Grain export boycott

You know how it is when you come across a word that you've never heard or seen
before and then you see it ten times in the next week? Well, I had an odd
experience this week which I put down to the long arm of coincidence and which
I will let others attribute to extrasensory perception.

The other morning I was reading the opening scene of Shakespeare's
'Coriolanus', which starts with a riot in a Roman street over the inflated
price of wheat, which was not so academic a motive because when Shakespeare
wrote the play, several sorts of mischief combined to stir up a good deal of
unrest in England on the same ground – a succession of droughts, a scant corn
crop had boosted prices, not to mention some suspicious deals between
landowners and shippers. 

Well, the scene opens with an angry rabble armed with staves and clubs and
they're out looking for the patrician leader they take to be responsible for
their empty bellies. Their spokesman, identified as First Citizen, puts the
case against the rich with almost Marxian severity, 'We are accounted poor
citizens, the patricians good. What authority surfeits on would relieve us: if
they would yield us but the superfluity, while it were wholesome, we might
guess they relieved us humanely; but they think we are too dear: the leanness
that afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as an inventory to particularise
their abundance; our suffering is a gain to them. They never cared for us, they
suffer us to famish and their store-houses crammed with grain; they make edicts
for usury to support usurers; repeal daily any wholesome act established
against the rich, and provide more piercing statutes daily, to chain up and
restrain the poor. If the wars eat us not up, they will; and there's all the
love they bear us.' 

I'd got a little farther than that when there was a plumping sound outside my
kitchen door and I went and there on the mat was the New York Times. On the
first page of the middle section, where you find the news summary, there's
always a quotation of the day. It was a single sentence from the most powerful
of American labour leaders, Mr George Meany. It was an interesting, startling
variation on Clemenceau's famous line that war is too important to be left to
the generals. What Mr Meany said was, 'Foreign policy is too damn important to
be left to the Secretary of State.' This was his battle cry by way of approving
a boycott which the maritime unions of America have invoked on grain shipments
to the Soviet Union. 

This scare goes back to the experience, which is all too well remembered, of
the huge 1972 Russian purchases of American grain at what was admitted at the
time to be bargain prices. The sale was cheerfully and vaguely represented by
the government as a bargain for the American consumer. But the result was a big
jump in domestic grain prices which was soon passed on to bread, cereals, eggs,
poultry and beef. The monster that sprouted from that ear of corn was something
called 'double digit inflation'. In 1973 inflation in food prices went from
eight per cent to 12. Mr Meany and six affiliated maritime unions who load the
stuff at all ports of the east coast, the Gulf of Mexico and the Great Lakes
don't intend to see it happen again. 

This year the Russians are said to expect a shortfall in their 1974 grain crop
of 30 million tons and the rumour is that they will put in an order for 15
millions from this country. 'Very simply,' said Mr Meany, standing there in
Washington with the longshoremen's leaders, 'we're not going to load any grain
to the Soviet Union unless and until a policy is set forth and agreed to that
will protect the American consumer and also the American shipping interests.
The boycott is meant to apply to all shipments contracted for after 1 July
last.' 

Well, there was an immediate outcry from the big farm cooperatives, the head of
the American Farm Bureau Federation called the boycott 'a form of piracy and
blackmail'. The governor of Kansas – which is to wheat as coal is to Newcastle
– called the boycott 'an ill-conceived grandstand play that could have tragic
consequences for the wheat producing Midwest and our entire nation.' 

Now, at this point, on that very day, President Ford had the possible
misfortune to be bang in the heart of the Midwest speechifying before 20,000
people attending the Iowa State Fair. It could have been worse, he could have
been in Kansas. Iowa, on the other hand, is famous for its hogs and I imagine
that if he'd promised to ship those hogs to Russia at bargain prices, he would
have found some other state fair to attend. It was not, by the way, clear
whether Mr Ford was there primarily as the Preisdent of the United States or as
a candidate for the presidency in 1976 and this is no longer a frivolous
distinction, not since Watergate. The press, indeed, asked him if his visit was
presidential since that night 750 loyal Iowa Republicans paid a hundred dollars
each to attend a reception for the president at which they were offered
lemonade and midget hotdogs on toothpicks. 

The President's press secretary came in nervously to assure everybody that the
Republican national committee would pay the whole cost of the president's trip.
He added the intriguing thought that Mr Ford's 1976 campaign committee, unlike
Mr Nixon's 1972 campaign committee, has not yet been able to hit on a formula
for properly distinguishing between the costs of a presidential journey and a
political safari. 

Well, before this shirt-sleeved audience in the broiling Iowa heat – and out
there in the Midwest and across the prairie the heatwave that flabbergasted
Britain is their regular diet between May and October – in such a place before
a sweating crowd, squinting in the murderous sun, he began promisingly enough
by saying that he'd make a very short speech because if there's one thing Iowa
doesn't need in August, it's more hot air. That brought the loudest cheer of
the day. 

Then he got into his regulation political stride. His air force jet, he said,
had flown that day across vast acres of farmland which constitute perhaps our
nation's greatest asset. Cheers. The crops looked fine, he thought and he
anticipated a record harvest. He went on to praise the American farmer as a
vital part of the nation's diplomacy and, if that was a little obscure, he soon
made plain that he was slapping them all on the back for helping with their
crops to open the door to 800 million people on the mainland of China and
helping improve relations with the Soviets. 

And then, of course, he had to get down to the issue of grain shipments and,
having faced it sideways, he now faced it squarely. His audience must have
known as well as he did that this year the Russians have bought over four
million tons of wheat but also over five million tons of maize which in America
is called corn. And the state song of Iowa begins, 'I-O-way, I-O-way, the land
where the tall corn grows...' 

Well, said the president, with his chin up and a red, white and blue tie
puffing from his chest, the Department of Agriculture had figured that this
year the American wheat crop would come in at 60 million tons and the maize/
corn crop at 150 million tons. He didn't say it outright but he implied that if
the Soviets wanted another five million tons or so of maize, it would be no
skin off Iowa's back. However, then came the 'howevers.' 

In spite of the hope of a record harvest, it was too soon to predict the final
tally and he asked that American exporters hold on and hold off a while on
shipping any more grain to the Soviet Union until the Secretary of Agriculture
had decided what the effect would be on the cost of living and the interests of
all Americans, farmers and consumers alike. Since this was precisely why Mr
George Meany was asking his longshoremen to hold off shipping any grain at all,
you must wonder first if the president had already heard of the boycott – he
had not – and second, why there is going to be such a storm about shipping
grain to Russia. 

Well, the simple truth is that President Ford threw in his precautionary word
about not hurting the cost of living as a hedge, whereas Mr Meany knows, or
thinks he does, that whatever the Secretary of Agriculture decides, the effect
of filling the Russian orders already placed will trigger a new explosion of
inflation. 

'Under the administration's policy,' Mr Meany said, 'in the name of détente, we
are going to give the Russians an open door to the private grain markets and do
it in a way that will cost the American consumers billions of dollars. Our
people,' he said, 'are still paying for the huge 1972 sales of grain. And why,'
he asked, 'should private interests sell wheat to a state-controlled economy?'
That must sound, in some countries, like a bizarre remark to come from the most
powerful as well as the most aggressive national labour leader, and then he
said his, already famous, sentence about foreign policy and when he was asked
if the mountain would have to come to Mohammed, if the government's leaders
would have to come to him, he snapped, 'You bet your life!'. 

So far we've talked about this rumpus as an argument solely about whether the
Russian sales will or will not saddle Americans with an inflated price for the
stuff the Russians bought and for the animals the grain is fed to. But the
rumpus will go on rumpussing because Mr Meany pays no heed at all to the main
argument of the president which is that the United States very seriously needs
the cash from the Russian exports to pay for its own imports. 

In 1974, American farm exports brought in $12 billion of net earnings from
international trade. If, the president told the Iowa crowd, if that $12
billions of foreign exchange income were erased, we would have a huge balance
of payments deficit, our dollar would be weakened in foreign markets and we'd
pay higher prices for the many items we import every day. 

I'm afraid that seems true enough but it's one of the chronic headaches of
politicians that they find it almost impossible to dramatise such vague
abstractions as balance of payments or export/import controls. On the other
hand, you see a ship sail out of New Orleans with a cargo of wheat and then you
go to the supermarket and find that a loaf of bread is five cents dearer and
you are ready, as the longshoremen are, to set up a furious cheer for Mr
Meany's snappy sentence, 'Foreign policy is too damn important to be left to
the Secretary of State.' 

You bet your life!

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP