US import restrictions, March 1975

An American man, whom in deference to anybody crowding 60 I shall call
middle-aged, had been living in Paris for the past ten years and now, for
reasons that shouldn't bother us, he was coming back to live out in his native
land what the outrageous Bernard Baruch at the age of 80 called 'the afternoon
of my life.'

In case you have a picture of this man tottering into the customs shed at
Kennedy Airport wearing sandals and carrying a scythe, let me say that he's
well-built, his skin and muscles are taut, he has a springy step and the
perennial air of a buttoned-down two-piece suit, Ivy League-type. He looks like
a retired crack tennis player and he is in fact a retired lawyer and he'd gone
to Paris in the first place because most of his business was done with French
and German firms and some time in the early 1960s it seemed simpler to maintain
these contacts at close quarters rather than at 3,000 miles. 

But now he was coming home. And before he left, he'd been thoughtful enough to
remember a couple of his friends here at home and he was bringing them some
presents that he knew they'd love. He picked up a box of cigars in London and
he brought from Paris, lovingly packaged in airproof (foil) a particular round
of veal that the French do better than anybody, which was also a particular
favourite of one of his oldest friends. When he lined up at Kennedy for the
immigration inspection and took out his passport, he suffered a moment of
panic. He hadn't been back for several years and he remembered, a little late
in the day, that if you're an American citizen returning to the United States
you must show a certificate attesting to the fact that you've been vaccinated
not more than three years ago. He riffled through the pages of his dog-eared
passport and he saw the familiar yellow forms stapled to the last page. He
checked the date and his fears were fulfilled. It was four years old. Now what
the immigration men do if they spot you in this dereliction of citizenship is
to beckon you into a room with a red cross on the glass panel of the door and
stick you with the vaccine there and then. 

Incidentally, I'd had the same lapse of memory a few years ago and when they
beckoned me, I went off readily enough with a rather smug twinkle in my eye.
I'd spotted this lapse when I was in London and I mentioned it to the airport
health people there and they said that they could do it for me at London
Airport and moreover do it for free and save me the $5 fee that they charge you
if they catch you at an American airport. Just as the London doctor was dabbing
my arm with alcohol and was about to give me the needle, he said, 'Have you
ever had any particular skin complaint?' I said briskly, 'Why, yes! Urticaria
pigmentosa.' He jumped and almost impaled himself on his needle. 'Good God,
man!' he said, 'You should never have a smallpox vaccine!' and he promptly
refused to do it. Now nobody should switch off at this point for fear of
contagion and I don't think we need to go into this affliction just now, I
hasten to say that it vanished from me years ago, but it is, I understand, a
very rare disease, so much so that researchers find it difficult to get any raw
material, strips of affected skin, that is, to research on. 

So you'll see the reason for my twinkle as they carried me off in New York to
give me the shot. I let them prepare the needle and then said nonchalantly, 'By
the way I was told in London by a world famous skin man (there's no harm in
stretching it a little there) that with my disease, anyone giving me a stab of
smallpox vaccine might be liable for God knows what catastrophe.' The man
asked, 'What disease?' I repeated the magic formula 'urticaria pigmentosa' and
he jumped a mile and bundled me out of the immigration area. So I have been
saving $5 for several years now. 

Well, back to our springy lawyer. He rather shamefacedly pointed out to the
immigration inspector that his vaccination certificate had lapsed and the man
said, 'Don't give it a thought! I guess you've been away from these parts for
some time. It's no longer required.' And so it isn't. 

The United States, I believe, was for many years the only country that required
proof of vaccination but then the United States Health Service did a study of
the incidents of smallpox in the country in the past 20 years or so. First of
all they found there'd been practically none, even with all the comings and
goings of millions of air passengers and, then, they were shocked to discover
that more people, a very tiny number but still more people, had died from the
vaccination than from smallpox. The Public Health Service therefore very
quietly announced with a noticeable absence of rolling drums or a blare of
trumpets that they'd forget the age-old vaccination requirement. 

So, our lawyer, vastly relieved – he's an American lawyer but he's also a very
law-abiding type – he was on his way, not yet into New York, but on to pick up
his bags and have them thrown on the counter for the customs men and a man
indicated a suitcase and when it was unlocked, he sorted and kneaded the shirts
and books and toilet kit and so on and casually said, 'You have any gifts
you're bringing in?' 'Oh sure!' said our lawyer and he proudly unearthed the
box of cigars. The inspector looked at them and then looked pityingly at the
lawyer. 'These,' he said, 'are Cuban.' 'That's right!' said the lawyer, 'The
friend they're for told me that they're hard to get here for some reason or
other.' 'The reason,' said the inspector firmly, 'is because they constitute
contraband under the Trading with the Enemy Act. Sorry about this!' he said and
confiscated them. 

The inspector now scrutinised this honest lawyer with a crafty Dickensian eye.
'You got any seeds, fruits, saplings or meat products?' The lawyer was aghast.
'Oh yes!' he said, delving into a corner of the suitcase and he came up with
his proud round of veal. 'Ah ha!' said the Customs man, 'that looks might
tasty.' 'Yes, indeed!' said the lawyer, 'It's a cut of French veal that's
something special. 'Is that so!' said the Customs man, 'Well I'm afraid whoever
tastes it, it's not going to be you.' He gave our friend a doggy, side-long
look and I certainly wouldn't want to suggest that any United States
immigration inspector (or) customs man would be coarse enough to convey by so
much as a glance that he could already smell his Sunday dinner on the hob.
Anyway, both presents were swiped. 

You can carry into England the American favourites that you wouldn't be
without, in my case, say, a certain brand of little sausages which I once
cooked for a visiting Scot but he didn't take to them. 'American sausages,' he
complained, 'I mean they're all meat, no brain and skin.' But you cannot bring
into America any meat or fruit products at all. 

Our lawyer was all the more miffed by these restrictions and he would have
thought sympathetically of the London customs men had it not been that for
years and years they'd frustrated him by what he considers the outrageous law
about quarantining dogs. My friend is devoted to London but not quite as much
as he's devoted to his poodle. He would have liked, in the past ten years, to
come over to London when we were there and stay with us, but Britain is, I
believe, unique in requiring that dogs entering the country cannot trot around
at their masters' heels till they've spent six months in quarantine, an ordeal
my friend believes would doom his dog to a lifelong neurosis. 'A fine thing, '
he said, on a bitter occasion, 'the British may believe a dog is a man's best
friend but only after six months' imprisonment.' 

Well, in a perfect world, or perhaps a federation of EEC and USA, you could
bring veal into America and dogs into England but the day is not yet. 

However, light begins to dawn at the end of the ninety-mile tunnel that
separates the United States from the island of Cuba. Since Castro ousted
Batista and set up his revolutionary government, since 1962 anyway, the United
States has imposed an embargo on all trade with Cuba and, more than that, she
has imposed punishing penalties on other countries and shipping lines that
dealt with Castro. Well, last week Mr Kissinger gave a broad hint that the day
may soon be here when a considerate American can arrive here carrying Cuban
cigars for discriminating friends and no longer have them confiscated. Mr
Kissinger, as a practising Foreign Secretary of course, doesn't talk quite as
frankly as that. He made a public statement saying that the United States is
preparing to move in a new direction in her relations with Cuba, provided the
Organisation of American States will agree to loosen the bonds of its general
trade embargo and provided also that the Cubans are prepared to practise what
he called 'mutuality.' This means, I take it, if you show us your cigars, we'll
show you our wheat, soy beans, steel, whatever. And what with our trade
imbalance and all, it does seem that the United States is about to be ready to
forgive and forget the colour of Cuba's politics. 

Three days after Mr Kissinger dropped his hint, three senators came out with
the draft of a bill to put an end both to the embargo and the collateral
punishment of third parties. The actual bill came from Senator Edward Kennedy
and a resolution calling on President Ford to think about it came from another
Democrat and from a liberal Republican, Senator Javits of New York. whom many
of his conservative Republican colleagues would like to see leave the party and
de-camp to the Democrats. 

Well, it begins to appear that a depression is a magic solvent of ideology. We
had a grimmer example this week. Ever since President Johnson's Secretary of
State, Dean Rusk, got out his dominoes and terrified us into seeing what might
happen if the countries of Asia fell one by one to the communists, it has been
a dogged principle of American foreign policy to give aid and comfort and
billions of dollars to any Asian country that begged for help against the
communists. Now President Ford, in turn, is begging the Congress for $220
million to save Cambodia. Ten years ago the money would have been voted in a
week, though it wouldn't have been for Cambodia. It was then neutral. And some
people say we wouldn't need to save Cambodia now if the United States itself
hadn't gone in there to search out the Vietcong using the country as a haven. 

Well, it's a talking point. But it looks very much as if the money won't be
voted at all. Not because of any ideological battle in Congress but because of
the simple cry that goes up from the unemployed in every hard-hit city in the
country: 'A quarter of a billion for Cambodia! How much for us?' 

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP