China earthquake

Even though I'm supposed, all these years, to have spent my time explaining
what is odd about Americans to the British and, if you'll excuse the
expression, what is odd about the British to the Americans, I'm always very
wary about attributing anything to what you’d think would be my main subject,
namely national character.

Years ago, I remember in the aftermath of a terrific argument – I was listening
in, I'm too much coward ever to get into a terrific temper with anybody,
except, I guess the lowest thing that crawls, namely men who push drugs to
school children – as I was saying, I was listening to a terrific argument
between a couple of Britons and a couple of Americans which was about some
characteristic of one or the other, which one side thought sensible and natural
and the other side thought ridiculous. As happens so woefully often in
arguments about politics or morals, what each side was really saying was, 'Why
can't you be more like us?' It's Rex Harrison's male chauvinist theme song over
again, 'Why can't a woman be more like a man?' 

I'm wary, I say, about ascribing any behaviour to national character because I
have a suspicion that if you take a given character A, born in the middle of
Kansas, say, and simply teeming with the blood and initiative of a prairie
type, and you transfer him at an early age to Shepherd's Bush. By the time he's
well into his teens, he will be indistinguishable from the same character born
as well as bred in Shepherd's Bush. Take the same character at birth and
transfer him from Shepherd's Bush to the Australian Bush, Outback, back
country, and he'll be indistinguishable from the same character who'd been all
his life Down Under. 

It all depends, of course, at what age you arrange the transfer. By the time a
man or woman is 30, they will not change their character – I don't believe
anyone changes his/her character after they emerge from the womb – but, by that
time, they've built up a pattern of behaviour and convictions and prejudices
absorbed from their native country and, at best, they'll modify them. In other
words, I think national character is important not because it exists but
because everybody thinks it does and acts accordingly. 

Well, after sitting in on that terrific argument, I remember writing that a
belief in national character is the first refuge of the anxious, meaning (as
Max Wall would say it) that to put something down to national character is too
often the easiest way out of a puzzle. Well, you must have gathered by now that
I've been working up to a puzzle which can most conveniently be ascribed to
national character. To two national characters. The character of the Chinese
and the character of the Americans. 

The news story that, in America, has blanketed everything else out of the
headlines and practically rendered invisible our little local hassle between
Carter, Ford and Reagan, is the Chinese earthquake. And this emphasis in itself
is interesting. I've seen several newspapers from Britain and Europe in which
the earthquake is there all right, but it hasn't obliterated the front pages
the national or local news. For the moment, we'll let this pass. 

The United States was the first government, I believe, to offer help at once,
knowing very well that the Chinese are very efficient organisers and would
probably be better than any of us at despatching search parties, water, food,
drugs and so on to the victims. Since the army in China is committed at all
times to doing routine service to civilians, it has, no doubt, mounted a
massive operation which, in the United States, would begin with the goodwill
and voluntary energies of the Red Cross but the American government was
bewildered at the start by having no information to go on about the size of the
catastrophe and the required scale of the rescue effort. 

And this brought up right away a problem either of the Chinese character or, I
dare to think, more likely a problem of 'face' in a communist country. For,
however differently the Russians and the Chinese present to the foreigner the
official picture of their way of life, Western tourists usually talk about the
humourlessness, the suspiciousness and strangling red-tape of the Russians, as
against the merry chuckles and openness of the Chinese. It's striking to see
how both the Russians and the Chinese, in any catastrophe, whether man-made or
an act of what some of us unrepentantly call an act of God, how they both
retreat into a curious silence and reluctance to tell us the dire facts. It's
understandable to us, even if it's lamentable, that they should want to cover
up a breakdown in their agricultural plan or the accidental death of a couple
of astronauts, it's absolutely predictable that we are not going to hear from
them about any palpable blunder of the national government in China, the Soviet
Union or Albania, not to mention Romania or even Yugoslavia, but an earthquake?
 

Well, the weird fact is that, for the first 48 hours, all we got from the
Chinese themselves was that there had been a severe earthquake in the North
China Plain and that a couple of French people and a Japanese had been killed.
The first hints we got of a mammoth catastrophe came from visiting foreigners
who managed to survive. Only when it became as plain as day that the epicentre
was through Tangshan, an industrial city with a million population, only then
could an ordinary, intelligent reader with a map, let alone a seismologist,
begin to suspect that the casualties were bound to run into the hundreds of
thousands. Where else on earth would a government of normally compassionate men
and women – and we know nothing to suggest that the Chinese are not as
compassionate as the rest of us towards their own kind – where else would a
government instinctively clamp a censorship on the dreadful facts and figures? 

There is of course the deduceable fact that the colossal damage to Tangshan
alone, a mining and power centre, could badly cripple the economy and anything
that reveals a weakness in the economy is not revealed by communist countries
to us, nor, for that matter, to the United Nations Statistical Department which
is more comprehensive in these matters than any other body but is regretfully
mum about such things as gross national products, steel capacity, unemployment,
crop failures and so on in communist countries for the simple reason that they
are not going to tell anybody on the outside. 

Well, I've been reflecting an American irritation so far rather than tracking
it to a source or sources. But the first American reaction was one of mixed
horror and exasperation growing out of disbelief. Disbelief that we didn't read
at once the scope of the disaster and the likely figures about the casualties.
And here, a remarkable difference can be spotted between two editorials, one in
Europe, the other in America. A thoughtful editorial in the London Times
guessed at the scale of the earthquake, noted the probable material damage and
then went on, interestingly, about the general regions of China where
earthquakes have happened since the sixteenth century and the shock of having
one take place in North China, which has never been regarded by experts as a
danger zone. 

The leading American editorial took a quite different tack. it noticed as a
curious fact that on the day scientists could describe with authority and
detail how a machine had scratched the surface of Mars hundreds of millions of
miles away, much of the world was wondering about the fate of millions of
Chinese and had to depend for their information on bits and pieces, sometimes
contradictory, from foreigners in China. Admittedly, it went on, disasters of
this apparent magnitude are not easy to describe early or accurately, but China
is now an integral state with excellent internal communications, surely the
government could have been quicker to report the event? After all, God, or
nature, or whatever the force to which this catastrophe may be ascribed, is not
an imperialist or a counter-revolutionary or a Soviet agent but there are
governments apparently believing that natural afflictions, whether the earth
that trembles, the rivers that flood or the skies that produce no rain are
reflections upon their own supreme powers. The droughts in Africa might have
been countered with less suffering for many many people if the governments had
not concealed or obscured the facts. 

It seems – I never knew this – that the Chinese have regularly refused the help
in such natural disasters of the West. On what grounds? Well, from three
separate accounts I see it says 'on principle.' On what principle? It must have
to do with a feeling familiar enough to all of us but one which extends in
China from the individual to the government. It's the feeling of not wanting to
be obliged or obligated and we know it best in Mark Twain's sharp observation
'the holy passion of friendship is of so sweet and steady and loyal and
enduring a nature that it will last through a whole lifetime if not asked to
lend money.' But surely, as the New York Times puts it, no sensible person with
any consciousness of the humanity he shares with the Chinese would feel that
such aid should be withheld on political grounds or that accepting it would be
demeaning to the Peking regime. What would be a blot on the People's Republic
would be the assumption that the less the world outside knows about the
tragedy, the better for the ruling group. 

I don't know if this reaction, which in my experience is the spontaneous
American one, is naive or not but in such crises, it's noticeable that
Americans are the first to forget power politics and, as when Europe lay
prostrate in 1947, pour out money and medicine and technology without much
thought to the latent powers they may be helping to build up. 

I've seen it said – and it's said by a type of knowing intelligentsia, in
Europe especially, a breed which is always on the alert, and usually gets
things wrong – it's said that Americans offer instant and generous help to
stricken peoples because they are essentially guilty about their wealth. Well,
whatever their motives, Americans tend to hear the thunderclap, the earth groan
and they ring sirens and rush help at once. 

I may sound as if I'm saying, 'Why aren't the Chinese more like us?' But the
question which must affect our view of the sincerity of any relation with
communist China, the question is still, 'Why?'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP