Ford and Reagan battle for Republican nomination

Three weeks from now, it's almost safe to say almost anything that happens
abroad will drop into Madison Square Garden in New York like a stone dropped in
a pond. The Democrats will be holding their presidential nominating convention
and while the suspense about the eventual nominee is hardly unbearable, the
Democrats will be writing their programme or platform. In fact, they've pretty
well written it now. It's not an exaggeration to say that it has been rewritten
and re-tailored to suit the opinions of Mr Jimmy Carter.

The last time the Democrats held their convention in New York in the old
Madison Square Garden, it took them ten days and nights to pick a candidate. I
say nights not as a bit of poetic licence. In those days, before television had
drastically shortened the procedures and the ritual intrigues of bargaining,
nobody dared to recess the convention once the balloting had started – too easy
for cunning men to arrange overnight deals in smoky rooms. Well, how, you'll
say right away, could hundreds of delegates go ten nights without sleep? 

Well, every main delegate has what ought to be called an 'alternative' but in
America that word long ago died out – 'alternate' is the word – and as the
balloting boomed on, a main delegate either brought a cot into the lobby or the
basement of Madison Square Garden or nipped back to his hotel, woke his
snoozing alternate and despatched him to the Garden while he took a snooze
himself. In that ghastly midsummer – no air-conditioning then – the convention
sweated and voted through 103 ballots and, in exhaustion and despair, came up
with a Wall Street lawyer who for most of the sessions had been an interested
onlooker and outsider. 

Well, after this frantic display of disunity, the Democrats lost the election
with consummate ease. I mention this now because while the Democrats this time
seem almost sheepishly united – so much so that their national chairman says he
expects to go to sleep on the first morning of the convention and wake up four
days later in time to hear Mr Carter make his acceptance speech – but the
Republicans are, for the first time since 1964, certainly bitterly disunited
and that's something we'll come to later on. 

What I started to say was that in the summer of a presidential campaign,
nothing that happens abroad can fail to be treated as a provocation to American
policy – a case of mice having a ball while the cat is otherwise engaged. Now,
on the surface, this may seem absurdly arrogant but you have only to go back
50, 60 years and think of England to appreciate this American attitude. In
those days, England was top dog, the only cat in sight and what mischief the
mice cooked up in India or Bulgaria or Berlin or Peking was instantly reported
in London and reacted to. Britain felt herself to be the keeper of the old
order of the world all round. 

And today, while the United States still rubs a bruise or two and announces she
cannot and will not be the world's policeman, she yet feels that disorder
anywhere on earth affects her standing in the new order. 

No doubt the murder of the American ambassador and his two aides in Beirut and
the riot in Johannesburg happened for their own murky reasons but America is
forced by such remote disasters to rethink her policy in the Middle East and,
by reflection, her promise to work for majority rule in Rhodesia. If there were
no election, everybody would naturally look to the president and the Secretary
of State for guidance and either accept or grumble over any solutions they
proposed. 

The Democrats, having practically crowned their new king before his coronation,
are at this stage likely to check with Mr Carter and tow whatever line he lays
down. But about half the Republicans – who every night hear dreadful things
from the polls and surveys – feel they have little to lose from opposing,
worse, expressing automatic outrage against any move, opinion, assertion made
by President Ford. 

America is in the position of the absent cat and the cat powerless to get back
home because half of his party feel he doesn't belong there. I don't ever
remember a case of a president in office feeling that he's already stripped of
the authority of that office. He's mocked not only by the opposition, but by
the challenger in his own party, Ronald Reagan. At the moment Mr Ford holds a
lead in the polls that has diminished from fat to slender – a lead, that is,
over Reagan. And every day one hears of doubts and disruption afflicting the
body of Republican delegates who are, on paper, officially uncommitted to
either him or Mr Reagan. 

The Reagan managers are systematically raiding the uncommitted wherever they
can be found, especially in big states like Ohio, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and
trying to persuade them either to commit themselves to Reagan or, in those
states whose election laws require the delegates who were elected as
uncommitted to remain so till convention time, the Reagan men are hoping to get
such people to agree to be, so to speak, uncommitted for Reagan. 

It's when you hear the reasons for shifts in allegiance, especially from Ford
to Reagan, that you realise how impotent President Ford is to pull rank on
Ronald Reagan and how effortlessly Mr Reagan can feign shock and horror at
practically everything Mr Ford has done or proposes to do, especially in
foreign policy. Mr Reagan is, for a candidate, in the enviable position of
being able to appear responsible without authority and authoritative without
having to bear any responsibility. This is always the carefree privilege of the
opposition but it's very tough indeed when your own party has a powerful rump
which is more indignant about your foreign policy than the opposition itself. 

So, a technically uncommitted Republican in Illinois who was seen to be
wobbling explained himself in this fashion, 'I don't like Ford's foreign policy
– too much détente, too chummy with the Soviet Union'. Another says, 'I'm not
against Ford but an incumbent president ought to have it locked up by now. He
looks weak and I like the fact that Reagan's not tied to the Washington scene.'
That's true enough and, for Mr Reagan, a blessing. He can say the United States
ought to send troops to guarantee a stable Rhodesia and, next day, take his
foot out of his mouth and say he didn't mean it quite that way, maybe the
United States and Britain could get together to arrange an orderly transition.
Nobody has asked Mr Reagan what he thinks Britain has been doing all this
time. 

Mr Reagan has put his foot in it at least two other times, once leaving the
impression that he'd cut off $9 billion in social security, then he began to
claim American sovereignty over Panama while the Panamanians are trying to end
American control of the Canal Zone – not quite the same thing – and, in fact, a
treaty towards that end is being amicably negotiated by both sides. 

The people, from the White House down, who knew Reagan to be wrong on his facts
said so, but their corrections provoked no cheers which the next appearance of
Mr Reagan almost anywhere in the country certainly does because Mr Reagan is a
splendid speaker, while Mr Ford seems often to be stumbling through a language
he's just learned. Mr Reagan has an actor's practised ease before a camera or
an audience. In fact he converts any rally, even an interview, into an audience
ready to chuckle, weep, cheer, in accordance with his timing. Mr Ford, it would
be cruel to stress it, has no more timing than a drone. 

I suppose that what used to be called the 'well-informed' man is not taken in
by such beguilements and decides things only on the issues. I really doubt this
is true even of well-informed men who are probably more susceptible than they
know to the human appeals which move us all, one way or another, of the
candidate’s warmth, or lack of it, ah, his voice, his smile, the set of his
eyes, the way he does his hair. Certainly an electorate of, say, 80 million
voters does not pick its president by putting the issues on a scale and
weighing trends. Like the chief editorial writer of a fair-minded newspaper,
one minute's close-up on television, I'm convinced, has more drawing power than
all the leaders ever written. 

When these two have been seen and listened to – and there can, by now, be
hardly anybody in the country who wouldn't recognise Ford and Reagan through
the wrong end of a telescope – it seems to come down to a choice not very
different from the choice the Republicans had to make in 1964 between a
candidate who claimed to be at the centre but was suspiciously close to the
Democrats who, to the Republicans, are notorious leaners to the left, and a
candidate who appeared as Wyatt Earp, a manly, self-sufficient, frontier
sheriff who stalked the empty streets at high noon and was ready with a gun for
the meanies and the baddies. In 1964, it was Barry Goldwater. Today, it's
Ronald Reagan – a younger looking, though actually older sheriff, about to take
no nonsense from the Russians, the Chinese or even the Panamanians. A man who
declares, over and over again in resounding tones, with the chin up and the
eyes shining, his passionate belief in the uniqueness of America and her
mission to lead the free world. 

I think it'll all be a question of the general mood when it comes to the
polling booth, whether Americans are disposed more to a crusade or an
accommodation, whether they want a man who stresses the greatness of America
or, like Jimmy Carter, the goodness waiting to get out but, once the speeches
are over, whether the patriotic tenor of Ronald Reagan or the baritone drone of
Mr Ford, they both seem to be in deep trouble. 

NBC took a statistical survey last week and reported that if Ford is the
Republican choice, 44 per cent of the Republican vote will go to the Democrat
Carter and that, if Reagan is the choice, 43 per cent of the Republican vote
will swing over to Carter. If this is only roughly true by August when the
Republicans meet in Kansas City, Ford and Reagan will be fighting for the glory
of being the loser. And if it's true in November, the Republican Party could
find itself broken, perhaps beyond repair.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP