Special relationship especially warm

I suppose we are just about coming to the peak of the tourist season, whether
we are thinking of the family from Newcastle on the Costa Brava or a German
filming the advertisements plastered along the Appian Way or the family from
the north of France picnicking, for a change, in the south of France. What I'm
thinking of, of course, is the American girl from Chadron, Nebraska padding
through Oxford or the retired policeman from Kensington I ran into a month ago
who had sworn for twenty years to take a bus ride across America and is now
doing it.

In about, I should say, the past year or two, there has been a noticeable and,
to me, heart-warming increase in popular mutual affection between the British
and the Americans. Listening to the echo of that sentence as you do sometimes
on a badly rigged transatlantic telephone call, I must say that sounds like a
dreadful, cornball remark but I think I know pretty well how the mutual regard
waxes and wanes across the Atlantic and to give you one example only, the most
vivid I can think of, and I hope you don't think this self-serving, I can only
goggle when I look back on the English press reception nearly four years ago to
the first one or two programmes of a television series I did on the history of
America. And the reception, in the same quarters, to the repeat of the same
series this spring. I'm not thinking of the general, popular press whose
reactions tend to be straightforward and uncomplicated. Both times the response
was, to put it modestly, gratifying. 

But in 1972 the intelligentsia press in London and in Washington was on its
guard against any whitewashing of the dreadful continent that seemed so busy
slaughtering Asian peasants abroad and killing or beating up students at home.
'Where...' one paper asked, after looking at my history of the Spanish
settlements of North America, 'Where was there any mention of Vietnam or the
banning of DDT or the lettuce boycott led by the Californian, Cesar Chavez?'
Well, once a criticism appears in print, it's too late to say: hold it, chum –
the conquistadors had never heard of Vietnam. Coronado, on his exhausting and
fruitless trek through Arizona, Nevada, Colorado, Texas, Kansas and back again
would have been very grateful for DDT but the records, which I have searched
exhaustively, reveal no trace of DDT in the Spanish marches. And Kent State
University had not been founded in 1540, nor even Harvard. 

The Washington Post lamented that Mr Cooke was busy blinding himself to all
that was rotten in the state of Nixon and tying up America in pink ribbons. But
once the series was repeated, the same papers found untold sense, sensibility,
even – I blush to say – grandeur in the series. Now, all that had happened was
Vietnam was all over, the universities had cooled and I myself wouldn't dare to
say whether they have cooled for keeps or are living in the dead centre of a
hurricane that will come hurling itself at us one day from another direction.
Anyway, while very many intelligent Americans are grateful that the
bicentennial orgy is now beginning to wane, I see where a London journalist has
just been over to America and is doing a series of articles you couldn't
possibly have read in a European paper five, six, seven years ago. 

'America' – it says here – 'is experiencing a new mood of optimism, idealism
and a passionate belief that the system can still work. After more than a
decade' – it goes on – 'when everything went tragically wrong, America has
embarked on a renaissance that, to an Englishman, seems enormously enviable.'
And this fervent Englishman winds up with the astonishing sentence, 'The great
moral debates in America seem immeasurably more exciting than our own stale,
ceaseless struggle about who is to have what share of the shrinking cake.' 

I don't think you could have read a sentence like that since the middle 1930s
when Englishmen were in the habit of making odious comparisons between their
own floundering or timid leaders and the drive and dynamism of Saint Franklin
D. Roosevelt. And Mr Hastings of the London Evening Standard rightly emphasises
the almost incredible repentance of Eldridge Cleaver, the most uncompromising,
the most terrifying of the Black Panthers, who boasted in his book of having
raped a white woman as an almost necessary assertion of black dignity. And Mr
Cleaver, as we might have guessed, de-camped, in fact, fled, from criminal
charges to Africa where we assumed he would find not only that black is
beautiful but, understandably to a black man, that life had for him more
self-respect and decency than it held for his race in the United States. Well,
Mr Cleaver who had been very free with the word 'fascist' at home, found
himself living in places that take a dim view of the big mouth and the free
speech. Living abroad, even as an admired martyr, he began to find all sorts of
virtues and strengths in his own detested homeland and, amazingly, he
voluntarily returned and gave himself up to a prison term. 

Now anybody, who had in 1970, say, predicted this, would have been laughed off
as a jingo or a wishful thinker of the most babyish kind. Having watched for
quite some time the ebb and flow of popular feeling between our two countries,
I am, myself, always cagey about some big, dramatic swing, either away from
admiration to contempt, or away from scorn to enthusiasm. But since the woeful,
and it seemed to me justifiable, decline in British respect for America during
the dreadful days of the malodorous Joe McCarthy, I don't remember a time when
Britons took a fairer overall view of America, or when Americans, well aware of
the sinking pound, the rising unemployment, the staggering economy and all the
rest of it, have had a more sensible and generous respect for Britain. 

I read with pleasure in our papers that Britain is enjoying just now a tourism
bonanza that surpasses even the wildest predictions of the tourist agencies,
that eight million visitors will have come and gone by the fall and that the
boom will be worth to Britain £200 million more than anyone had forecast. The
total take from tourism in 1976 is now expected to be over one thousand million
pounds. What will come out of this it would be fascinating to know – I mean, by
way of correcting or adjusting the foreigner's view of Britain. Of one thing I
am sure. Several million Americans are going home to tell their countrymen that
the picture of Britain as a dank, green land in the temperate zone is an
outrageous lie. Britain, they have just learned, is as browned off as central
Texas in August and is hotter than Calcutta. I even ran into a beautiful
American woman who had completely wiped out the memory of two previous visits
to England and came to two downright conclusions: that London is more
insufferably humid than New York in mid-summer and that Britain is essentially
tradition-ridden and un-progressive because it lags so far behind in
air-conditioning. 

Well, I went on about this a couple of weeks ago, and will go on no more, but I
did use on this woman the simple, and it appears to me, sensible argument that
nothing would be wilder, more profligate than for Britain to invest billions in
general air-conditioning and then find next year that thing's were back to
normal and what you should have invested in was raincoats, indoor heaters and
flood control. It had no effect. But then nobody in his right mind is going to
pick a fight, even a reasonable one, with a beautiful woman. There are other
things more important than setting beautiful women right about logic. It's a
waste of emotion and the raw material. 

One of the predictable things about visiting a foreign country is to assume
that you will right away appreciate the foreignness of it by noticing that the
newspapers are agitated by totally different happenings from the ones that
engross you at home. That's obvious, isn't it? But the obvious surprise is so
obvious it never gets said, which is that very often what's interesting and
exciting the French or the Spanish or the Germans or whoever is what's exciting
the Mancunian and the Glaswegian. If you'd been in America this week, it's
true, you would have looked over the headlines and seen reports on local
matters you'd certainly, as a tourist, decide to skip, such as that after
Watergate the Senate has voted to create a permanent special prosecutor
independent of the Department of Justice, that there's a legal fight over the
will of the late head of the FBI, J. Edgar Hoover (by the way, if you're smart,
you'd notice that in America 'late' doesn't mean 'former', it means 'dead') or
that the Mississippi delegation to the Republican national convention is
thinking of switching its allegiance from Ford to Reagan. 

But I have to tell you that these matters are not at all what was on
everybody's lips and eyeballs. Americans were sickened by the murder of the
British ambassador to Dublin. They were staying home in the late afternoon and
early evening to inflate their chests over the doings of the American swimming
team in Montreal and they were gasping and gurgling over the gymnastic flips of
the little pixie from Romania, where four years ago they were gasping and
gurgling over the pixie from Russia. They were telling each other how like an
old, Italian movie, and then some, was the (consummate) robbery of that bank in
Nice. 

The best shock of this kind I ever had as on my first long stay in Spain. The
first night, I was to meet a Spanish film producer and I'd boned up on the
Spanish film industry and tried to memorise the names of the Spanish film stars
he might go on about. Well, sir, he talked all evening about the Spaniards'
favourite film star, the incomparable 'Hamez Esdayart'. I felt very guilty that
I was unacquainted with this great man. I must have looked very shifty all
evening till the truth dawned. Yes indeed! An actor mas formidable! 

Good old 'Hamez Esdayart! Good old James Stewart!

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP