Report uncovers CIA murder plots

On a flight from New York to London a year or two ago, I found myself sitting
next to an Englishman, I should guess close to 50, and a young woman close to
20. They were very obviously related and I guessed from his almost excessive
chivalry in asking if she was comfortable, if she wanted this or that, not to
mention several paternal pats on her wrist, arm, shoulder and kneecap, I
guessed in a Sherlock Holmes flash that they were father and daughter, newly
reunited.

My deductions stopped well short of the truth. They were newly wed. He an
Englishman, she a New Zealander and he was taking his young bride to meet his
aged parents somewhere in Sussex. We got to talking and it turned out that he
was a movie exhibitor. I've been watching movies since John Bunny kissed Flora
Finch and so we had a lot of material to choose from. We fell to talking about
a puzzle that is as old as the century and a puzzle that's never been solved. 

Why is it that one movie or play about some worldwide popular hero is a
smashing success and why is another a flop? Being temperamentally disposed to
peace at almost any price, I began to riffle through my mind for examples of
movies about big, historical heroes that had been equally big at the box
office. We went on a little mental excursion with such giants as Napoleon,
Nelson, George Washington, Hitler and pretty soon decided that the grandeur of
the original character is not necessarily enough to guarantee a pittance for
the producer and his company. I could think of two films about Hitler that died
on their first showing, several films about Napoleon. 

The appeal of the actor who plays the great man is evidently more important
than the historical eminence of the original. Otherwise, how to explain the
enormous success 40 years ago in the United States, as well as Britain, of
George Arliss playing Disraeli – a character who to most Americans sounds like
a relief pitcher for the Boston Red Sox? Also, it seems it's not enough for the
movie actor to be an international idol, he must be playing a part that roughly
approximates to his personal appeal. It was a splendid mating of the man and
the actor when Gary Cooper played Wild Bill Hickok and was shot in the back in
Deadwood while he was holding nothing but aces and eights, which for a hundred
years since has been immortally known as 'the dead man's hand'. But it was not
a bright idea to cast Gary Cooper as Marco Polo and the box office reflected
the baffling dumbness of the producers. 

But then this man brought up a movie which, to him, to me, to anyone now alive,
would seem to be in prospect a gold-plated 18-carat certainty. The movie, which
was named after the great man's autobiography, was 'The Spirit of St Louis' and
was about Charles Lindbergh's unforgettable first solo transatlantic flight
between Long Island and Paris. Unforgettable to whom? That is the rub. 'We
discovered too late,' the man said, 'that there was one, maybe two, generations
that had never heard of Lindbergh.' 'But surely,' I said, 'you really
guaranteed yourself against a flop by casting James Stewart?' At this point,
the young bride spoke up, 'Who,' she said, 'is James Stewart?' I guessed from
this that their marriage was going to have what we now call 'problems of
communication'. 

Well, we wound up this philosophical discussion by deciding that there's no
general formula for ensuring whether a given movie will go off like a rocket or
a squib. Certainly, the popularity of a star is the most treacherous gamble.
Robert Redford has had a couple of flops in a row and Gene Hackman, I believe,
five. 'But how do you explain,' the man said, 'the shekels still rolling in all
around the world from the exploits of a fictional character played by a
formerly unknown boy from Glasgow?' 'How do you explain?' I echoed, thinking of
the way my wife and I had tried to catch up with 'Goldfinger' ten years ago on
a trip around the world and having continually to postpone the pleasure because
of the enormous queues lined up outside theatres in Beirut, Istanbul and Tokyo.
I'm talking, of course, about James Bond and his most successful – only
successful – impersonator, Sean Connery. It seems that the James Bond movies
are imperishable still and so are their revenues. 

This experience came back to me the other evening when I was visited by an old,
old friend of mine – an American who has lived in France for, I suppose, the
best part of two decades. He's a lawyer, a very astute gent, a very close
student of international politics, a lover of the arts and he's just 70. He was
mentioning a flourishing British colony of tax refugees in the little town in
the Mediterranean Alps where he's lived so long and he was expressing
astonishment that a Briton, by staying out of his native land for a year (is
it?) can then come back for three months, less one day, a year and never again
pay any British taxes. His astonishment was due to the contrast – a sharp one
to him – with the situation of Americans abroad. 

An American can decamp from his native land for ever and he will go on paying
American taxes as long as he lives. This led to the naming of several eminent
Britons who now live on various islands, Wight, Man or on the continent of
Europe. And that brought up the name of Sean Connery and he said, 'Who's Sean
Connery?' Not wishing to embarrass him in the presence of a Scot, I hissed in
an undertone, 'James Bond!' And he said, 'Who's James Bond?' Well, you see how
I went back in a circle to the Englishman and his innocent 19-year-old bride. 

Well, it struck me that there are probably legions of people who, even if
they've heard of James Bond, have never seen one of the Bond movies for a
reason that in the 1960s was given to me over and over again – because they're
absurd, extravagant, preposterously violent and bear no relation whatsoever to
the way civilised nations conduct their secret services. To which young people
would always retort, 'Of course, not. But that's what makes them such fun!' The
violence is so comic and extreme that it's all the more entertaining when they
pretend it's all being done on the instructions of the British Secret Service
or the Foreign Office. 

Well, you must begin to sense what I'm working up to. About a day too late for
my talk last week, a Senate committee released its final report after an
investigation into something that, in its fictional form, has fascinated and
entertained the world for ten or fifteen years, namely the real business of
which the James Bond movies are such a shocking and entertaining parody. The
bigger shock is the discovery by Senator Frank Church's committee that the
James Bond movies are pretty close to the truth, or have been, in the conduct
of the United States Central Intelligence Agency for the past 20 years. 

Now there has never been, before, a public enquiry into the methods and
targets, you might say the victims, of the American government’s intelligence
service. I doubt there has ever been a public enquiry by any other government
for painfully obvious reasons. A secret service is, by definition, secret and,
in both peace and war, a great deal of time is put in by all government agents
trying to guess the secret moves and break the secret codes of other
governments. If, at any time, there is a more or less complete revelation of
the aims, methods and intended victims of a government's secret service, it
might just as well give up the whole intelligence business. 

This bleak conclusion is self-evident and I don't imagine there was ever a time
when some responsible public official spoke up and said, 'I tell you what,
let's have a Senate committee investigate the CIA?' the way Max Wall suddenly,
out of the blue, says, 'I tell you what, Auntie, let's have tea with lashings
of toast!' 

The Senate investigation that has just finished – and produced a report,
grizzly beyond the most cynical imagining – did not come out of the blue. It
was an accidental by-product of the whole Watergate enquiry. Many of you may
remember the day in the spring of 1973 when Senator Irvin's Watergate Committee
called as a witness Mr Richard Helms, formerly head of the CIA and then
ambassador to Iran. There had been hints and rumours and testimony long before
the White House tapes that the CIA might have been involved in the bugging of
the Democrats' headquarters in the Watergate Building. Mr Helms, a poised and
straightforward witness, was there to say, 'Absolutely not!' 

He was called because by the law which set up the CIA, it was forbidden to
interfere in domestic matters. Its province was foreign intelligence. That was
the small episode from which, after the courts forced the publication of the
White House tapes and the House Judiciary Committee heard masses of talk about
CIA involvement, that was the episode that sparked, in the end, the Senate
committee's investigation into the whole conduct of the CIA at home and
abroad. 

In recent testimony, before this committee that's just published its report,
there was this exchange between a senator from Maryland and Mr Helms.

Senator: When Thomas à Beckett was proving to be an annoyance, the king said,
'Who will rid me of this troublesome priest?' He didn't say, 'Go out and murder
him'.

Mr Helms: That is a warning reference to the problem.

Senator: You mean that is typical of the kind of thing which might be taken as
presidential authorisation?

Mr Helms: I think that's right. One sort of grows up in the tradition of the
times.

This luminous phrase implied that it was the tradition of the times, from the
Eisenhower presidency through Kennedy, Johnson and Nixon, to plan for the
riddance, i.e. the murder, of Lumumba of the Congo, Trujillo of the Dominican
Republic, to make eight attempts on the life of Cuba's Castro, connive in the
assassination of President Diem of South Vietnam, plan and finance the
destruction of the Allende government in Chile. 

The kindest conclusion of the Senate committee is that it's hard to pin down
any clear-cut order from a president to perform these murders though the
evidence is very strong, except in the presidency of Lyndon Johnson, that the
presidents knew about the plans and tacitly approved them. 

Well, it has come as an enormous shock to hear that government of the people,
for the people, by the people includes the planned assassination in peace time
of foreign leaders the president may disapprove of. It will come as relief to
you, I hope, to know that the next step is a law the Congress is working on to
forbid murder as a policy of the United States government.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP