Politics v baseball

This has been the week of the so-called World Series. If Americans played
soccer more than they play baseball, I'm sure it would still be called the
World Series, though what it means is they're holding their domestic Cup Final.
The Cup Final, then, of the baseball season. That's as far as I'm going to go –
you'll be relieved to hear – about the actual game of baseball. Baseball, like
golf, is an addiction. To non-addicts, it's a dreadful bore. Addicts, wherever
they live, anywhere in the world, don't need to be told anything by an
outsider. They know all the latest wrinkles about the supply of the latest drug
and what it does and how to get it.

I remember the first time I was back in England after a two-year exposure to
this country and its customs, including this extraordinary game, which
interested me then about as much as curling or needlework does now. I was
invited at this time of the year – the week of the baseball championship always
happens in the fall – to go to the Harvard Club in London to listen to the
World Series; the magical word was 'listen'. It seems that until then the
expatriate addicts had had to gather round a news ticker at breathless
intervals and watch the score as it was tapped out in print. But that year (it
was before the Second War), somebody, the BBC, RCA, I don't remember, somebody
arranged a radio circuit across the Atlantic and the Harvard Club of London
sent out invitations with enthusiasm bordering on frenzy. Come and listen to
the thing itself, by the courtesy of Mr Marconi's invention. 

London, then, as now, was five hours ahead of New York and if I remember
aright, those were the years, in the mid Thirties, when the New York Yankees
were the almost automatic Titans of the game. Anyway, the game that we were to
hear was being played in New York. The starting time was, as always then, 1
p.m. So six o'clock in London was the perfect social hour at which American
businessmen in London could dispose of their chores, rush over to the Harvard
Club, receive a tumbler in their right hand and settle to the unique experience
of hearing the thing play by play. And, may I say, that to this day, there are
baseball fans who actually prefer to hear a baseball commentary on radio than
watch it on television, for baseball commentary, which is a language as
incomprehensible to a non-addict as Swahili is to a white racist, it's
extremely precise and quick and gives a mental picture of the field and every
physical move of the players, quite as vivid as the picture in the mind of a
world chess player; his picture of every move he made in the game that made him
champion. 

Well, in those days, the transatlantic circuit was a radio circuit and it came
at us in whimsical gusts, like showers of autumn leaves, sometimes a blizzard,
sometimes a patter, sometimes one leaf. Even if it had been crystal-clear, I
would have been about as hep – it used to be hep and then it was hip and now I
understand it's hap – I would have been as 'hap' to what was going on as if I'd
been sitting in on a pow-wow of African tribal chiefs. But the inhaling and
exhaling of the radio circuit only served to tantalise these Americans far from
home. They bent around the radio set, practically on their knees – African
chiefs at a prayer meeting – and when it was all over they had never dreamed of
anything so wonderful. What will they think of next? 

None of us dreamed of the day when people in theatres in Sheffield and Buenos
Aires and Sydney and Bangkok would watch Muhammad Ali earning $7 million in 20
minutes in a ring in Haiti or Los Angeles. Incidentally, the box office take
from all those millions around the globe is the reason why Ali was earning $7
million instead of the enormous purse of – was it $10,000? – that Jack Dempsey
got for knocking out Carpentier in 1921. 

Well, if this had not been a presidential year, the World Series would have
blanketed most political news just as the prospect of a British Gold Medal in
the Olympics blanketed for a week or two concern for the state of the pound
sterling, but we have only two weeks to go – we all thank the Lord – before we
shall know, as one gloomy man put it, 'whom we're to be saddled with'. 

And there was an interesting collision the other evening between the national
mania for baseball and the national ordeal of the election. There's been a
great and understandable fuss this year about the fact that the baseball games
are being played at night. This, as you must have heard me say before, is the
magical time of the year and almost invariably the World Series is played over
most of a week – the championship goes to the winner of four games in seven –
on days of sparkling light and balmy warmth, but this year we've had, for us,
almost as crazy a fall as you had a summer – about 20 degrees colder than
usual. A brilliant, but sharp day in the 50s followed by a day of torrential
rain and howling winds. And then, predictably, another day of blinding light,
but sharp. Sharper still, in the evenings. Why should this game which brings
out vast crowds by day suddenly have to be played at night? 

The answer – which has considerably rankled the baseball world – is because the
television networks want it that way. In the past 20 years or so, we've seen
most games come under the dictate of the television networks because they want
the most money they can get from advertisers and most money comes from the
biggest watching audience and most people are home at night. It's as simple as
that. The players prefer daylight, whether crystalline or grey to the
bone-white glare of the Klieg lights but, as in tennis, the players are no
longer consulted. 

Well, a third antagonist (protagonist?) got into the act last Friday. The World
Series started last Saturday, the 16th, in Cincinnati. This year it's the
Cincinnati Reds versus the New York Yankees, who have been under a cloud for a
dozen years or so. Cincinnati won the first two games. Then they took a day off
while the teams flew to New York. On Tuesday, they came to Yankee Stadium and
again Cincinnati won 3–0. Only one more to clinch the championship. Not the
most exciting World Series there has ever been. The Yankees are a good team
with chronic weaknesses. The Cincinnati Reds are a great team who begin to
press on the nerves of their opponents in the early innings and then strangle
them in the end. 

But the fourth game was supposed to be played on Wednesday night, whereupon the
cloudless skies of Tuesday were engulfed by a colossal storm, warnings to the
ships at sea, coastal floods and an empty stadium. Thursday dawned. As always
happens after a fall storm, in a light that never was on land or sea,
suggesting that the painters of the Italian Renaissance groped their way
through an encircling gloom, the kind of day when the very notion of smog or
pollution is an absurdity. 

Now the Yankees had to win that game to stay alive which would leave Friday,
tonight to some of you, as the night of the fifth game. When? At what time?
That's the rub. The games have been starting at 8.30, but a baseball game takes
several hours and 9.30 on Friday was the arranged time of the last of the
presidential debates. As one sportswriter put it, 'Not even the Baseball
Commissioner wanted to take on Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter at the same time.' 

Of course, they weren't thinking of the crowd at Yankee Stadium which would be
up there even if 9.30 were the starting time for a nuclear war. They, the
networks, were thinking of the 60 or 70 million television viewers who would be
watching the last, public battle – public recital, at least – of the two
presidential candidates instead of watching the World Series. And, perforce,
being hooked into appeals for this incredible razor blade, that divine perfume
and the other glorious beer. (By the way, down all these years, I have
suppressed my thoughts about American beer in the interests of Anglo-American
friendship.) 

Well, this was a dilemma or stalemate of horrifying proportions. Somebody was
naive enough to ask the Baseball Commissioner's office when the National
Broadcasting Company would let baseball know what time the fifth game would
start. To which the commissioner’s public relations man snapped back, 'Baseball
will let NBC know when it's going to play the game.' That brave retort can be
defined, I'm afraid, as a whistle in the wind. 

Ultimately in all sports these days, the decision about when any championship
will be played – boxing, tennis, hockey, football, basketball, I guess night
golf isn't far away – the decision will be made by the television presidents.
So, while I'm talking to you, there is a great summit meeting going on between
the Baseball Commissioner's staff, the managers of the two teams, and the
television company. 

Will the fifth game start at 1 p.m. and sacrifice the (huger) audience that
will be at work and, therefore, immune to appeals to switch razor blades or
perfumes or beers? Should the game start at 10.30 p.m. and lose the senior
citizens who like to be in bed at midnight, game or no game, shaven or
unshaven? The problem is agonised by the fact that the same network is carrying
both the games and the presidential debate. 

The one consolation is that the networks do not yet decide when the president
and his opponent may take to the air. They do have a big say. Eight-thirty has
most people in the east at home; 7.30, same thing in the mid-west; 6.30, most
people are eating in the mountain states and at 5.30, presumably the people on
the west coast are dashing home to watch. 

But there was no suggestion that the Messrs Ford and Carter should go on in the
afternoon or wait till midnight. Some priorities remain, though with 34 million
registered voters saying they're not going to vote, you may well wonder what
the hassle's all about. 

Put on the Reds versus the Yanks and Gerry versus Jimmy, alternately, at the
same time! No, that would produce a disastrous drop in the viewing audience for
the Carter-Ford bout, causing the Stock Market to drop still farther. 

For, as the editor of a financial weekly wrote this week, 'The reason the Stock
Market has gone down is because the American people fear that either Ford or
Carter is going to be elected.’

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP