First primary in presidential campaign

Well, the first hurdle is behind us, buried in the snows of New Hampshire. We
now have only 29 primary elections to go through, a hot summer, two brawling
conventions, one in Kansas City, the other in New York, an autumn of deafening
oratory – claims, counterclaims, insults, contradictions, dire prophesies –
then an election the first Tuesday in November and then we shall know who is to
be the next President of the United States.

Whenever one of these presidential campaigns gets under way, which is never
later than a year before the election, I think wistfully of the old lady who,
many years ago, heard me going on about this time of year about the chances of
this man and that for the presidency and wrote me a simple, succinct sentence
on a postcard: 'Instead of fretting for so long over who is likely to be
president, would it not be wiser to wait until November and see who is.' 

It would indeed! But wisdom has no more to do with electioneering fever than
with gambling on horse races or looking into a crystal ball. You don't need to
be endowed with much wisdom, you don't even need to be an elementary scientist,
to know that what the ancients thought they knew about the behaviour of the sun
and the stars and what we know, not to mention that their calendar was
different from ours, or the glaring fact that people born on the same day in
Peking and Pimlico have vastly different genes, upbringing and the rest. In
spite of these wildly varying conditions, millions and millions of people
around the globe turn every day to a column with some such title as 'Seeing
Stars' or 'Your Fate Today' and read that they should write no letters, avoid
financial advice and anticipate romance in the evening. Or, looking across the
column to the sign of their mate, business partner or enemy, read 'your natural
cunning promises a big bargain today' and the reader sighs, 'The lucky stiff!
Just like a Scorpio.' 

Well, the American primary elections are a dogged attempt at a step-by-step
system of democracy. Ordinary folk in one region of the country are allowed to
look over the big boys trying for the presidency and say whom they prefer in
each party. And then ordinary folk in another, different part ofo the country
are allowed to do the same. And, in spite of all the hullabaloo of campaign
buttons and posters and gaudy promises of the millennium, we ought not to
belittle the good intentions – you might almost say the bravery – of the
system. It would certainly be a radical change if eight Russians had to go from
door to door in the town of Minsk, say, and beg the farmers and the factory
workers and the man who keeps the corner store to vote for them to replace Mr
Brezhnev. 

It would even require quite a change in the British system. If you never knew
who the Labour Party or the Conservative Party were going to have as their next
Prime Minister until five Labour candidates and two Conservatives had trudged
through Oswaldtwistle and Burnley and Cleveleys in the Lancashire primary and,
in the result, effectively knocked off two or three hopefuls, the others going
on to Hampshire and to speak in schoolrooms and outside petrol stations in
Southampton and Winchester and Petersfield, and then the candidates who
survived that massacre would go on to Maidstone and Ashford and Sevenoaks until
the Kent primary had declared the winners and caused the rest of the country to
say, 'Well, what do you know? That's the end of Fred, or Ted, or Philip, or
whoever!' 

The New Hampshire primary may not tell us whether either Jimmy Carter, the
successful Democrat, or Gerald Ford, the successful Republican, is going to be
president next time round but it does tell us who isn't. Sargent Shriver, for
instance. Sargent Shriver is a brother-in-law of the late President Kennedy. In
1972 he was the chosen vice-presidential candidate of the Democrats and he was
chosen, it's generally agreed, because he peppered the ticket with some of the
gold dust that brushed off the dead president. Mr Shriver may have been tempted
to try again – for the big prize this time – on the assumption that the gold
dust still sparkles, but in the past few months the picture of the late
president has been considerably tarnished, first by a Senate committee which
practically concluded that the CIA's plot to assassinate Fidel Castro was
masterminded by Kennedy, and second, by a lot of uncomfortable stories, some
pretty well proven, some conjectural, that President Kennedy had a rather
active intral-mural and extra-mural romantic life. I mean inside and outside
the walls of the White House. 

Anyway, Mr Shriver came at the bottom of the list in the Democratic primary,
taking only nine per cent of the Democrats' votes and that, in an election in
which he was the only Roman Catholic in a state where over 50 per cent of the
population is Catholic. It would seem that if he couldn't win in New Hampshire,
he couldn't win anywhere. He's probably come to the same conclusion and, even
as I talk, he may have thrown in the sponge. I imagine that Mr Fred Harris with
only 11 per cent, and possibly Senator Birch Bayh with 18 per cent, at least
are looking at the sponge. 

I really don't think there's any point in going into the characters and beliefs
of any of the Democrats because there are so many of them lusting to be
president and it would be a waste of your memory bank to learn the philosophy
and foibles of three or four men and then have to forget about them come
Tuesday when they hold the Massachusetts primary or after Florida the following
week. I'll say for now simply that Jimmy Carter, who looks like Huckleberry
Finn and comes out of Georgia, is an interesting case of a Southerner somehow
able to win in a northern state and what he's done is to make the Florida
primary more critical. For if he won there, he could puncture once for all the
hopes, the candidacy, of the man who expects to ride high in his native South
land, George Wallace. 

For the rest of us and the rest of the country, the most interesting thing
about the New Hampshire primary was the close race between President Ford and
the former governor of California, and before that B-film cowboy, Ronald
Reagan. By the way, you know that in the past year the television networks have
tended to dredge up all the films of Ronald Reagan in the hope of attaching his
charms to the accompanying commercials. However, the Federal Communications
Commission decided, a couple of months ago, that this was a form of privilege.
Under the law which allows candidates for the presidency to get equal exposure
outside the time they themselves have bought, Mr Reagan's films were banned
from the box. 

At that time jokers said that the other candidates ought to tot up the running
time of the Reagan films and be given equal time. A better joker, considering
the dim quality of many of those films, said that any network that ran the
Reagan films ought to give Reagan equal time to reply. 

Well, back to the case of Reagan versus Ford. Before the New Hampshire primary,
it was being said, and truly said, that the winner in New Hampshire, in fact
the winner in all or most of the state primaries, is by no means necessarily
the man who's going to win the November election. Indeed three men, two
Democrats – Stevenson in 1952, Humphrey in '68 – and one Republican, Wendell
Willkie in 1940, won their parties' nomination without going into the primaries
at all. On the eve of the New Hampshire primary, the statisticians,
sociologists and professors of political science (in which this country
abounds) were flooding us with fat pamphlets and thin pamphlets proving pretty
conclusively that the primaries prove nothing at all. Or, proving anyway that
the truth about them discovered by Professor A is exactly the opposite of the
truth discovered by Professor B. 

To me, the most interesting discovery – and one that could almost excuse us
from giving any weight at all to the primaries – is a study done by a student
at the University of California, which says, in effect, that what you should
watch is not the primaries, but the public opinion polls. Now, old politicians
temperamentally hate public opinion polls because they rob the old men of their
old fondness for displaying their professional insight into matters that,
before the public opinion polls, could not be scientifically tested. This
California student proves, with a raft of historical examples going up to this
year, that the men who take the presidential election, and sometimes the
primaries before it, are practically always the men who stand at the top of the
popularity polls among the voters of their party. 

Against this, we have all learned a cautionary lesson which may not be a lesson
at all. It is that if an incumbent president doesn't win in New Hampshire, or
only just wins, he'll quit the White House. This bit of witchcraft is based on
two examples: Truman in 1952 and Lyndon Johnson in 1968, but there is, I'm
afraid, lots of evidence to show that both men had resolved to quit politics
before the New Hampshire primary. 

So, we come down to the persuasive study of Mr Beneger of the University of
California and, applying his test, popularity among your own party's voters
across the country as the polls record, the election would now seem to be
between President Ford and Hubert Humphrey. Humphrey is not going into any
primaries, not campaigning – simply waiting for the crown to be handed to him
when five or six Democrats fight to a standstill in the New York convention. 

But President Ford is another case. Mr Ford won – narrowly – over the
'Lochinvar out of the west', Reagan. Both sides claim a famous victory. Mr Ford
is certainly going to go on and, in one primary or another, we shall see if the
apparent lesson of New Hampshire is a true one, namely that the country is
going more conservative. 

Jimmy Carter, a conservative Democrat, handsomely beat the four liberal
Democrats. Reagan, the conservative Republican came awfully close to beating
the moderate Ford. 

My own hunch is that Reagan is not going to make it. This is a hunch that has
no base in sense or science. So if you must bet on the election, take the bets
of people who think they know. Bet against everybody, not for somebody and
don't take any wooden nickels.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP