Jimmy Carter's background

This episode contains references to racially offensive character names.

One of the quietest and most effective of America's humorists is a young
middle-aged man, Russell Baker, who was at one time a first-rate reporter on
the New York Times. 

He quit reporting to brood on the human situation. That sentence, I suppose,
implies that a reporter is too fenced in by facts and what newspaper men called
'hard news' to spend much time thinking or meditating, which is a kind of
'floating' thought. 

Well, I didn't intend any slap at the New York Times. On the contrary, the New
York Times is one of the few leading newspapers left whose reporters are
reporters and not leader writers in disguise or ambitious novelists trying out
their imagination on the facts that come to hand. More and more it seems to me,
and most notably in England, you can see the political leanings of a given
paper without having to turn to the editorial page and this is becoming more
and more true of conservative papers, liberal papers, leftist papers. It
encourages people to do what I believe they shouldn't be encouraged to do,
which is to buy the paper that gives you the facts that you want to hear or a
view of the facts that you feel must be so. I think it's a great pity. 

The difference between this practice and that of the New York Times is
strikingly reflected when English friends of mine arrive in New York. To a man,
they complain that the New York Times is dull and grey on its news pages. Well,
even in its own country the Times is known as 'the good, grey Times.' What they
mean is that the reporting isn't what they call 'lively.' The Times requires
its reporters to see or hear what happened, to check with the people involved –
whether or not they share the reporter's political bias – and to put it all
down as accurately and baldly as possible. 

It seems to me to be one of the greatest compliments – perhaps THE greatest –
that you can pay a reporter and that's to say that you have no idea which way
he'd be likely to vote. But of course it makes for humdrum reading, unless the
facts themselves have been hidden and happen, also, to be hair-raising, which
was certainly true of the facts about Watergate dug up by the two, grey,
impassive grave-diggers, Woodward and Bernstein, employed by the Washington
Post. But, I'm afraid their success in exposing a flagrantly dishonest
president unfortunately encouraged reporters everywhere to lust after a similar
fame by digging out not all the facts, but all the scandalous facts in the
hope, no doubt, of getting a movie contract and so graduating, once for all,
out of the reporting business. 

Well, Russell Baker quit reporting for quite other reasons. He was an alert and
excellent reporter but he had a talent for meditation and for whimsy and irony
which got in the way of the grey, bald facts. So he became a columnist and he's
now one of the most prized of the New York Times's stable. And this week was a
good time for him to stretch himself because there's just now an absence, or
rather a calculated pause, in hard, political news. The conventions are over,
the candidates have been picked, but the presidential campaign, it's always
agreed, will not fire its first guns until Labor Day, a national holiday and
the official end of summer. 

Well, in this brief – or you could say briefing – period, the staff of the two
campaigners are like Eisenhower's staff before D-Day. They're poring over
battle plans, equipping the troops, bringing up the landing barges and the
rations of gas masks and peanut butter. But on Monday September 6 – BOOM! 

In the meantime, the newspapers are also mobilising their war correspondents.
So many reporters to Ford, some detailed from now to November 2 to Senator
Dole, Ford's hopeful vice president, similarly another body to cover Senator
Mondale, Jimmy Carter's VP, but the main body to stay with Carter till the
election doth them part or sends them on to the White House. Understandably,
there's a larger body gone off with Carter than with Ford because we all know
old Gerry Ford, or think we do, and we know that he's hardworking and decent
and pedestrian. We don't know who or what Jimmy Carter is, in spite of reams of
profiles and character studies and a spate of funny cartoons. The cartoonists
have pinned him down before anybody because his Southern origins tempted them
beyond resistance to show him as a corn-bred Georgia cracker. 

The best of these cartoons came out several weeks ago and I'm afraid I have to
weaken the punch of the joke by reminding some people that the chic-est shoes,
worn by Madison Avenue advertising men and such, tend to be made by the Italian
house of Gucci. Well, the cartoon showed in parody one of the immortal scenes
of American literature – Huckleberry Finn and Nigger Jim, on their raft,
hailing a passing steamboat chugging power and smoke. Huck, of course, is Jimmy
Carter. Nigger Jim is his vice-presidential mate, Senator 'Fritz' Mondale.
Carter is waving up to the steamboat and saying, 'Hi y'all! I'm Huckleberry
Carter and this is my man Fritz!' And, out of the corner of his mouth, he's
hissing to Mondale, 'Shuffle a little, Fritz!' To which Mondale is hissing
back, 'I can't! I've scuffed my Guccis!' 

Well, this of course is meant to point up the incongruity of having a Southern
hillbilly for president and an urbane senator as his running mate. It's too
easy to be true. Whatever else he is, Carter is not a Georgia cracker or a
hillbilly or anything so naive. Homespun, he may have been but then, in their
several ways, so were Harry Truman and Lyndon Johnson and Lloyd George. And
Herbert Asquith, for that matter. What they became was something quite
different. All of them highly intelligent, they turned into cool and
sophisticated politicians. 

The suspicion that there is a great deal more in Jimmy Carter than meets the
eye of the cartoonists is what has sent that army of correspondents down to
encamp close to Plains, Georgia – Carter's home town – a place of 540
population, no motel, one petrol pump, a grocery store and several healthy
farms. And the fact that Carter has cultivated a large and prosperous farm
would be simply stated and left at that, if his principal crop were not in
peanuts – what in England used to be called monkey nuts – and for some reason,
known possibly only to Morecombe and Wise, peanuts are a comic commodity. It's
going to take time to shake the reporters' out of their joyous preconception
that Jimmy Carter is a latter-day Huckleberry Finn. 

Time, the magazine, published a facetious, lexicon of Southern words and
pronunciations we're all going to have to learn if Carter becomes president.
The truth is that Carter's speech is a very modified form of Southern American
English, much less Southern than that of Lyndon Johnson, and I haven't heard of
anybody American, English, Scottish or Australian who has the slightest trouble
in following him. But newsmen are quicker than anybody in pinning a stereotype
on a human being suddenly famous. They have to be because they have to write
about him, while everybody, themselves included, is wondering what he's all
about. 

For the time being and until he starts to declare himself on the issues, these
people are busy boning up on what their editors require, namely background
pieces. In Carter's case this means probing into his life and family history
and coming up with little shining nuggets of homely anecdotage. It's a
depressing process and sometimes an unfair one. Carter, for instance, has a
nephew who's been in trouble with the law and people wonder if this will affect
the outcome of the election. Well, somewhere along the family tree we all have
weak branches but few of us stop to say, 'I wonder what the background stories
about me would read like if I were suddenly a presidential candidate.' 

And this is what started Russell Baker off on his latest reverie and, for all
its fun, it packs a moral, at least a cautionary, tale for all of us. 

The reporters, Mr Baker notes, have gone off in battalion strength to Plains,
Georgia, to search for the roots of Jimmy Carter. And they made Mr Baker
realise why he'd always shrunk from running for president. He came to reflect
on what the press might do to him 'if they ever descended in force to do its
sociological study of my roots'. He fears it would take these ferrets no more
than a day or two to unearth the fact that 'as a toddler, one of my most
memorable achievements was the discovery that my Uncle Sims hid his whisky in a
jar behind the barrel of whitewash behind my grandmother's house or that my
grandmother, on being shown the evidence by me, threw the whisky on the
woodpile and gave Uncle Sims such a lecture that he never touched the stuff
again for several days.' 

Well it seems that Mr Baker's Uncle Sims is long gone and, as he says, 'beyond
public humiliation, but I cherish his memory too closely to want to see the
story laid out in Newsweek under an old snapshot of him.' Apparently this
rustic episode happened during prohibition when it was a criminal act to
manufacture or even possess liquor, whether it was the genuine stuff smuggled
into the United States or home-brewed moonshine. Mr Baker says Uncle Sims,
whose only surviving snapshots show him with several days' growth of whiskers,
would have inevitably emerged from publicity as a bum, which he was not. 'Every
male at the crossroads', Baker says, 'shared his taste for moonshine while
every female spent a good deal of time emptying jars on woodpiles.' 

Mr Baker also had a friend, the eleventh child of a mountain family, therefore
called simply 'Eleven'. Mr Baker doesn't know what became of him but he says,
'I don't want to be sitting before the television some night surrounded by
secret service men when suddenly a commentator appears interviewing a man named
Eleven about my early deficiencies. I'd rather not be president.' And so say I!
And so, I hope, say you. 

Childhood has much more to offer than quaint or disreputable incidents. What
went on in the mind of young Jimmy Carter is everything, and that no reporter
will ever dig out. As Mr Baker puts it at the end, 'The reporters are fiercely
capable fellows when it comes to finding the Uncle Sims of America but they are
not geared for the more important things, like detecting the way a June morning
smelled in 1934 or what the wind sounded like in the chimney that December.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP