Presidential election, November 1976

Whatever else may be said about the 1976 presidential campaign, most people
agree that the only exciting thing about it was the election itself.

By twilight on Tuesday, the only positive people on either side were campaign
workers, press secretaries, relatives and friends who have an obvious
obligation to maintain the team spirit, whatever the facts may say. And, among
the general public, wise guys, true believers and chronic loudmouths to whom
wishing something hard enough will make it come true. Everybody else, from
journalists, politicians on both sides, professors of political science, all
the way up to the most reliable of the pollsters, namely Lou Harris, gave up in
the end and said that the election was too close to call. 

Most of us who've been watching the ebb and flow of partisanship in the 50
states could make out a list early on Tuesday evening and write down only two
or three absolutely sure things. Massachusetts, for instance, the only state to
go for the Democratic nominee in 1972, was written off by the Republicans long
before election day as sacrosanct Democratic territory. Apart from its normal
Democratic allegiance, there was the powerful fact that Senator Edward Kennedy
was running for re-election and would almost certainly carry the state by a
landslide and carry Carter with him. Which he did. Georgia would plainly have
gone slightly mad if it had not voted for its own son, Carter, the most
improbable presidential candidate in the history of the states or perhaps in
the history of the United States. 

We also made the not-very-risky guess that with a Southerner having the best
chance at the presidency in over a hundred years, Carter might relax the solid
grip on the South that Nixon had managed last time. By the way, I ought not to
toss off that Nixon feat so glibly because the reversal of it explains, so far
as I can see, more about Carter's election than anything else. Nixon's capture
of the entire South in 1972 was about as remarkable as if the Conservatives, in
the last British election, had won every Labour seat from Birmingham to the
North. Let me go into this. 

All the way back too 1880, the Republicans have had to confront every four
years not only an uphill fight for the presidency, but a high stone wall in the
middle of the hill and that wall was known as 'the Solid South' – the absolute
certainly that every state of the South would vote for the Democratic
presidential nominee no matter who he was. This had nothing to do with
political principle or ideology. It had everything to do with the machinations
of the Republicans in the decade after the Civil War. They descended on the
South like locusts and tried to organise the new, huge Negro vote – the
Negroes, of course, had been enfranchised for the first time and their success
was alarming – alarming, that is, to the whites. 

In the 1870s the whites who, themselves, were deprived of the vote for a time
in some Southern States, the whites rallied together behind the Democratic
Party simply because it was the resistance force against the invading
Republicans and, for more than 30 years after the Civil War, the South stayed
loyal to the Democrats in every presidential election and state election. Now
what this meant in political terms was that Democrats, whether or not they
shared any political prejudice with the Democrats of the North, entrenched
themselves in state politics, in the governor's mansions, in city and local
politics. They obviously controlled the state's legislatures, the town halls,
the counties, the works. They, therefore, owned the patronage which gives
people political jobs and can assign contracts, whether it's a skyscraper
permit or a new highway or whatever. And when you have a governor and a state
legislature and city mayors, all of the same party, it's clearly going to be
very difficult to break that party with promises of jobs and power since that
party doesn't need promises, it already owns the jobs and the power. 

And this explains why, far into this century, Southerners who are even
feverishly sympathetic to Republican principles and who detested, for instance,
Roosevelt and later Truman, stayed with the Democratic Party because they had
established over the very long run similar overwhelming power in Congress.
Until the past few years, the chairmen of congressional committees, where the
real work of Congress is done, were appointed chairmen through length of
service, so it's obvious that if a Southern State had been sending a couple of
Democrats back to the Senate, year after year, decade after decade, those two
would become and remain chairmen of the most powerful congressional
committees. 

The first break in this stranglehold came with Eisenhower who shook the
Democrats by taking four Southern States in 1956 and also Texas, a
south-western state with a Southern prejudice. In 1960, Nixon took only three,
but four years later Goldwater took five. In '68 Nixon again took five, but in
1972 the political battle was joined so sharply between Nixon, the
conservative, and McGovern, the leftist liberal, that the whole South
proclaimed itself the new bastion of conservatism and every Southern state and
Texas went for Nixon. 

So, even after the Spiro Agnew resignation and the Nixon disgrace – by the way,
only five per cent of the voters said Watergate was an issue this time – it
seemed early this year that no Democrat could possibly pierce what was now a
solid Republican South unless, the polls showed, the Democratic nominee was
Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts. I heard of more bets which are now being
reluctantly paid off on that simple premise that no Democrat, other than
Kennedy, could possibly unseat Ford. 

Well, enter now – as the stage directions used to say – a man from a very small
town in Georgia, population 680-odd, a prosperous peanut farmer who was,
however, also, a former nuclear submarine commander. A name most of us had
never heard a year ago, even though he'd been a highly controversial governor
of Georgia, some saying that he had at least reduced the vast number of bureaux
in the Georgia state government, others saying that he'd done that but the
fewer bureaux had actually increased the number of bureaucrats by 30 per cent
and the cost to the taxpayer by 50 per cent. 

Well, the rest of the astonishing story you know. How, by the end of the
Democratic convention, Carter was over 30 percentile points ahead of Ford, how
Ford came back and back and back, until the double-dome pollsters threw up
their hands on the very eve of the election and said it was a dead heat. 

When we sat down – we're back now to Tuesday twilight – we gave California to
Ford because all the Democratic managers out there said the state was lost. I
made a preliminary tally giving 18 states to Carter with an electoral vote of
197 and 24 states to Ford with an electoral count of 223. That would require
Ford to get only 47 more electoral votes from the, admittedly, toss-up states
of Texas (26), Pennsylvania (27), Illinois (26) and five others with almost
negligible numbers of electoral votes – Connecticut, South Dakota, New Mexico,
Rhode Island and Mississippi. 

Electoral votes are distributed on the basis of the number of representative in
Congress which, in turn, is based on population. So California, the most
populous state, had 45 votes to give to Ford, as New York, the second most
populous, had 41 to give to Carter. Now, when you settle down to the long vigil
of a presidential evening, you expect the early returns to go for the
Republican and that's because the first returns come in from the rural areas of
the Eastern states and the farmers, on the whole, have a strong Republican
bias. But here an odd thing happened and, as the evening wore on, we should
have seen it as a sign of things to come. 

Carter established an early lead in the popular vote by 51 per cent to 48 per
cent and he held it, hour after hour, for eight hours until the election was
decided. As we watched NBC's big, empty map of the country filling in with red
states for Carter and blue for Ford, a pattern became glaringly clear. The
South was returning to the fold and if Ford was to win, he was going to have to
wrest most of the big industrial states and/or Texas and/or California from the
Democrats. When Carter took New York and then Pennsylvania, it began to look as
if it were all over. And then he took Texas and his electoral lead was
commanding. Ford was now going to have to take almost everything, certainly all
the neck and neck, big races. Well, he took California and then Illinois. And
then, little Mississippi came in and put Carter over by two votes. 

On Wednesday morning, we woke up to find that Carter was still president but by
only two electoral votes, that Oregon, only six votes, but Ohio with 25 were
still tied too close to call. If Ford took both, the final electoral count
would be Carter 272, Ford 266, the closest electoral vote in history. Woodrow
Wilson won in 1916 by only 23. 

Well, what happened since then, you all know. There’s always one unsuspected,
massive trend that nobody spots and we, all, including the pollsters, kept
saying to the dead-heat prophets that though the popular vote would be as close
as a hair's breadth, Carter would probably have a very comfortable electoral
majority. Well, in the result, Carter had an easy two million majority in the
popular vote and squeaked through the electoral vote, which is what counts. 

At this, still bleary-eyed, stage, my own explanation is simple, if tentative.
Carter only partly revived the old Democratic majority in the cities, but he
broke the new Republican grip on the South – most of all, he broke the old
Republican grip on rural America.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP