NYC aid bill passed

Well, the perishing west wind is whistling across the land these days and the
snowbound hinterland and then coming on across the Jersey Flats and it ripples
up the Hudson River and whirls through the cross-town streets of New York
before it blows out to sea, inverting umbrellas and making the girls' slacks
flap against their legs where once it ruffled up their skirts.

And if there is still an energy crisis, or the likelihood of one, nobody would
ever know about it. The department stores are ablaze, inside and out, and the
65-foot tree at Rockefeller Center causes rubbernecks from Connecticut and New
Jersey to clog up the traffic along Fifth Avenue. And the cashiers at the big
stores are drooping with fatigue from the jostling lines of shoppers carrying
everything these days, from calendars to baby carriages, since they abandoned
shop assistants and left everything to self-service. 

The Santa Clauses shaking their little bells have had orders from their union
this year. For the first time, they're expected to observe a code of conduct
which says, among other colourful admonitions, that they must not be drunk on
duty. They must keep their money deep inside the recesses of their uniform,
that they must shave off a natural beard in favour of a false one, unless God
has blessed them with a natural that is snow-white and fully packed. They're
warned also not to make expensive promises to the young that their parents are
unlikely to keep. 

The Christmas shopping is brisker than it's been for years on the English
principle of making the most of tonight, since tomorrow we may go broke. 'Going
broke' is not a phrase we like to bandy about in this city, but the actuality
that threatened us for so many months has now been banished by the certainty
that Congress would pass the president's bill to lend New York City $2.3
billion a year for the next three years. The bill squeezed through the House by
ten votes only in 416, but the real danger of its defeat came in the Senate,
when a rally of conservatives promised a filibuster and a last-ditch apostle of
thrift from Alabama, Senator Allen, a Democrat, offered to stand up and talk
and talk and talk the bill into extinction. 

Filibustering is an American folk tradition which, like many others, seems
doomed to vanish. Its theory is impeccably democratic. Why should a majority,
just because it's a majority, impose its will on a sincere, high-minded
minority? The filibuster achieved its finest years in the decades following the
general acceptance of a theory of government which was put forward in the early
nineteenth century when the pioneers were breaking into the West and running
into all sorts of regional troubles and ways of life that Washington could not
know about. In other words, to give you a saucy – but extreme – example, why
should Washington decide to give the states small, equal amounts of money for
public roads through public forests when some states, like Kansas, say, have no
forests – very few trees, for that matter – while the people of Florida cannot
cross a wood without the risk of being bitten by snakes? 

This sort of grievance, as it developed into a political theory, became known
as 'the theory of the concurrent minority'. Perhaps to call it a theory is
unfair. It was a conviction, reached after long experience of some very pesky
facts. A democracy, it concluded, is going to perpetuate injustice if the
majority can always dictate its will to a determined minority and when the
minority is sufficiently inflamed on principle or as a special case, it would
be better to think again about the majority's wishes. And out of this
conviction grew the filibuster which was a deliberate device for obstructing
the passage of legislation that violated the passionate convictions of a
minority. 

In 1917, before the Germans announced unrestricted submarine warfare and so
practically invited the Americans into the war, President Wilson put up an act
to arm American merchant vessels. The bill came first before the House of
Representatives and was passed by an overwhelming vote of 403 to 14. And then
it went to the Senate and its passage was a foregone thing when 75 senators,
out of the sitting 96, announced beforehand that they would vote for it. But it
didn't pass. Seven senators, who shared the fear that it would invite a German
declaration of war and were determined to stay out of the war at all costs,
these seven took it in turn to stand on their feet and talk and talk, offer
numerous amendments which were defeated on a roll call but no matter. The main
aim was achieved. To talk and talk till the term of Congress had expired and
the bill was still being debated. 

Well, 80-odd years ago, the House stiffened its rules that permit a filibuster
and it has since been abandoned there. And though the Senate has also tightened
its rules, a filibuster, if it can arouse enough willing and healthy speakers,
can still talk a bill into the ground. Until quite recently, the Senate had an
unlimited freedom of debate. When, for instance, in 1938, an anti-lynching bill
came up, a senator from Louisiana got up and talked for six successive days.
There's no rule in the Senate that says that you must speak to the motion. I
remember a senator from Tennessee, in the process of filibustering against a
tax bill, fished out an enormous memorandum on the different ways that various
obscure members of the government's Engraving and Printing Bureau had been
dismissed. 

Certainly, the most shameless and amusing of all modern filibusterers was the
comic and outrageous demagogue from Louisiana, the late Huey Long. When, after
two years of Roosevelt, a bill came up in the Senate to extend the life of the
so-called 'national recovery' administration – which was the emergency
lifeblood Roosevelt had pumped into the wilting body of American government –
Long defeated it with a continuous speech of 15 hours and 35 minutes. He
didn't, as I recall, talk for long about the sins of the administration. He
took to reading doom-ridden passages from the Bible. He took up the current
condition of baseball and, at the end, he wiped a tear from his eye, recalled
his dear old Mom and, taking out a dog-eared diary or handbook, he began to
read aloud with Shakespearean intonations his mother's recipes for pot liquor
and fried oysters. 

I don't know if, last week, Senator Allen of Alabama was prepared to enlighten
us about his mother's recipe for corn muffins or black-eyed peas. If so, his
hopes were soon shattered. The Senate had canvassed itself and found that most
of its members were thoroughly sick of the New York City financial mess and
enough of them were scared with what the city's bankruptcy might do to other
cities by way of contagion and Senator Allen couldn't recruit enough relay
runners for his talking marathon. Moreover, as a matter of practical politics,
the bill was almost passed. 

Bills come up in two stages. First, the so-called 'authorisation' bill. The
Senate has to say whether it approves the notion of passing a bill and that is
commonly the time to kill it. If the authorisation bill passes, the nearest
thing to a kill that you can achieve is to reduce drastically the amount of
money appropriated in the second stage, the 'appropriation' bill. Poor Senator
Allen stood up last Monday in a nearly empty Senate chamber and moaned, quite
sensibly, 'If we could not defeat the authorisation where this matter was
decided on its merits, how in the world can we defeat the appropriation bill?'
And he fulfilled his own fears. There was no way. And the Republican senators,
even the ones who'd been picturing New York as a spendthrift Sodom and Gomorrah
which ought to be taught a painful lesson, they concluded that if President
Ford, the loudest of the preachers, had decided that 2.3 billions a year was
not too much, then they gave up. And so did Senator Allen. 

From then on, the bill followed its ceremonial routine. A vote to approve, then
to a joint conference of the appropriate House and Senate committees, then a
quick vote on the compromised bill in both Houses and then the president’s
signature. 

Whether or not President Ford changed his mind, his supporters and his campaign
managers will be very vocal in their insistence that he never changed his tune.
He said in the beginning, 'No help for New York unless it helped itself in
painful, self-disciplining ways' and New York is doing that. Mayor Beame is
dismissing city employees right and left. Most telling of all, New York State
has promised to increase the already considerable state income tax and New York
City is going to jab the third and most painful flag in the bull's neck – it
will increase the tax which we, alone, among American city dwellers, have to
pay – the New York City income tax. 

No wonder, then, the word came from Washington this week that congressmen are
being swamped with protests against money that the American taxpayer will have
to fork out next year for the following federal projects: a federal study on
the impact of rural road construction in Poland – $85,000. Poland, Europe, that
is, not Poland, Wisconsin or Warsaw, Indiana, and you may well ask, 'How can
such things come about?'. 

Well, the answer would occur to you quite quickly if you looked through the
congressional record and saw a list of names of the present members of
Congress. In Rhode Island, it helps to get elected if you have an Italian name.
In Nevada, there are constituencies made up entirely of Greeks. 

Well, to go on, a government dictionary on witchcraft – $46,089; a grant to
Central College, Iowa to report on the enhancement of the self-image of
freshman women – $22,470; a study on teaching American mothers how to play with
their children – cost $576,969. And here's a vital government study to which I,
for one, had no idea I was contributing – for a study of bisexual Polish frogs
– $6,000.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP