Hearst jury selected

I started last time to write a letter about what it was like to see things from
the west coast of the United States instead of from the east, but I got
sidetracked – as one does in letters – with other things that came to mind,
though mostly they were about the difficulty of talking from California without
having the listener go off into a daydream of preconceptions about sun,
beaches, sex, Hollywood etc. etc.

When I rudely interrupted myself I was saying that California stretches from
north to south the distance from Edinburgh to Naples and that even that apart
from latitude, the picture of California life from the Pacific coast west to
east can be greatly scrambled by the fact of two mountain ranges, the Coast
Range and then the Sierra which can produce wildly different modes of life by
way of climate and occupation, even 50 miles apart. 

Anyway, if it's understood that nothing is to be found surprising in
California, here you're in parkas and snow boots watching men chopping down
timber in great forests, there you're mooching around in slippers and a bikini
watering your parched garden. One morning you're in San Francisco, whose hilly
streets have not seen frost, and the same afternoon you're standing in a snowy
ridge in the foothills of the Sierra looking west into the Central Valley where
cattle are staggering or dying from lack of food. 

The 'Long Valley', as John Steinbeck called it, and not unreasonably, since
it's about 300 miles long and has 20 million acres in pasture and food crops,
well, it's been without rain since October. Even the mild coast, San Francisco,
for instance, which expects to get its modest 12 inches or so mainly in
December, January, February, has had half an inch since October. So, while
blizzards went whistling across the mainland and buried New England, while an
ice storm hit New York so quickly that, within a couple of hours, it was not
possible to drive cars, buses, anything, on the streets, while all this was
going on, I was, every day, hearing about the ranchers and the fruit growers of
the Central Valley going bankrupt and the animals dying and the coming hideous
prices of beef and fruit. 

No matter what's going on in the world, people are most concerned with what
affects their livelihood and health – if it comes to disasters as large as
earthquakes, hurricanes and so on, with their survival. So while I was in San
Francisco, the morning greeting, the shopkeeper, the cab driver, librarians,
restaurant keepers, they all started by wondering if the rains would ever come.
Southern California was as badly off and there you could hear about a group of
people who were in dire heartbreaking distress. They are people who cannot get
a new swimming pool finished before 1 April. 

I do not jest. After a television aerial, the next thing a southern California
householder thinks of is a swimming pool. As your income goes up, the pool's
dimensions increase from that of a sunken tub in the garden to a chic Olympic
model, usually glistening there by sunlight and moonlight, its scrupulously
filtered waters rarely disturbed by the splash of a human body. For, with the
very rich, a swimming pool is like a church steeple to a wealthy suburb. It's
not for use, but for pious display. 

Well, an innocent stranger might think they have swimming pools in southern
California, and it's much the same in Florida, because, in both places, the sun
is the main natural features, the chief selling point to tourists. But it seems
that the more genial the climate, the more casually you can stroll out of the
house and dip in the pool, the more fastidious you get about the exact
conditions under which you will consent to stroll out of a house and drop in a
pool. You'd expect that in southern California they'd boast that the water
temperature of their pools rarely fell below 60 degrees which, if left to
nature, that's what would happen, but they regard 60 degrees as a form of
torture. 

To give you the ridiculous truth, the fact is that no people, anywhere, in this
land, are more petted than the Floridians and the southern Californians about
the temperature of the water in which they will take their daily float or swim.
And the California Public Utilities Commission has decreed that, from 1 April,
it will be illegal to provide natural gas for the heating of new swimming
pools. Now California, as you know, is the most populous of the 50 states and
it uses more electricity, what we call 'energy', than anybody. What with
air-conditioning, three cars to every two of the population, more
refrigerators, washing machines, ice crushers, blenders than half the rest of
the states in the West, not to mention heated swimming pools. And there's the
rub. 

There was a quick dip in the consumption of fuel when the Arabs first slapped
on their embargo and then hiked the price of oil and there was a rash of good
citizenship by way of observing the new federal speed limit, 55 miles an hour –
it's still there, by the way, even on eight-lane freeways that go slamming and
winding through six or seven hundred miles of bare Texas or Kansas landscape –
but since the well-advertised energy crisis, we have consumed more fuel per
person than ever before. 

Still, there is a limit to the personal sacrifices a southern Californian can
be asked to make and the commission's cruelty has set off an uproar from the
companies who build swimming pools and a howl of pain from the people who won't
be able to finish their pool in their backyard before the end of March. If this
obsession, in a world of earthquakes, nuclear threats and hideous religious
wars seems obscenely frivolous, so be it. Until the earthquake comes to you,
it's amazing how het up we can all get about our local inconveniences. 

So in California last week the general anxiety spanned the gamut from the
despair of bankrupt ranchers to the fury of householders who will have to take
a dip in pools only ten or fifteen degrees warmer than the temperature of the
sea at almost any English seaside resort in summer. 

Dr Kissinger came through San Francisco to make not a speech so much as a
foreign policy sermon, perhaps as reasoned and reasonable a case for his
policies as he's ever made but, by this time, reason is not called on by most
of us when we come to arguing about détente or Angola or what to do in the
Middle East. And outside the hotel where he was talking, there was a large
troop of demonstrators as grim as any you could have seen in the riotous
Sixties but, now, very orderly, very quiet, earnestly padding back and forth. 

And, also, they were the damndest mixture of protestors. Ten years ago, they
would have torn each other apart long before they'd made common cause and gone
after Dr Kissinger. There were predictable posters bobbing around, 'Get America
out of Angola' – it's not in – and 'Kissinger, Out of San Francisco' There was
'Down with Imperialism' from leftists and 'Keep the Money for America's
Defence' from rightists who fear that the Soviet Union is getting a military
jump on the United States. There was a variety of crank protestors –
vegetarians, organic food freaks – who somehow thought that Dr Kissinger was
either a threat to their cause or could help it. 

Strangely enough, and I met a reasonable variety of San Franciscans in a
fortnight's stay, none of the natives I ran into even mentioned the event which
had corralled over 350 reporters from all over the United States, and several
other countries besides, this was for the opening, two years to the day of her
kidnapping, of the trial of Patty Hearst. I suppose if you've lived all your
life in Oberammergau, the last thing you'd want to talk about would be the
Passion Play and Patty Hearst's mother and father live in San Francisco. She
was kidnapped from a house across the bay in Berkeley. Since February 1974, the
San Francisco papers have milked the mystery dry of news, shock value,
speculation and theories of guilt, innocence and brainwashing. 

So, whereas the Hearst trial was front-page news around the world, it wasn't in
the San Francisco Chronicle the day the jury was finally chosen. 

Choosing a jury in the United States is a most telling reminder that Americans,
no matter what they will settle for in the end, always begin with a theory of
perfection. It can take months to pick a jury in a criminal trial. The lawyers
on each side are allowed a great many challenges to the integrity and
impartiality of every person who comes up for jury service. Hundreds of
potential jurors appear in the courtroom the first day. They are quizzed as
mercilessly as spies to establish that they have no preconceptions about the
defendant's guilt, that they feel, in this case, no envy of the wealthy
Hearsts, that they can impartially consider the politics of the Symbionese
Liberation Army, that they are willing to be convinced, or not convinced, about
the possibility of brainwashing, that everything they've read and heard and
seen about the case has done nothing to prejudice them one way or another. 

What the two sides are seeking, in theory, is blameless and judicially
disinterested saints. What the two sides are seeking in fact is 12 people who
might seem to be favourable to one or the other view of the case. The
prosecuting lawyer, for instance, was most jealously concerned to see that the
jury was composed of men and women who had children so they would temper their
final judgement with compassion for the stoical couple who, millionaires or
not, have had a rough, sad, two years of it. 

Well, in the end, 36 were picked as a shortlist, from which finally emerged
seven men and five women. The judge had not allowed the press in on the jury
picking because he thought that the leading questions put by counsel would
appear in the papers and prejudice, frighten or otherwise arouse jurors still
coming up for questioning. The press raised a hullabaloo about this, screaming
about violations of press freedom, but any interference these days, whether
with pornographic films of the most horrendous clinical detail, down to the
freedom of a reporter to dig out state secrets 24 hours old, all such
interferences are branded as attempts to crush or enslave the press. 

Well, never having been in the hundred or more going nations that really do
enslave or crush the press, we have, in this country, no way of knowing the
difference between freedom and hair-raising licence. In spite of the saintly
hopes of the jury pickers and the rage of the press, I have no doubt that, at
last, the jury in the Hearst case consists of 12 human beings.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP