Panama blunder by Reagan

It was a heartening thing to get in the mail one morning a letter from a
listener saying 'thank you'. Not for something I'd talked about, but for
something I hadn't talked about. 'Thank you', it said, 'for not talking about
those awful American primary elections.’

Well, I discovered some years ago, later I'm afraid than I should have done,
that few topics are more boring than another country's politics. The United
States is an exception perhaps in that its politics are, from time to time,
spiced with more melodrama than those of any other countries, except possibly
those of Central America. Even they've been fairly quiet lately. 

There was a time in the 1930s when the Central American republics appeared to
be having a revolution and a new president about once a month, which led the
late Will Rogers to say, 'In the United States, every boy can get to be
president. In Central America, every boy has got to be president.' 

Well, I don't think anyone would deny that a commentator has a duty to take in
not only the melodramatic spasms of American politics and, alas, the all too
frequent explosions of tragedy. In this century alone, there have been 14
Presidents. Two of them, McKinley and Kennedy, were assassinated and three,
Theodore Roosevelt, Franklin Roosevelt and Harry Truman, had very close shaves.
And, as we all know, we've had, also, the first president in history who was
forced to resign from office. 

But American politics do not simply oscillate between high drama and routine
tedium. The routine, especially, of electing a president is different enough
from that of most other democracies or pretended democracies to be worth
following not only in its comic aspects, of which there are plenty, but as a
continuous demonstration of how a continental and very mixed population, a
bubbling, maddening, fascinating stew of 215 million people contrive, however
blousily, to try and make democracy work. In, I think, all the other
continental nations that have tried it, it hasn't worked and I sometimes think,
especially after a trip around the country and seeing the huge differences of
the regions, I sometimes think it's a wonder not that they ever had a civil
war, but that they've had only one. 

Well, as you'll guess, I'm inching up on the presidential election because my
pleasure in the grateful lady's letter was quickly snuffed out by another
letter in the same mail charging me with irresponsibility in not keeping you up
on the candidates. To this charge I offer two defences. One is that the
intelligentsia who insists on knowing about the progress of the race from New
Hampshire, to Massachusetts, to Florida, to the Carolinas, Pennsylvania and so
on, must surely read the papers designed for the intelligentsia. 

My second defence is that in March I named the nine, I believe, candidates for
the nomination of the Democratic Party and predicted that, by the summer, at
least six of them would have lapsed back into obscurity or despair so that your
memory exercises would have been a waste of time. And look! It's only May and
the Democrats have only one man left in the race, Mr Jimmy Carter, the low-key,
toothy, peanut farmer from Georgia. To hedge a big bet on his certain
nomination by the Democrats in New York in July, you could say that there is
another man waiting and watching from the grandstand who feels – who hopes –
that, at the last minute, Mr Carter will not get the judges' approval and he,
Hubert Horatio Humphrey, will be hauled out of the stands and pushed past the
tape. 

Now according to Mr Humphrey's friends and advisers – he still has lots of
advisers, even if he hasn't got a campaign manager or a campaign or any money
with which to wage a campaign – there are aficionados of American politics who
believe that when it comes down to the conventions, it will be Gerald Ford
against Hubert Humphrey and, if this now sounds naive or simply dogmatic, let
me say that one of those naive prophets is Senator Barry Goldwater who, being a
conservative Republican way over on the right, ought to be cheering the sudden,
dramatic victories of Ronald Reagan. 

Nobody knows better than Goldwater what it's like to carry the banner of the
right and to see it hailed in the south and the west, a region that has
hardened in its conservatism so visibly as to become a new entity in American
politics. It runs from Florida through Louisiana and Texas and Arizona and
Nevada to California, and is now known as the Sun Belt. Well, you may recall
that in 1964, Goldwater carried the Republican convention at San Francisco in
an orgy of revulsion against all Republican liberals and, in the same place,
Nelson Rockefeller, the leader of the liberals, was booed from the rostrum and
consigned to oblivion. He is, by the way, now the Vice President of the United
States. 

It seemed back then that the country had taken a big swing to the right and
there were all those angry and confident voices out of Florida and Texas and
Arizona and California to tell us so. The Sun Belt certainly runs up a lot of
delegates, but not so many votes in the nation, as a whole, and Senator
Goldwater, who can still recall – and now with a chuckle, where once he used to
wince – he can still recall the feeling the morning after the election that his
part of the country, the Sun Belt, was by no means the whole of America, that
America – after it has heard from its more defiant patriots, from its brave
right wing – America tends to move towards the centre and the man, or men, who
stand there. In short, Senator Goldwater was given the second worst drumming in
a presidential election. 

Now he's a generous man. He's just about the last politician I can think of who
would express an old grudge in the form of a prediction. He probably agrees
with much of what Mr Reagan has to say, on domestic matters certainly. But Mr
Reagan, the other day, started to wave the flag over what he calls the
'sovereign territory of Panama' and practically offered to go to war if anyone,
the Panamanians, for instance, tried to push the Americans out of their
ownership of the canal.

Well, first, Panama is not sovereign American territory. United States citizens
are resident aliens or as the Bible says, 'strangers within the gates'. The
Sovereign State of Panama, in 1904, sold a strip of land five miles on each
side of the access of the canal to the United States. And – here's where the
patriotic rub comes in – the treaty gave the United States perpetual
sovereignty over this tiny zone, known as the Canal Zone. The treaty also
guaranteed the independence of Panama. The rent, you could call it, of the zone
began as a thumping $10 million with annual payments of a quarter million to be
paid on and on after nine years. In 1955, the United States signed another
treaty which increased the annual rent to be paid out to $1.9 millions on
account of inflation and there was a clause in that treaty granting United
States' citizens equal pay with Panamanians. 

Twelve years later the Panamanians were up in arms, literally, about the
American ownership and the controlling treaties and, ever since, they've been
trying to get the Americans out. In 1973, the United Nations Security Council
was ready to pass a resolution calling on the US and Panama to negotiate a new
treaty and give Panama sovereignty over all its territory, including the Canal
Zone. And a year later – that's two years ago – the Americans and the
Panamanians agreed to set a date for a final transfer of the canal to Panama,
in the meantime providing for joint operation and shared revenues. And that's
where the balky matter stands. Or stood until this week when Mr Reagan rattled
his sword and swore to do or die for America's Panama. 

Now, all this Mr Reagan could have boned up from an almanac in ten minutes, but
when it comes to foreign affairs he does seem to be living up to the remark of
an American senator who once said, 'his knowledge of American foreign policy is
profound up to the 12-mile limit. After that, it's a blank.' 

Well, Senator Goldwater took up Panama when he appeared on the Sunday midday
television programme 'Meet The Press' which certainly has more viewers than all
of the Sun Belt has votes. He said, 'I have to support President Ford's
position of renegotiating the Canal Treaty and I think Reagan would too if he
knew more.' And Vice President Rockefeller who, as I hinted earlier, has
understandable reasons for enjoying the sight of a Republican on the right
coming a cropper, he said Reagan is a man who doesn't do his homework on key
issues of national security. He says we had the same sovereign rights over
Panama that we had over Louisiana which is a factual misrepresentation. 

Incidentally, the Vice President thought President Ford lost Texas last Tuesday
so spectacularly because he refused, last winter, to veto a bill which
permitted only a very modest increase in the price of petrol. The president's
action is one that probably gathered him many more votes from outside Texas
than it ever lost him in the oil state itself. Mr Rockefeller mentioned that
when he was in Texas, a couple of months ago, the Republican chairman of Texas
said, 'If the president didn't veto the bill, he'd lose every delegate to the
convention', which is what appears to have happened. 

It's worth a mention, anyway, when people are waxing hysterical over Reagan's
massive triumph in the state that lives by oil revenues. I've quoted Senator
Goldwater to the exclusion of scores of pundits who are writing themselves into
a daze over the tragic collapse of Gerald Ford and the coming presidency of
Ronald Reagan, because Goldwater has immense, even decisive, influence on the
conservatives in the Republican Party. 

Nixon was really doomed the day that Goldwater – not any liberal, not any
moderate, not any close friend – went to the White House and told him he had to
go. What Goldwater fears, of course, is a split and bitter Republican
convention which could then write not a winning ticket, but an entry permit for
Jimmy Carter to live in the White House. But, again, Goldwater sucks his teeth
and discounts Carter and reads over again Hubert Humphrey's speech renouncing
his candidacy. 

'I listened to that statement of refusal', Goldwater said, 'and if it wasn't
filled with hand-graved invitations, I've never seen one.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP