California's Proposition 15

It's taken a long time, but I've just realised why journalists who write from a
settled base – London, Paris, Washington, New York – have such enviable cool
whenever they're asked by visitors about the mood of the country, the nation
they're covering.

They can lean back and tell you, mainly because they have a familiar chair to
lean back in. They're looking at things from a centre into which all the
different currents of the news are drawn and can be seen in an easy, circular
motion as in a whirlpool. I believe, long ago, there was a journalist who
called his column, 'The Washington Whirlpool' – his title was better than he
knew. 

Well, on the contrary, I've been living life very much on the hop these last
few weeks and if I tend, during the winter months, to develop typewriter
arthritis in my study in New York, I have lately become, as they say of
surgical patients with the stitches out, ambulatory. I've been making a couple
of television films and I started ambling on the primeval, windblown coast of
Scotland. A couple of days later, we were off to balmy days in Greece and then,
after a mere six-hour wait in Rome's soulless airport, another two brisk days
on the Mediterranean. And then suddenly I was in the bosky depths of New Jersey
and then in a vast Victorian house in Connecticut and there followed a weekend
in the gorgeous mountain landscape of Vermont. 

And so, off to the Ohio River and down to Six Mile Island on an old steamboat.
About 36 hours pause back in New York and, this last week, out here to San
Francisco, and into the ruins of the mining towns of Nevada and such historical
oddities as Sutro's Tunnel and a town at the foot of a mountain which consists
of one saloon with a boardwalk porch and an abandoned Masonic Hall and no
people. It is called Genoa. 

So if you ask me what's been going on in America this past week or ten days, I
cannot begin to fake my customary sangfroid or, as the French say 'cold blood'.
But just to give you a rough idea of what was most on the minds of the
Americans I ran into, I should have to say that in New Jersey a few men in
white coats would glance first at an automaton and then at a computer and
signal the automaton to fire golf balls through a minute circular hole in a
plastic screen to try and ensure that a golf ball hit on the level shall not
travel farther than 276 yards. 

In Connecticut, a hundred or so people that I sifted among were arguing whether
their first woman governor had been a success or a failure because she was a
woman or because she was bright or inept. But discussing this was a passing
courtesy like remarking on the weather. Their main concern was to plan a
campaign to raise money to preserve and maintain the house of one of America's
most famous dead writers. 

Vermont. Now that made a startling change. I drove from a small airport only 50
miles or so from the Canadian border, off the federal highway, off the state
highway, off the county road and up a gravelled road to an old farmhouse – not
perhaps as old as some of you may be listening in at this moment, but 200 years
old anyway. I was visiting my daughter and if I'd been alone, I'd have gone
right on by. Last winter, it was a mellowed, firehouse-red, clapboarded
eighteenth-century farmhouse. It has now turned into an oyster-white,
clapboarded eighteenth-century farmhouse. You see it was beginning to rot and
it had to be re-sided. And the roof leaked, so my son-in-law got busy and,
being very much a do-it-yourself pioneer type, in spite of degrees in music and
architecture, he did it himself. 

Incidentally, when he started to insulate the roof, he unpacked the stuffing
that had been up there since 1800 and how do you suppose he knew the date? Not
from the deed, but because the eaves were still packed with newspapers bearing
that date. It was the year of Thomas Jefferson's first campaign for the
presidency and the papers were bristling with abuse of him so scurrilous as to
make Richard Nixon look like a politician who had the luck to be very gently
handled by the press. 

Well, that's by the way. What was deeply on the minds of my daughter and
son-in-law? Jimmy Carter came up from time to time and we all agreed that he's
a mystery man – a mystery character as well as a mystery politician – so much
so that none of us could swear whether he is in the making a second Franklin
Roosevelt or a second Nixon. But there were anxieties much closer to home. 

When I arrived, I wandered into an orchard which had been ploughed under and my
daughter was on her knees in an acre of soil and manure laying out, as fast as
possible, before the rains came and before the baby woke up, 225 strawberry
plants that had just arrived. My son-in-law, looking more rural than any sower
of seed in the admired paintings of Millais, was driving his tractor. He had
taken out of the deceptively green Vermont land several thousand little
boulders and had made a pond and was now building an irrigation ditch. To get
the strawberries in during the warm spell, that was the main thing. The next
concern was whether the baby had bronchitis – which, by the way, he hadn't. 

But then a big jump into the brilliant, silver light of San Francisco and here
you're back to a metropolis and the sort of metropolitan coverage of the news
in the papers and on the telly that you get in New York and Boston and Chicago.
Not though in Washington. Washington's television is curiously provincial in
its blind obedience to networks' soap operas and local commercials. But that's
another topic for another day. 

San Francisco was saddened for a day or two – and how can it be longer for a
whole city population – by a bus accident in which 28 persons, most of them
members of a high-school choir off to a recital, had died. But San Francisco
did have a political preoccupation that seemed to muffle the crackling debate
over whether the Democrats or the Republicans are proving themselves more adept
at preparing to lose the election through fratricide. I saw it first on a motor
car – a bumper sticker which said simply, 'Yes to Prop 15!' Pretty soon another
car whisked by carrying, 'Vote no on Prop 15!' 

I think it was California that started bumper stickers long ago. The memorable
ones carried no political import. I remember with relish one that came out
after the wild, brief success of a book called 'The Greening of America' and
the sticker said, 'Keep California green! Bring your own money!'. 

But what was Prop 15? Well, an election in California is never the simple
matter of voting this man in and that man out. The ballots that the voters face
tend to look like a page of the stock market report. California law provides
not only for voting for people, but for regular referendums, or referenda, on
burning issues and even allows – on the petition of so many thousand signatures
– for recalling the governor from office. They tried it once with Reagan and
failed. Lord Bryce said, nearly a hundred years ago, that in the democratic
world there were roughly four systems of government – the British parliamentary
system, the American federal system, the French assembly system and California
politics. And of these the most complicated was the California system. 

Well, just now, Californians are going to the polls – they're going to go to
the polls – and among a raft of public issues printed out on the ballot form
with all the crispness and clarity of a title deed is one called Proposition
15. It is, as you'd guess, one of 15 propositions that the people will vote for
or against on their presidential primary election ballot on 8 June. Now for the
rest of the country, June 8 is the date when California will give an immense
boost to the candidacies of Ronald Reagan and Governor Edmund Brown. Or perhaps
not. 

But, here, in California, a banner newspaper headline spoke nothing less than
the truth when it said, 'Prop 15 May Eclipse Carter Brown'. The presidential
rivalry of Jimmy Carter and Jerry Brown may be simmering on one burner, as
Ronald Reagan and Jerry Ford on the other, but the boiling issue is over this
proposition which asks the voters, whether informed or illiterate, to decide
pretty much the fate of the American nuclear energy industry, since California
houses about 45 per cent of it. 

The text which the people in the polling booth are supposed to have scrutinised
is impossible to translate into simple English but, very roughly, it requires
Congress to set no limit to the monies that can be paid out as compensation in
a nuclear plant accident. The present statutory limit is $560 million. It
requires only a two-thirds vote in the state legislature to force utilities
companies to prove, and to do it all the time, that their reactor systems are
safer than they are now, though there's been no serious accident, before any
new plants can be built or the present ones continue to run. 

The people who'll vote yes say it will bring the whole question of nuclear
energy, its usefulness and its safety, to everybody's attention. And the people
who'll vote no say it will virtually shut down the plants that increasingly
provide extra electricity, it will cancel plans for more reactors, it will
cause wide unemployment and it will arrest the national effort to develop
another source of energy. 

Edward Teller, the so-called father of the hydrogen bomb, goes further. He says
if Proposition 15 is passed, America will have virtually abandoned the vital
need to find other sources of energy than oil and that if the Arabs raise the
price again or, and when, the world's oil gives out – as it's surely going to –
America and the Western world will scramble to pay any price for it and so deny
the minimum needs of the impoverished third of mankind and that these poor
nations will then move from poverty into massive famine. 

At any rate, you can see why the fate of many more of us than Carter, Reagan,
Brown and Ford could be in the hands of the California voters on 8 June.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP