Networks refuse Ford air time

The other night, two of the three television networks that cover the whole
country did an extraordinary thing – unique, in fact. For 50-odd years,
whenever the president felt he had an important message to bring to the people,
he has simply requested the time from the networks and whatever their
commitments, however juicy the revenue from an advertiser, the arranged
programme has been promptly cancelled and the president took to the air.

Last Monday, however, to everybody's surprise and the rage of the White House,
two of the three national networks refused the president time for a speech he'd
prepared about government spending and an impending tax cut. It was not the
topic of the speech that caused their decision. They announced on un-debatable
grounds that President Ford is now also candidate Ford, a declared candidate
for the Republican nomination in next year's presidential election. 

The law – to be exact, Section 315 of the Communications Act – says that if a
candidate is given time on the air to make a speech on any topic whatsoever, a
network is obliged to give equal time to any rival for the same nomination.
This does not mean, heaven forbid, any rival for the same office put up by
another party – that would entail the networks in giving equal time to the nine
men who have declared themselves available for the Democratic nomination, not
to mention the unknown nominees of the Greenback party, the No Nothing party,
the Prohibition party, the Save a Tree party. But there is another Republican
seeking the presidency, an absolute unknown from Worcester, Massachusetts, not
to mention the impending shadow of Ronald Reagan. 

So the National Broadcasting Company and the Columbia Broadcasting System were
legally correct in saying that they would have to give equal time to the
gentleman from Worcester and they weren't going to do it. Accordingly they
announced that they would pick out what seemed to them the core of the
president's speech and play it over as a snippet in their usual news
programmes. And that they did. They, alone, reserve the right to decide on any
future occasion whenever the president wanted time for a speech plainly in the
national interest or during an obvious national emergency, then they'd carry
him to any lengths he cared to go as the one and only President of the United
States. But last Monday, they looked on him as candidate Ford and their action
implied that his speech, however eloquent, could be considered that of a man
privileged to use the networks for sweet talk calculated to cajole votes for
him next November. 

It was a fair enough implication. Since the Greeks invented the word
'politician', it has been the First Commandment of the breed in an election
year to promise to cut taxes and keep everybody happy. And last week Mr Ford
said that's what he intends to do. 

It's not fanciful to imagine Mr Ford as a very miffed president the night they
gave him, or rather refused him, the air. But he must have recognised with an
extra twinge next morning the pain of being a candidate and a president at the
same time. When the papers carried despatches from Paris, Frankfurt, Geneva,
Cologne and London reporting for the first time alarm among the bankers and the
governments of Europe at the prospect, which is looming very close, of New York
City's going bankrupt, actually defaulting on all its debts and obligations. 

Candidate Ford is not going to garner votes in Michigan and California and
Illinois and Texas by telling the people that they had better brace themselves
for stiffer taxes in order to bail New York City out of going broke. President
Ford, however, has been told that, unless the federal government intervenes in
some way, New York City will have to default, maybe as soon as a month from
now. It's inconceivable that the Congress would sanction a direct loan to the
city itself. It would be bombarded by pleas from other cities. The help would
have to be to New York State. An emergency would be declared by the president
and then the state might get a direct loan at a kindly rate of interest or,
more likely, a guarantee against the city's current indebtedness of $3.8
billion. 

A municipal bond expert, speaking before the American bankers' convention which
was meeting here last week, predicted that if the city defaults and therefore
has to stop the wages of all the people who run the schools, the hospitals, the
police, firemen, garbage men and so on, there would be an imminent threat of
civil disorder. 

Before the reports came in, Mr Ford had slapped at this city like a sleepless
man swatting at a bothersome fly. He has massaged the local pride of audiences
around the country by more or less congratulating them on not being as
improvident or loose in their fiscal habits as New York City. This kind of talk
is now going to have to be dropped. New York City may have been very wicked –
at best, irresponsible – in the way it concocted its budgets down the years but
the causes and recriminations are all in the past, even among the enemies of
the most distracted little man in public office, Mayor A. Beame. 

He's tried everything. He went on his knees to the New York state legislature
in Albany and from them he got a new Municipal Assistance Corporation, 'Big
MAC' to take over some of the debt in exchange for taking over the city's
taxing authority. The corporation issued bonds. Nothing happened. Hardly
anybody would buy them. The issue flopped before it was floated. 

The mayor then bled before the biggest and the most stable of the city's banks
but, singly or combined, they couldn't take the risk of assuming the whole
debt, but they did keep patiently rolling over the short term notes. The mayor
fired 40,000 city workers, reduced the police force in a city where that is a
frightening economy indeed. The mayor went to Washington. The state's two
senators and all the congressmen from New York begged and badgered the
Congress. The Congress is thinking things over. But so far the president has
stood absolutely adamant against federal money and on the face of it, you can
see why. 

Consider crime, for instance. New York City somehow cannot shake what, by now,
is a worldwide reputation as the most dangerous city in the country. In fact,
New York is 19th on the list of cities that are, you might say, crime prone –
Detroit, San Francisco, Phoenix, Arizona are way ahead of New York as violent
cities. Their mayors wring their hands and beg the state legislatures for more
money for crime prevention, as also for hospitals, drug addiction treatment,
fire prevention, police and so on. If New York gets a massive loan from
Washington, the administration will be engulfed in a flood of begging appeals
from a dozen states. 

I imagine if the fears of the Europeans prove to be well grounded that Mr Ford,
whatever hat he finds himself wearing at the time, is going to have to think up
some neat and persuasive explanations of why New York is different – why New
York, as the banking capital, the clothes capital, the publishing, the
entertainment capital, the money mart of the nation, why 'it' must be rescued? 

In the meantime, Mayor Beame sees the days flicking off the calendar the way
they used to show the passage of the seasons in the old movies. He cannot tread
water and wait for Washington to take the plunge, so now Mayor Beame has
another plan more gruesome in its possible consequences than his first plan. He
proposes to cut yet another $200 million from the city's 1975 budget of $12.3
billion. He had already cut out 7,000 city workers in the first plan. He
intends to sack another 13,000 or, rather, not to sack them but to coax them
with inducements of money – whose money? From where? – to retire early. He also
proposes to freeze all wages and cost-of-living increases for the next three
years, in spite of the signs of a second round of what they call 'double digit'
– namely, ten per cent – inflation. 

The state legislature has already enacted this new plan into law and it's all
meant to coax and wheedle high-minded and rich people into buying the un-bought
bonds of Big MAC. What it is bound to do is to spark new strikes, new protests
and a decline, at least, in the city's public services. There's one big point
that New York congressmen keep making over and over to their hitherto deaf
colleagues – that New York is the only big city that pays for welfare. 

Now Chicago, by comparison, is preening itself these days. It has not had a
budget deficit for 20 years. The police, firemen, sanitation workers are paid
less than their fellows in New York but they seem contented with their lot. The
garbage men get no time and a half and they have smaller pensions but they
retire sooner and make no fuss. Mayor Daley's machine cannily lets the union
leaders into the city government so if they... if they struck against the city,
they'd be striking against themselves. Mayor Daley balances one ethnic group
against the others and distributes his favours evenly among the 30,000
political appointees in a city with 100,000 city employees. 

But, mainly, Chicago pays not a penny for welfare. It's taken care of by the
federal government and the state of Illinois. New York City, on the contrary,
has to figure 25 per cent of its total budget for welfare. This city has
services that no other city has ever heard of. Free college tuition for
everybody. Anybody listening like to go free for four years to London
University? Also, day care centres, not only for working mothers but for
mothers on welfare. Welfare, in fact, seems to be the escape hatch out of
bankruptcy. 

If the federal government can be persuaded to take over that one-quarter of the
city's debt, there might be a glimmer of light ahead. These, however, are not
the preoccupations of the European economists and bankers which are that, if
New York defaults, there would be a run of foreign depositors, especially, on
the banks. The dollar would weaken abroad, the international level of interest
rates would be revised and, in the words of an eminent Frenchman, 'There could
develop a catastrophe on the world stock markets'. 

Perhaps if candidate Ford can turn a blind eye to the streets, the garbage, the
unemployed city workers of New York, President Ford will not be able to turn a
deaf ear to the warnings that come from people even more remote from this city
than the inhabitants of the White House.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP