Ford shakes up team

If broadcasting had started in Dickens's time, I imagine that by now we'd have
some immortal catchphrases for certain familiar voices. The temptation to
speculate what he might have called one's non-favourite politicians is so
strong that I desist in the interests of avoiding several libel suits.

These bad-tempered thoughts come to me by way of self-protection. By now I fear
that many of you – between yourselves I hope – are referring to me as 'the
Croaker' but that's what you get when you have a regular broadcaster who has
irregular habits of travel. First, in early October, we had brilliant early
fall days during the week but at the weekends, ceaseless rains, so that this
year the fall was more like an English autumn – ripe and russet, a season 'of
mists and mellow fruitfulness', as the poet said, not the blinding light and
the trumpet blast of screaming scarlet maples and gold. So, every other
weekend, people started hacking away and the doctors prescribing antibiotics,
people going into drugstores asking for cough suppressants and getting all
sorts of coloured fluids that taste of menthol and eucalyptus but unfortunately
suppress nothing but the desire to eat. 

The cough medicines that are sold over the counter in the United States are
absolutely forbidden to contain the only drug that stops the coughing
mechanism, namely codeine. It's an interesting point that, in England, you can
buy a number of patent medicines that do contain it, maybe because October and
November, in England, can be so dank and clammy everywhere that the country
resounds with hackers and croakers and so releasing codeine for general
consumption is no more than an act of mercy. 

Anyway, as I was saying in between pantings, I no sooner got over the first flu
than we went off to Mexico City which these days rates either number one or
number two, I forget which, as the smog capital of the world. It's an
interesting list. I think it starts with Jakarta and then it may well be Tokyo
or Mexico City, then Los Angeles and so on down the list to New York. The first
effect of Mexico City on me was of a hand gripping my chest, followed by watery
eyes and a rough throat. It has always had its quota of poor people but with
the coming of what we unfailingly identify with progress, namely industrial
development, there has appeared industrial poverty. 

There's a stretch of road, ten or twelve miles or so, on the north-west fringes
of the city that begins with a two-mile line-up of factories belching steam and
smoke and gases. And then closer into the city, for about twenty minutes, you
go by barren tracts of ground, not a blade of grass to the horizon, piled with
trash, edged with indescribable rows of hovels – the whole landscape like some
ghastly overdrawn Italian film satire on Western civilisation. I found it the
most depressing city landscape since Calcutta, the main difference being the
people that in Calcutta are so listless that many of them literally give up and
collapse on the ground. In Mexico City they are evidently infected with the
common belief that industry spells progress and on those brown, bare, rubbishy
fields, what in Lancashire they used to call crofts, nobody seemed depressed
and the children were hopping around like fleas. 

Well, after the smog of Mexico City, next stop was down on the Pacific coast,
Acapulco which is the Palm Beach-cum-Miami Beach of Mexico. Three hundred years
ago it was the chief Pacific port of the Spanish for their astoundingly
prosperous China trade. Then it went to sleep for three centuries or more and
woke up after the Second World War when a few travel agents promoted it and
then the jet set discovered it and now, in the wake of the fashionables, the
rich, the not-so-rich and the package tourists, the high-rise white hotels by
the water, in the town the endless stalls of arts and crafty rubbish, 'Pretty
Colombian statue of Quetzalcoatl, lady? One dollar!' But even a 20-storey
high-rise is a doll's house up against the towering mountains that encircle the
noble bay. It's a stupendous setting by day or night. 

More to the point, for the Croaker who's just ceased from croaking, it was 88
degrees by day with drenching humidity, then you fly back to New York where you
expect crisp days of late fall and get, instead, last week, days in the high
70s, humid and smoggy. All that's needed to stir the old phlegm is a flying
trip to London where you come on 45 degrees and grey skies. Anon, a bleary sun
weeps for an hour or two and the doormen and cheerful shopkeepers say, 'Another
beautiful day, sir!' And you say, 'It is?' Give me a gram of codeine or I'll
cough you out of your shop!' And then back to New York which is finally
settling down to the sharp days of early winter. 

So, here I am and, in between croaks, what are people talking about? Mainly
Gerald Ford and Justice Douglas. It will be no news to you that Mr Ford is in
trouble. It seems an age since the mere presence in the White House of a
demonstrably decent and honest man seemed like God's blessing on a greatly
troubled nation. Ten days ago the president shook up his cabinet, most notably
firing his Secretary of Defense and taking away from Dr Kissinger, the
Secretary of State, his collateral position as chief adviser on national
security. 

Everybody and his brother knew that Dr Kissinger and Mr Schlesinger had been at
daggers drawn over not so much the amount of arms we should pile up against the
worst happening with the Soviet Union, but you might say the public
belligerence with which the arms build-up should be conducted. Dr Kissinger
found it difficult to arrive in Moscow with the dove of peace tucked under his
arm while Mr Schlesinger, in Washington, was, so to speak, breathing fire and
smoke. Everybody knew this. But when Mr Ford fired Mr Schlesinger, he
practically wept tears over the beauty of Mr Schlesinger's character, declared
that Dr Kissinger, the apostle of détente, retained exactly the power he'd
always had, which was blatantly untrue and, in effect, gave no reason
whatsoever for the shift. 

And then, to any Anglo-American – that's to say anybody with a lively interest
in both countries – there was another fascinating question, 'What about Mr
Elliot Richardson who, after the shortest term ever known, I suspect, as
ambassador to Great Britain, was being recalled to become Secretary of
Commerce?' An intriguing shift. It's been hinted in the past that Mr
Richardson, who'd enjoyed the distinction of being fired by Mr Nixon, was
himself ambitious enough to seek some day in the future the presidency itself.
This rumour was scotched when Mr Richardson went to London for while there are
these days several springboards into the presidency where formerly there was
only one – the governorship of a state – the big white building in Grosvenor
Square is not one of them. 

So maybe people surmised Mr Richardson had been given the nod to come home,
take over commerce for a while and see where he went from there. Judging by Mr
Ford's now raging determination to stay in the White House, I shouldn't judge
that Mr Ford thinks of the commerce department as a presidential springboard
either. So why is Mr Richardson leaving London? To this fascinating question Mr
Ford, at a press conference, gave what has now become a standard reply to all
precise questions – a loose string of phrases about ability, decency,
competence and how to qualify for the presidential team. The answer was that Mr
Richardson, like Dr Kissinger and the kicked-out Mr Schlesinger, is also a
splendid type. 

It makes you yearn for the days when Harry Truman told Henry Wallace to keep
his trap shut or else, and then fired him. Or when he got out that order to the
last Roman general of the United States and announced that MacArthur was
stripped of all his commands. Asked why he'd done this, Mr Truman told an aide,
'The son of a... so and so thinks he's Genghis Khan. Well, he's the United
Nations commander, or he was.' 

Where does Justice Douglas fit into all this? William Orville Douglas is, I'm
sure, not a name that you've conjured with. Forty years ago he was one of the
youngest men ever to be appointed to the Supreme Court – 36 years ago, to be
precise. He was one of the rip-roaring, young liberal lawyers that Franklin
Roosevelt brought to Washington – a learned, courageous, irascible, unrepentant
liberal as the word was understood and enacted into law in the battling days of
the New Deal. Throughout his time on the court, he has been 'the' champion of a
liberal interpretation of the constitution. So liberal, in fact, that he has
refused to define obscenity, has given the greatest possible latitude to public
dissent, at all times, trusted the individual citizen, however bland, however
wild, to act in the best interests of the republic. 

Well, today, Justice Douglas is a broken man. He'd been on the court longer
than any man in history. Last year he had a severe stroke and, this term, he's
been wheeled to the court sessions and while other judges asked questions of
lawyers, he was seen to sit, listless and frozen, as if off in a trance. Was it
vanity that kept him from resigning? It was not. From his point of view, the
court was already too heavily loaded with conservatives, appointed either by
Eisenhower or Nixon. If he could hold out till next November and see Gerald
Ford defeated and a Democrat in the White House, then the new president might
replace him with another liberal. But he couldn't hold out and the flesh
couldn't hold out and this week he resigned. 

Now Mr Ford has the chance to appoint a new man. Being, however, the new Ford,
the president whose every thought and move looks to his popularity next
November, he's said to be thinking of corralling the women's vote by appointing
the first woman justice. He'll also see how the country takes the infamous
anti-Israeli vote in the United Nations. Maybe appoint a Jew. Maybe appoint a
Jewish woman. Maybe a Jewish woman conservative from California if all the
polls show that the women's vote, the Jewish vote, the conservative vote and
the California vote are in peril. 

This is the way government of the people is thought of one year before the next
opportunity to get yourself back in the White House.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP