UN wasting money

Normally, about once a week I find on my desk a package enclosed in a rubber
band, a pile of printed letters, circulars, heart-rending pictures of poor
children and starving children, a raft of appeals for funds to fight arthritis,
multiple sclerosis, urgent warnings that without an immediate contribution this
private university will have to close down, or that historic building will be
bulldozed by developers.

I've only touched the outer layers of such literature. Bulging in the centre,
like the fat heart of the artichoke, is denser stuff, beautifully printed
prospectuses of some coming series of volumes on cookery, or history, or the
habits of the Trobriand islanders. This is the stuff that you can throw in the
wastebasket at once. Not because I'm not interested in cookery or history or
even the sexual customs of remote Pacific tribes, but because the literature
promoting these works looks and feels almost as expensive as the books
themselves and I resent doubling the price of the books I'm urged to purchase
by the sheer opulence of the thing advertised. 

This luxury, by way of expensive paper, beautiful printing, three-colour
illustrations, extends, strangely enough, to some charities that you'd think
would be busy saving every penny for the actual treatment of the arthritics,
the doomed historic building or whatever. 

I don't suppose there's a country anywhere which is as lavishly wasteful as the
United States in promoting good causes which, themselves, ought to absorb all
the money that's being solicited. Some years ago, there was an evening
newspaper in New York – like all the other evening newspapers except one, it
foundered – that ran a regular feature every year for several weeks. It was an
example of muck-raking or investigative reporting, at its best, as distinct
from some recent keyhole discoveries which constitute investigative reporting
at its worst, which we'll come to later. 

This newspaper, then, did an annual job of digging into several hundred
charities and listing the percentage of their budgets that was spent on staff's
salaries and advertising, along with the amount of money spent on relieving or
curing the sick or the stated aim of the charity. The revelations of this
checking amounted to a scandal. One year, I seem to recall, only about a third
of the charities that were checked spent more on the good cause than on the
advertising of it and the maintenance of offices and a permanent staff. 

Well, the other day, a shocker came out of Lima, Peru and it would have come
out of Rome if the spokesman had been speaking from his home. It came from the
Food and Agriculture Organisation, the so-called FAO, of the United Nations.
Now whatever you may think of the UN as an effective political outfit, I don't
think any knowledgeable person is going to knock the work of some of its
agencies, like the FAO or the World Health Organisation. We all take much too
much for granted, for instance, the really splendid work that radiates out of
the World Health Organisation's headquarters in Geneva. In the age of air
travel, when a man with cholera can be in Malaya one day and in Edinburgh the
next, the World Health Organisation does a job – and it does it 24 hours a day
– a job of reporting and prevention which, if it wasn't done by the United
Nations, would have to be done by some other world organisation. 

Well, back to the shocker out of Lima, Peru. There, last Saturday, the
director– not an underling, but the director – of the UN's Food and Agriculture
Organisation said that its work was quite ineffectual and you know why? His
figures make the FAO sound like something out of Gilbert and Sullivan and would
be very funny if they weren't very tragic. 

'The FAO is totally ineffectual', he said, 'because 80 per cent of its budget,
which is contributed by the member nations (25 per cent naturally by the United
States of America), 80 per cent pays for the offices and staff of what he
called the "gigantic centralised bureaucracy in Rome", 11 per cent goes to put
out publications' – and I'm still quoting him – 'that nobody reads and the
remaining nine per cent to holding meetings and for travel expenses that are
largely unnecessary.' The great work of the FAO which is to survey and supply
the needs, by way of food and crops and such, of impoverished nations is
hampered, to put it mildly, by the fact that four-fifths of its funds are
gobbled up maintaining over 4,000 employees in seven impressive buildings in
Rome. 

The director of the FAO is a Mr Saouma, a Lebanese and since he was speaking in
South America, he had to say that the money required to staff the FAO and
publicise its theoretical great work does not leave one dollar over to spend on
the agricultural problems of Latin America, which is one of the three
continents, Africa and Asia being the others, that cry for help in farming, the
production of foodstuffs, the relief of starvation and the prospect of famine. 

Parkinson's Law that a bureaucracy increases in size in inverse proportion to
the work it's doing seems to have achieved its finest demonstration in the
work, or non-work, of the FAO. 

And this invites a comment, which I will accept, on what you might call the
'fringe' uses of money for essential purposes. There's been, as we all know, a
tremendous to-do about the bribing of foreigners by companies involved in
overseas business. Those of us who don't work for overseas corporations are
properly shocked. Some of the airplane company executives, who testified before
a Senate committee looking into such dreadful goings-on, they seemed in a way
shocked themselves, but not so much shocked by the fact of the monies they pay
out to secure foreign contracts, but shocked that these monies, even when they
are balanced in the ledgers, should be interpreted as bribes. We, who don't
take part in such shady negotiations, don't understand the executives. 

Yet we all understand, and the tax people of all countries allow, business
entertainment. Let's say a broadcasting executive wants me to do a television
series on, I don't know, the threat to the existence of the California condor
or the history of the Angles, Saxons and Jutes – I've had weirder offers – and
he takes me out to lunch. He can deduct this from his gross income as a
legitimate business expense. And the aim is plainly to persuade me to say yes.
He doesn't feed me a regular, plain meal prescribed by the Internal Revenue
service, he asks me what I want and he makes an effort to please me in this and
other ways. Now, is the half-bottle of wine and the poached salmon or the steak
and kidney pudding a bribe? I suppose if I said, which is true mostly, that I
don't eat lunch but I'd take the cost of the meal, that would be criminal,
would it not? Would that be bribery or extortion on my part or his? And way up
the scale to the stratosphere of international contracts, imagine a nation
whose energy, labour, productivity, the existence of a going economy (as
distinct from bankruptcy) depend on getting oil from abroad – a definition
which covers a lot of countries. And suppose the agent for the supplying nation
says, 'Yes, the contract's yours, but only if you give me a bigger bonus than
I've been offered by another nation that wants this oil too.' 

What are you to do? I'm not of course condoning bribery, extortion or
corruption. I can be as readily and righteously shocked as anybody. I'm just
saying that in the public discussion of the oil and airplane scandals, there's
a great deal of 'foggy' righteous indignation from comfortable people, whose
comfort depends on oil in their furnaces and work at the airplane factory. And
that we might begin to dispel this fog with a little more careful analysis of
the words 'bribery, corruption and business entertainment'. 

I dropped a dark hint earlier that there are good and bad forms of
investigative reporting and I implied the hint also that I, for one, have been
shocked. It's not difficult to guess by what. The excellent reporters, Woodward
and Bernstein, of the Washington Post performed a public service when they dug,
night and day, through many months, to reveal the devious involvement of the
White House in the Watergate scandal and laundered dollars and dirty tricks,
and all the rest of it. They provided the raw, the very raw, material on which
the house judiciary committee held its hearings and voted to impeach President
Nixon. Anyone who believes, at this late date, that Mr Nixon was innocent of
steady and calculated lying to the press and the people will believe anything.
But, once the house acted and Mr Nixon's right-wing associates went to the
White House, told him the Senate could not raise more than four or five voices
to declare him innocent and then told him he must go, I suggest that that
should have been the end. 

Woodward and Bernstein have now put out a book, 'The Final Days' which wallows
in the private turmoil and indignity of the Nixon family in its wretched
twilight in the White House. The authors say that they have put in nothing that
wasn't told them by at least two people. Which two? How many people knew how
often the president slept with his wife? How many counted the drinks he took in
the loneliness of his study? 

The book is riddled with pseudo-fictional asides, telling us exactly whose brow
furrowed when the president rapped his ring on the desk. I think the only
answer to this sort of stuff is the question, put by an old American immigrant
comedian who used to listen wearily to Charlie, the neighbourhood gossip and
say, 'Was you der Charlie?' If any of this private gossip is correct, it's
surely cruel to print it. If it's incorrect, it's scandalous. 

Mind you much of it is fascinating, but I suggest it would have been worth
foregoing the fascination for the sake of the compassion.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP