Carter Playboy interview 24 September 1976

On Wednesday morning, a man in Atlanta, Georgia, walked into a lift in a office
building, saw one of the firm's secretaries standing beside him and said, 'You
look particularly nice today! Very nice indeed!' And she said, 'Well, you know
what Jimmy Carter says – it's OK as long as you keep it in your heart.'

Well for those who haven’t a clue to what I'm talking about – for, that is, the
people who don't read newspapers or are very pure in heart – maybe I'd better
begin at the beginning while hastening to assure the rest of you that I'm not
going to follow this latest Jimmy Carter episode step by step. One step might
be funny or fascinating. To take it a step at a time would be about as tedious
as putting on a display of every single step on file with the Ministry of Silly
Walks. 

All right then. In the current issue of Playboy – which was the first of the
gamey magazines that now make the news-stands of the western world so bulge
with bosoms and buttocks as to be mistaken by the short-sighted for fruit
stalls tottering with melons – in the current issue of Playboy there is a long,
8,000-word interview with the Democratic presidential candidate, Mr Jimmy
Carter. In this interview, Mr Carter says many interesting and even thoughtful
things about the range of issues, domestic and foreign, that confront this
country and its allies. Being Mr Carter, he also talks about himself in a way
that we have come to recognise as the musing of a man to whom his religion is
an ever-present part of his life. 

My father used to tell me that Mr Gladstone chewed every morsel of his food 32
times before swallowing. Mr Carter told us the other day that he prays 34 times
a day. Mr Carter is a Baptist and is so insistent in public about the tenets of
his faith that he may help to coin a new idiom. Until now most of us, I think,
save the adjective 'devout' for Catholics. Mr Carter may become known
everywhere as a devout Baptist. 

Well, the issue of Playboy containing the interview had been on the stands for
some time before a sharp-eyed news agency man spotted one peculiar passage in
it. I don't think any newspaper has bothered to pick up what is politically
interesting about the interview and it's a sign of the times, perhaps of any
time, that what most newspapers are looking for is not a careful discussion of
the complexities of modern life, but some, simple, juicy, preferably indiscreet
remark which merely be being isolated from its context can be made to appear
scandalous. 

Now I may be accused, and rightly, of following this mischievous habit by
quoting you nothing but the scandalous passage but I'm not, at the moment,
going into the views of Mr Carter and Mr Ford on the political issues that face
America – we've all had a long glimpse of them in Thursday night's first
television debate – I'm reporting one remark of Mr Carter in a magazine
interview because that remark has echoed round the country. It may come to be
all that many people will ever remember about Mr Carter and there's already no
doubt that, one way or another, it may have the most dramatic effect on the
voters in November. Not even Mr Carter's closest advisers will say that it
could win him the election. Mr Ford's advisers are bucked by the thought that
it might lose Carter the election. 

All right, all right, Cooke! So what did he say? Well, out of the blue, Mr
Carter said, 'I've looked on a lot of women with lust, I've committed adultery
in my heart many times.' But he went on to assure the interviewer that he knew
(how?) that God had forgiven him and then said he would not condemn a man,
quote, 'who leaves his wife and shacks up with somebody out of wedlock' and –
I'm still quoting – 'Christ says don't consider yourself better than someone
else because one guy, ' and there I have to stop the quote, even on this
programme there are limits to what you might call 'family slang,' because one
guy sleeps, shall we say, quote, 'with a whole lot of women while the other guy
is loyal to his wife.' 

Now I don't think anybody who has even the most casual acquaintance with the
New Testament would deny that this is sound Christian doctrine though it may
embarrass some pious people to hear so. If Mr Carter had said it another... a
gentler way, the passage would never have been plucked from the interview but
what amazed even bloodshot politicians who are capable of much rougher language
in private was the crudity of Mr Carter's phrasing in talking about sex. If it
had been a private slip in the mouth of a politician in his cups, it still
would have done harm to his public image but Mr Carter has never been known to
be in his cups. In public, he's always appeared to be a man of such earnest,
grinding rectitude, with never a flicker of humour, that many ardent Democrats
have prayed for him to 'unbend' a little and talk a little more lightly, more
folksily from time to time. But, on this occasion, he didn't unbend, he
verbally unbuttoned. 

The first thing that happened was to have reporters get hold of Mrs Carter and
ask her how she felt. She got out of it with great grace saying that she'd
always had good cause to trust her husband implicitly and explicitly. Next they
interviewed Mr Carter's 78-year-old mother. She paused and thought a moment and
said, 'In a way I was surprised but it didn't shock me. Do you know, I'm so
broad-minded, and he just gave an honest answer.' 

Then they went after Mr Carter's vice-presidential running mate, Senator
Mondale – we're getting a little closer to the general mood with him a running
mate must never, ever question the wisdom and goodness of the man he might one
day succeed. Senator Mondale came through gamely. He said he didn't believe the
religious beliefs and moral opinions of the candidates should or will become an
issue in the campaign and bearing up bravely, he went on to say that in fact Mr
Carter had a characteristic rarely found in politicians. It is a, he said, a
refreshing candour which – quote – 'might prove quite helpful in the long
run.' 

Well, after that, the reporters (newspaper, magazine, radio, TV) fanned out
across the country and they had a hard time finding many people who echoed
Senator Mondale's belief or hope that this whole incident would prove quite
helpful. The Republicans, of course, are tickled pink and are, for the most
part, keeping their joy to themselves. But Vice President Rockefeller couldn't
help grinning before an audience in Cleveland and saying, 'I never thought I'd
see the day when Christ's teachings were discussed in Playboy and I'm a
Baptist, ladies and gentlemen!' 

From all over the place it was possible to sense a trend of ordinary people
being more dazed than anything else. While women's libbers thought it a typical
masculine attitude, most men and women interviewed felt it was a puzzling thing
to bring up in a presidential election. An old lady in Louisiana said, 'It's
not the kind of thing a president ought to be talking about.' And a professor
of art in Atlanta, where the girl in the lift said, 'It's OK if you keep it in
your heart', I think he put his finger on what is likely to be, to look at it
cold-bloodedly, Mr Carter's big, tactical mistake. This man said, 'It was not
very smart to do publicly and I also thought, oh Lord, now the president is
going to start preaching about "lust in your heart".' 

Well, I think it unlikely that Mr Ford will follow suit. He and his advisers,
with the memory of Watergate and the gangster language of the tapes still
green, are concerned to see that, however dull Mr Ford may sound at times, he's
never going to sound less than presidential. And that, I believe, is the main
thing. 

The chairman of the Democratic party in Mr Carter's native state of Georgia cut
through the well-disguised embarrassment of most Democratic politicians and
said, 'The general reaction? Bad. Bad, bad. I've been everywhere today and the
reaction is uniformly negative'. By the way, I don't think I've seen a single
quote from anybody famous or obscure to confess that they were disgusted or
even shocked and let's say, for argument's sake, that public taste or
acceptable morality, if you like, has changed so drastically in the past ten or
twenty years that nobody today is shocked' let's say that. But between the
shedding of an old moral attitude and the taking on of a new one, there must
surely be an uncomfortable period when you're not absolutely certain that the
new attitude is right, or better than the old. Most Americans then, I'd guess,
are more baffled than anything else. 

The incident can only deepen what has become Mr Carter's main disability, which
is his power to puzzle people, not as a debater but as a personality. An old
and highly intelligent friend of mine wrote to me from California. He wrote, 'I
never thought I'd come to voting for Ford. I look on him as an honest oaf. But
Carter turns more and more into a country slicker and a puzzling one and I'd
rather have the honest oaf every time.' 

Lots of people must feel this way but you no sooner pin a label on Mr Carter
than he strips it off. Before Playboy he might have been to many people a
country slicker. After Playboy, he comes on more as a honest Elmer Gantry, an
old-time, brooding Evangelist – a strange, sincere man but with something of
the... of the tortured quality of the Reverend Mr Davidson in Somerset
Maugham's tale about Sadie Thompson. 

The polls now show Carter slipping markedly and offering us a prospect we never
expected three months ago – the prospect of a very close race. In three states
that the Republicans were resigned to losing, to being clobbered in, in New
York, Illinois and California, the polls show Carter and Ford now neck and
neck. I suspect that if Mr Ford can go on reinforcing his convention image as a
downright, decent man, an understandable, ordinary man, he could win
handsomely. Adlai Stevenson's wit was thought, during his campaign, to be a
great asset, but in the post-mortems it was seen to be a liability. 

And if wit is off-putting in a national candidate, there's something worse.
Strangeness. The uncomfortable and growing feeling that we don't quite know who
Carter is or what he's really up to.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP