Shining the light on payola

Almost 50 years ago, an American president inspired good people everywhere and
deeply depressed the professional diplomats by saying that, from now on,
international treaties and the like would be open agreements openly arrived at.

Down the decades, I doubt there has been a more splendid recipe that has
produced more messy and inedible dishes, for how can two nations engaged in
vital or delicate negotiations publicise, as they go along, every stage of
their mutual suspicions, fears and quarrels? They can't. And, ever since, the
only lasting agreements have been open agreements, privately arrived at. 

Well, now, President-elect, Jimmy Carter, has out-Woodrow-ed Wilson. He says
that he will bring to America a government that is open to the people all the
time. He, too, has inspired the good and the thoughtless and, this time, deeply
depressed big and little business, the Pentagon, the Department of Commerce and
everybody who hopes to sell American goods abroad. 

Let's go back and sketch in the real background against which Mr Carter stands,
with his eyes flashing and his pockets open to the world! 

I'm going to tell you a story which will be, I hope, vivid enough as to plot
and colour but the identity of the characters will be purposely vague because,
to put it discretely, I wish them no harm. It concerns an American businessman
in the business of shipping uniforms, swords and other military paraphernalia
to South and Central American governments. It was a thriving business because,
in his time, most governments below the Rio Grande were run by Generalissimos
and their lust for uniforms gleaming with gilt spaghetti and swords encrusted
with jewelled grips was in indirect proportion to their experience on the
battlefield. 

It's been my observation that the grizzled veteran of three wars, the real old
warrior, usually ends up his life in a pair of slacks and a tweed coat and the
only reminder of his long familiarity with Armageddon is a fading sepia
photograph of his company, hung over his desk. But, by the same token, my
businessman's clients were field marshals and generals of South American
republics who could barely distinguish a whiff of grapeshot from a whiff of
grapefruit. They ordered up medals and ribbons and insignia by the gross and
were always sending him heraldic designs to signify the latest order they'd
invested themselves in, such as the Grand Cross of San Isidro or the victory
medal with palms in gold of the noble Order of the Knights of Ferdinand and
Isabella. 

He also shipped small arms – under proper licence, of course – from the
government of the United States. More routinely, and in his own country, he was
a manufacturer and supplier of police uniforms. Well, one time, he had a very
big deal brewing with the government of a South American country, so big that
it was being conducted in person by the dictator himself. The contract had been
prepared down to the last comma and the last specification of the dictator's
personal commission, the ten per cent, or whatever, he would collect as a
reward for his devotion to his country's security. The deal awaited only the
signature of the big man, himself. And my friend was so sure of its
consummation that he was already off on a celebration holiday in Europe. 

The dictator's pen was practically poised over the contract, when I woke up one
morning and read on the front page of the New York Times that there had been an
overnight coup from, you might say, the shadow military cabinet and the
dictator had barely time to collect his medals and epaulettes, not to mention
the entail of his considerable fortune that was lying around in ready cash, and
beat it for Miami, or Madrid, or wherever. It became my painful duty to cable
my friend that his European celebration was aborted. 

He came back quickly to the United States but he was, by no means, sunk in
grief. He prepared a new contract, down to the names of the people who'd sign
it and he explained to me, as you might instruct a ten-year-old in the elements
of hopscotch, that in doing business down there, it was an elementary
precaution, whenever you're making up to the current Fuhrer, to cultivate,
also, the core of loyal generals who could be most trusted one day to arrest
and succeed him. They, too, had their known price and their commission was
figured according to the going rate of inflation, interest rates and so on. 

I thought of this old story when I read, this week, a little more about the
sad, prolonged fate of Madame Peron who had the ill luck not to decamp in time
and is now being charged with embezzlement of government funds for personal use
– a charge that could have been brought against any or all and the score of
former dictators who'd abdicated or been dethroned and who had not had the wit
to have their own private jet at the ready. 

There are countries, of course, in Asia especially, where the amassing of a
private fortune by the reigning president was done quite openly. I remember
when I was in Thailand some years ago wondering aloud to a general who I must
say, to my surprise, was running the only radio network, asking him why the
cost of public transport was so high. And he explained briskly and with no hint
of secrecy or shame that all the bus lines and the highway construction
companies were owned by the prime minister's favourite wife. 

Well, we used to think that this was an incurable element of the mysterious
morality of the East, and then in the, what, the 1950s, we had the great
independence movements in Africa and out of them arose black rulers, most of
whom had suffered much hardship, often long prison terms, in their campaigns to
free their peoples from the colonial yoke of such as you and I. It was natural
that we should come to think of them as so many George Washingtons and there
was one I remember who, in this country, was thought of as a saint or guru on
the order of Nehru or Albert Schweitzer, until the day he was overthrown. We
wondered for a while what had happened to this great and good man. 

Well, the word came through eventually that he was feeling no pain. He'd
skipped over the border and turned up incognito in St Moritz or some other
ritzy spa, very well provided for by the fortune he'd stowed away in a Swiss
bank account. He came and went before the present era of bustling arms deals
and lively trade between the rich nations and the poor or, as the United
Nations now requires us to say, between the developed nations and the
developing. So, in his case, we had to wonder where the fortune had come from. 

But, a little later, the word 'payola' crept into our vocabulary to signify a
personal commission paid to the head of state and then, later still, to the
agents of governments who clinched deals with foreign corporations. 

I suppose the lowest form of payola, in our time, was what was known as a
rake-off paid by restaurants, country clubs, nightclubs to the gangsters who,
in the infamous Prohibition era, not only paid through the nose for bootlegged
booze, but also paid an additional fee to the shrewd Al Capone as protection
against the raiding of their premises by the police. And in places where the
police were in on the deal, receiving, in fact, part of the protection money
against the danger of their turning honest, Mr Capone could arrange for the
threat of break-ins by burglars and gunmen and collect further protection fees
to ensure that these gentlemen would not come calling. 

In time, Capone grew more sophisticated and found it more profitable to buy up
the warehouses that stored his own illegal liquor and then own the nightclubs
that served it, thereby eliminating such bothersome middle men as landlords,
proprietors, stockholders and so on. He made thundering profits from delivering
the stuff 'he'd' manufactured at no cost at all and charging the customers $20
a bottle for rot-gut whisky. It was true that he had to spend a little money to
print his own labels, exact duplicates usually of the better brands of Scotch,
Irish and Bourbon. 

And, during the war, the Capone heirs turned to a business which, one of them
assured me, made Prohibition look like a rehearsal. This was the black market
in beef. Since the feeding of 10 or 12 million American men in uniform ate
heavily into the civilian supply of beef and the civilians were warned that
they were going to have to do with less beef than they'd ever known, the
civilian population was naturally anxious to eat more beef than it had ever
done in peace time. This came out later as an actual Department of Commerce
statistic. The gap between the threatened shortage and the actual amount
consumed was bridged by Mr Capone's young men. 

Well, the history of payola from South American juntas to Capone's mobsters
seems primitive today and very long ago. Today the enquiring American reporter,
who, two generations ago would have gone after the Chicago underworld, now
looks into the books of American and foreign corporations to see why this
airplane or that arms shipment cost so much more than the price appropriated by
Congress. The Lockheed and Prince Bernhard scandals have had the effect of
strengthening what are called, in this country, the Sunshine laws which require
full public scrutiny of all business done with foreign governments and
corporations. 

Mr Jimmy Carter has given his blessing to the Sunshine code and promises to
extend it so as to give the people, the country, a government which will be, as
he puts it, 'open to all the people'. Now Mr Carter, contrary to his original
stereotype, is no Georgia hick. He must surely know not only that it's
impossible to sell anything to, say, Iran without adding the cost of the Shah's
personal commission, but that what the economists call, and businessmen too, 'a
political mark-up' on the cost of doing business in any country in Europe is
absolutely standard procedure. 

If American businessmen are now going to be required to be known as the
Sunshine Boys, their hearts may be purified but America is going to be very
much the poorer, for the American export trade, like that of any other
exporting nation, depends on the legal acceptance of a certain amount of
payola. The problem, as one distinguished economist, here, puts it, is how to
impose America's terms at the world bargaining table without exporting her
morality. 

It's only one of the mysteries that must be solved by the mysterious
president-elect.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP