Patty Hearst arrest, 26 September 1975

Sooner or later something will have to be done about what I can only call the
'appetite' of the media, the evident need of television and radio to guess and
speculate at the greatest possible length about something that has just
happened and about which we know very little.

Last week, I was about to scrap my talk at the last minute and do a new one
because Patty Hearst had been caught in San Francisco and for the next hour or
so, if you switched from one television channel to another of the thirteen
channels available to us in New York, you'd find that most of them were
throbbing with the news. Also, two of the three national networks kept
reminding you that at 11.30 that night they would put on special programmes on
the incident lasting 30 minutes each. I saw most of one and some of the other
and the kindest word you could use to dignify them was to call them
'backgrounders'. By noon of the next day hundreds of thousands of words had
been broadcast about Patty Hearst and every bright and smudgy news clip had
been dug up and shown again of her in school, at home, supposedly holding up a
bank, we saw once again the whole banging, hideous shoot-out in Los Angeles,
the cameras wandered pruriently over the house where she'd been taken, nobody
had seen the capture, we never saw her. Next morning the press joined the pack
with no more news but with columns of guesswork on what might have happened to
her in the 19 months of her disappearance, on how she might plead when she came
to trial, on whether or not she might be let out on bail. 

So when I sat down to talk about the relatively meaty topic of how America's
preoccupations have changed over the past 25 years, all we knew about Patty
Hearst was that she'd been caught in a working-class neighbourhood and would
probably stand trial on 19 separate federal, or state, charges. When I said
that the media have an evident 'need' to guess and speculate at interminable
length, I chose the word carefully. The 'need' is simply the need to fill the
20-odd hours that they're on the air. I don't know what television is like in
Greenland or Tibet, but it would be a wonderful concession to human sense and
sensibility if television was available for, say, only three hours a day. As it
is, the networks start up at 6 a.m. and they close down at about 1.30 in the
morning. Motion pictures go on all night. Now, given this gigantic maw, this
vast belly that has to be fed, it's fairly obvious that, for instance,
Shakespeare, if he were alive and writing continuously would be all washed up
in about three months. We'd have seen it all. 

There's a radio station in New York that never sleeps. Its slogan is, 'All the
news, all the time!' And behind the ceaseless rattle of an announcer's voice
you can hear the chatter of the news ticker. This is very useful to turn on if
you missed something on the regular hourly news programme but, even then, this
station keeps 'updating' the news, as they say, every ten minutes which means
saying the same thing over and over again, with minute additions of news to be
sure, but also with gobs of the sort of rumour that's prefaced by the adverbs
'allegedly' and 'reportedly'.

The only thing that I could have said a week ago about Patty Hearst, the only
interesting speculation at any rate, would have been to wonder if any judge
facing a girl giving the clenched fist salute and announcing her occupation as
that of an urban guerrilla could be trusted with a bail bond. All that struck
me, gasping in a flood of hearsay, was the thought that the urban guerrilla
movement, whether large or small, could hardly enjoy a more tasty triumph than
that in which Miss Hearst released to her wealthy parents on, say, a million
dollars bail, stayed home for a couple of days, or a couple of weeks, and then
skipped town again. It was a passing thought and I let it pass and got to the
[...] to the old days, when we were worried every fall by the prospect of the
atom bomb and the new days when we worry about the prospect of the next
presidential sniper. And this, too – though every newspaper in the world is
bound to look on it as the compulsory front-page headline – is something that
defies any new commentary of mine other than an extension of the one I made
less than three weeks ago when that weird little girl in Sacramento pointed a
gun (that) didn't go off. 

Once again the president said that the American people were not going to be
stopped seeing their president by a couple of people. But how about the third
person? Or the fourth? And that night the president, speaking as he very rarely
does without script or notes, went on and on about the duty in a democracy for
the president to wade into crowds and, as President Johnson used to say, 'press
the flesh.' It began to sound in President Ford's mouth like a holy mission and
certainly one can see how important it must seem to him as an individual caught
and photographed twice in a moment of alarm crouching in the streets, how
important to try and retain his pride and poise. But it still seems to me more
important for the people of the United States to retain their president and one
thing that I should guess greatly increases the risk of other attempts is the
huge publicity that's been given to Miss 'Squeaky' Fromme and which, I fear, is
now blazing around the person of Sara Moore. It would surely have been an easy,
as well as a responsible, thing to do if the managing editors of America's two
leading news magazines had called each other up and said, 'Suppose we don't put
Squeaky Fromme on our covers? Suppose we call off all the background writers
and the special reporters and make our coverage from her point of view
disappointingly terse?' 

As it was, she has made the cover of Time and Newsweek and is guaranteed the
instant immortality which would-be assassins crave. This craving is, I should
have thought, the first consideration the police and the news media should
ponder. For the confessionals of innumerable assassins have revealed as perhaps
their most powerful motive the drive to be known the world over as the little
one who brought down the great one. The ego in such people overwhelms the
normal impulses of shame, timidity, conscience. We should never forget the
bizarre case of the man who committed the senseless slaughter In New York
Central Park of a girl and a dog and an old man, a week or less after the
assassination of Senator Robert Kennedy. Now this man was a fairly recent
immigrant and a lonely man who lived in a single room. He, in turn, was mown
down by the police in the park, but when they went to the room in his lodging
house they found it full of clippings about Sirhan Sirhan, Bobby Kennedy's
assassin and pencilled reiterations on scraps of paper of the name Sirhan
Sirhan. The eerie and crucial detail was that this man also had a repetitive
name like, say, [Darvash Darvash]. The coincidence must have seemed to him an
act of fate and the vast publicity given to Sirhan Sirhan egged him – a loner
and a nobody – egged him on to a similar, explosive assertion of power. 

Since the San Francisco incident, a great deal has been written about the
present state of American society and the public violence that, in the past
decade or so, has seemed to range through most of the world. But deploring the
sickness of society is useless both as diagnosis or treatment. What we are
dealing with in the widespread bombings of public buildings and the kidnapping
of public men is, as the Carlos incident showed, a cool-headed organisation of
terrorists with a headquarters, perhaps a floating headquarters, that is able
to supply both tactics and weapons. What we're dealing with in the
assassination attempts is the freedom of deranged or disturbed individuals to
have easy access to public men. 

The president’s dogged insistence on maximum exposure to the crowds springs, I
dare to suggest, from a deeper motive than he seems to be aware of. Of the
comments of the San Francisco incident which were invited by the New York
Times, only two, it seems to me, touched on the root of the problem. Mr William
F. Buckley said very forthrightly, 'The president has a problem of machismo if
he's caught restricting his own movements. But I think a perfectly solemn
request by Congress, one that he would be obliged to accept, would solve the
problem.' 

Miss Barbara Jordan, a black congresswoman from Texas, and one of the most
formidable members of the House Judiciary Committee that voted to impeach
President Nixon, put the latest attempt in its true social context by saying,
'I would say that the assassination attempts are a reflection of what we've
always known that there is a mindless element among the citizenry. It's a
minority element whose actions can have devastating results. I suggest that the
president reduce his schedule to the confines of Washington DC and the White
House until there's a reduction of the hysteria which seems to creep into the
minds of the mindless.' Inevitably Congress has roused itself to want to do
something but just what it's likely to agree on after the long and snail-like
progress of a bill through committees and along the floor of both houses is, at
present, quite uncertain. 

The first reaction is of congressmen looking for a culprit and finding it in
the Secret Service who by now dart around the president like a flight of moths
round a single lamp. It came out, by the way, that two days before the
president’s visit to San Francisco, Miss Moore had actually told the local
police that she might try to 'test' (her word) the security system. Surely this
approach is fiddling? In any crowd anywhere that the president plunges into,
there are bound to be disturbed people who might be seized by the dizzy
ambition to strike him down and if they have a gun, they'll do it. 

Which brings up the latest of the 120 gun control bills now pending before the
House Judiciary Committee. It proposes an outright ban on the possession of all
handguns and if our past experience of Congress since the murder of President
Kennedy is anything to go on, Congress will bicker and the sporting gun lobby
will resist and nothing will be done. Even if the ban were made a federal law,
somebody, somewhere will always get a gun. Perhaps only a third or fourth
attempt will galvanise the Congress into doing what Mr Buckley proposes, namely
disqualifying him from proving his courage by banning the primitive ritual of
'pressing the flesh.' 

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP