Ford on Portuguese revolution

You always know that a man is running for president when he contrives an
invitation to speak before the annual convention of the American Legion and the
sight of him doing it can be a very incongruous one, according to his physique
and his military record – or his absence of a military record.

The picture in the papers next morning is always the same. On the wall, or
curtain, behind him, is a huge, circular emblem with the words 'American
Legion' running around the inside of it, enclosing a great star on a field of
bay leaves, maybe laurel leaves, and the two letters U S solidly in the very
centre. And, in front of it, there stands the speaker, the candidate, with his
arms outstretched in an Eisenhower salute. He's always grinning and on his head
is the legionnaires’ little overseas tricorne cap making him look like an
overgrown French cadet. On Eisenhower, it looked all right. On Gerald Ford, a
navy veteran, it looked acceptable, if a little odd. On Nixon, even though he
was a navy man too, it gave him the appearance of a barker at an amusement
fair. On Adlai Stevenson, the eloquent, literary, witty liberal, it looked
ridiculous. 

However, there has never been, to my knowledge, a presidential candidate,
however much of even a pacifist, who dare forego an invitation to address this
thumping patriotic convention. The legion was thought up quite informally when
20 men, of mixed rank, met in Paris for a dinner in February 1919, only three
months after the First World War ended. These men were all, so to speak, new/
old soldiers and remembering that old soldiers never die, they were, in the
flush of their battle companionship, determined not to fade away. They called a
bigger meeting the next month and got together a thousand mostly soldiers and
marines who were then kicking their heels up in Paris waiting to be demobbed.
Two months later, an executive committee had been formed, held a meeting in St
Louis and the legion was born. 

In its early manifestos, it declared a few, simple, downright aims. It was for
God and country and, very early on, constituted a powerful lobby in Washington
on behalf of wounded and disabled veterans and later on for the orphans of the
men who'd died in the war. It then campaigned to increase the bonus of
ex-servicemen and to amend the civil service law to see that preference was
given to them in federal jobs. 

Since those early years, the legion has done many sensible and imaginative
things, like a network of posts throughout the country devoted to building
parks and playgrounds and hospitals. It has started junior baseball leagues. It
organised emergency relief for victims of Mississippi floods in the Twenties
and the Thirties. Possibly its most important public act was to throw its whole
national weight behind the amendment to the constitution which, in the end,
prohibited child labour. 

Well, many of these services are now forgotten and as the veterans of the First
War died off and as the veterans of the Second grow old, it tends to be
pictured, whether fairly or not, as a rock-ribbed, flag-waving, fanatically
anti-Communist, patriotic society dedicated to the proposition that in any
international conflict, military or diplomatic, the benefit of any doubt should
be given to America first, last and all the time. 

President and presidential hopefuls tend to approach the legion's annual
convention with a wincing conscience. It's not the place to preach appeasement
or even the palest version of it. It is an atmosphere that encourages and
applauds the jutting chin, the tone of defiance, the most extravagant promises
about strengthening fortress America. But in the years since the Americans and
the Russians – indeed all of us – have had to think the unthinkable, the
possibility of nuclear annihilation, there has not been a president or a
candidate who dared be callous enough to rattle a sabre or threaten anybody. 

The only man who could express, before a very silent convention, a firm
detestation of war and even go on to warn everybody about the Frankenstein
possibilities of what he called 'the industrial-military complex' was
Eisenhower. When he appeared, he was, after all, the American hero of the
Second War, the nearest thing in 200 years to George Washington on a white
horse. 

Well, last week, President Ford went before the legion convention. And it must
have been a ticklish occasion for him, since he's been busy on his first dry
run of presidential campaigning crying up the blessings of détente and, as I
mentioned last week, even praising the farmers of the Midwest for helping with
their bumper crops to open a door to the mainland of China and to improve
relations with Russia. 

So the problem is how to be strong without being a jingo, how to hope for a
reduction in strategic arms and yet guarantee American security, how to woo the
Soviet Union and warn her in the same breath. I can only say that this
balancing act was made immeasurably easier for President Ford by the Russian's
blunt and frightening call, issued before the president climbed on to the
platform in Minneapolis, for mass solidarity with the Portuguese Communists.
We'll come to that in a minute, since it mocks and threatens the whole
declaration of Helsinki and, perhaps before any audience, President Ford would
have chosen to change his tune. 

However, forgetting it for the moment, let's just summarise what the president
had to say because his speech before the legion is, I think, much the most
significant statement on foreign policy that he's made since he came into the
White House. He told the legionnaires, as a general principle, that détente
means a fervent desire for peace but not peace at any price. He paid a passing
tribute to the legion's social programmes but quickly remarked that people,
however sincere, who think that the billions for defence should be transferred
to the poor and the disadvantaged, were short-sighted. 

'I'm convinced,' he said, 'that adequate spending for national defence is an
insurance policy. It's most valuable if we never need to use it but, without
it, we could be wiped out. For the next fiscal year, I honestly and sincerely
hope to hold down our spending on nuclear forces. This tentative judgement is
conditioned on real progress in the strategic arms limitation talks but
Congress and the American people must realise that unless agreement is reached,
I will have no choice but to recommend to the Congress an additional two to
three billion dollars for strategic weapons.' 

And then he brought up the dirty word. He wished there was a simple word in
English to substitute for détente. To him, détente meant easing, or relaxing,
'but definitely not, I emphasise "not",' he said, 'the relaxing of diligence or
the easing of effort. It means maintaining the strength to command respect from
our adversaries and to provide leadership to our friends, not letting down our
guard or dismantling our defences.' Helsinki had established, he thought, a
basis for détente, not the thing itself. 'But we cannot raise the hopes of our
people and shatter them by un-kept promises.' 

And now he came to the line that spoke for the volumes of misgivings his
administration has felt since the first Russian comments on Portugal. 'We are
now carefully watching some serious situations for indications of the Soviet
attitude towards détente and cooperation in European security. The situation in
Portugal is one of them. The United States expects Portugal to restore a
democratic form of government but the Portuguese must find the solution in an
atmosphere that is free from the pressures of outside forces.' 

To people in Washington who fear the worst, that's rather as if 40 years ago we
had asked the Nazis and the Soviets to stop sending arms to Spain. I think it
would be presumptuous to say that President Ford and Dr Kissinger see the
declaration of Helsinki, only three weeks after its signing, as a hollow
document but nothing the Russians have done, as distinct from what they've
said, has so depressed the president in the year that he's had to deal with
them. 

Let's recall that at the very end of the Helsinki conference, the assembled
governments, including the United States and the Soviet Union, signed a
document promising to support liberty of thought, conscience and faith, the
exercise of political and civil rights, a freer flow of information, ideas and
people and in the relations between states, non intervention, sovereign
equality, self determination, territorial integrity and change by peaceful
means. 

Well, within ten days of the signing, I don't think there can be the slightest
doubt, Moscow has fed money –and now, at the least, official encouragement – to
flout and deny in Portugal precisely liberty of thought and conscience, the
exercise of political and civil rights, non intervention, sovereign equality,
self determination and change by peaceful means. Cunhal, the Communist leader,
simply brushes aside the elections that battered his party with a thumping 60
per cent majority. As for freedom of ideas and faith, the military have
suppressed the last free newspaper and attacked a Catholic church. The legions
of Portuguese who are enraged at their own suppression by a party that got only
12 per cent of the vote are regularly defined in the Soviet newspapers as
hoodlums and neo-fascists. 

And beyond these desolating facts is the profound and effective cynicism of
intervening in the most brutal way in Portugal and then saying that when the
United States and the Common Market countries are shocked by the defiance of
free elections, those countries are miffed that Portugal is not developing,
quote, 'in a direction that suits the capitalist West and are, in effect,
interfering directly in the internal affairs of Portugal'. This is surely, in
the way of propaganda, the old Hitler technique of massing armies on the
frontier of a cringing nation and then screaming that that nation is attacking
the Third Reich. 

I'm afraid that the American columnist, James Reston, spoke nothing but the
plainest truth when he wrote, 'The troubling thing is that the Soviet Union,
after getting almost everything it wanted at Helsinki, mainly recognition of
the national boundaries seized by force, should now invoke the Helsinki
principles of liberty in order to help destroy liberty in Portugal.' 

This is what rankled in the mind of President Ford at Minneapolis. He was not
tempering his hopes for détente to the windy patriotism of the legionnaires. He
was taking a quite new stand and saying that, after Helsinki, there are limits
to America's acquiescence in such another brutal seizure as that of Hungary.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP