Immigrant work ethic

I was going to begin by quoting the two kind gentlemen who called on Scrooge
for a contribution to the fund for poor children. I think it goes: 'At this
festive season of the year...’, but I'm not sure about 'festive' and I have no
quick way of checking it.

It's true that at least two copies of The Christmas Carol are about 27 feet
from where I'm sitting if I walk along an L-shaped route six yards to my study
door and three yards to the left into the living room but Vincent is in sole
possession of the living room. Vincent is the painter. And the bookcases are
cloaked in sheets tied down so as not to flap around and trip him on his way to
the paint pots. Anyway, he's slapping away there, at the moment, and I'd rather
not burrow under the sheets to find that doubtful word and run the risk of
being splattered with coral. With what? 

I think I ought to explain, just to bring you up to date on what's happening in
America that the Cookes – or rather the only Cooke who gives the orders in this
household – she's decided that we've had the green colour on the living room
walls long enough. It was never meant to be green. For years and years we had a
colour known to the experts as 'El Greco Bronze' but last time the man made it
too green and the fanciest name you could give it now would be 'El Greco
Jaundice.' So, it's giving way to what is called 'Coral' and I believe coral it
will be since this time my wife, who is by trade a painter, not a Hitler-type
housepainter but one whose works are framed and suitable for hanging or even
selling, she mixed the coral and coral it will be. 

Vincent came from Italy long ago, though from the way he talks you'd think he'd
sailed in from Florence last week. Vincent's troubles with the language have
their compensations for us. At any rate, he has, I should guess, never heard of
the work ethic and so he's never thought of ridiculing it. So Vincent arrived,
two days ago, moved all the furniture out of an entrance hall which is 35 feet
long and eight feet wide, stripped and prepared the walls, plastered the
cracks, laid on the base coat and so on, and next day he painted what I figure
must be about 700 square feet of surface (not counting the ceiling), say, a
thousand square feet in all plus an extra glossy coat on seven doors. He
couldn't use a roller all the way and proceed smoothly like a man mowing a
lawn, because at regular intervals there are mouldings and inside the mouldings
there are rectangular panels of another colour which have to be edged very
delicately. 

Now this is the sort of project which, with a lot of delicacy and unstinting
energy, I'm pretty sure I could finish in a month. Well, I went away on
Wednesday when he was plastering cracks and preparing a tattered stretch of the
ceiling damaged last summer by the spill over from our hurricane (we live next
to the roof) and I came back next evening, Thursday, and the hall was finished
with all the furniture, carpets and whatnot back in place. He'd by then moved
into the living room. He'd done all the tedious preparation and today he's
finished the primer coat which, I'm alarmed to tell you, is baby pink. But by
tomorrow, he says, the dark coral will be on, he'll have glazed it and done a
glossy coat on two doors and he promises to be out of the house by twilight
tomorrow, with all the furniture and fixings back – by which time, if you can
only wait, I can tell you what was the word the two charitable gentlemen used
on Scrooge. 

However, I got on to Vincent because it strikes me he doesn't think of himself
as a dynamo or the all-American working man. He's a gentle, roly-poly
apple-cheeked, first-rate pro and – this you'll find hard to believe – very
easy-going. Easy-going but expert going. Breaks, sure enough: on the dot of
noon, is back on the dot of 1 p.m. and out of the house on the dot of 3 p.m. He
certainly abides by the union rules, he's at it as the clock strikes 7 a.m. He
doesn't whistle while he works, he props up on any available flat surface a
little transistor radio and he keeps it tuned to one of our stations which
plays nothing but classical music. So, today, for instance, he's been slapping
and niggling away to bits of Mozart and stretches of Verdi. In short, here's a
man who arrived on Wednesday morning, due to leave at 3 p.m. on Friday having
painted in two colours a thousand square feet of surface, also a living room 25
feet by ten requiring preparation, primer coat, base coat, different top coat,
and a glazing job, not to mention the separate glossy coat on nine doors, the
whole works done without puffing, protestation or malingering in three
stretches or 24 hours in all. 

Of course he suffers from certain disadvantages other than his shortcomings
with the language. He's Italian by birth and prejudice and, luckily for us,
he's never heard of a tea break. I can hear some bigots thinking aloud that he
must be an extraordinary sort of Italian. The bigotry, I impute, comes from
that old prejudice about national character which says that Italians are
adorable, except in Sicily, and slap happy and far from expert in anything but
laying old stone and brick and eating pasta. 

It reminds me of the time during the Second War which Eisenhower attested to in
his memoir, when the advance up through the Italian boot was going too slowly,
partly because the army engineers were proceeding sluggishly with the repair of
bridges, viaducts and such. Now Eisenhower, and whatever you may say about him
as a non-Field General, had one vein of genius in his character, if ever
character can be genius. 

This man, born in deepest Texas and brought up in small-town Kansas, somehow
grew up with absolutely no preconceptions about the innate virtues or failings
of national character. He looked into the record of any given army division,
battalion or whatever, was somehow able to ignore completely the natural
prejudices with which we're all infected from birth, and gave a job to the
people best able to cope with it. When the bridge building was going along
badly in Italy, he didn't get off a gung-ho memo to the commander of the US
Engineers and say, 'Ginger things up!' He sat down, looked over the forces
available, the British, the Americans, some partisans I suppose and the Italian
army and said of course the best army engineers are the Italians and handed the
job over to them. 

Well, I don't mean to get trapped into the complimentary prejudice that all
Italians make the best house painters. A few years ago, the man in this house –
it's an apartment house, a block of flats if you will, with 70 apartments in
all or 406 rooms – ah... Vincent, he has no helper, by the way, lives his
working life moving up and down the building painting endlessly, like the men
who clean the windows of the Empire State Building. Start at the bottom, go to
the top, take a 103-storey drop to the bottom and begin again. 

I was saying, the painter, a few years ago used to be Sam, a Russian. He was a
problem child the moment he looked the job over. He spotted every snag, every
tiresome obstacle in the way of painting the place at all. He complained, he
sighed, he grumbled, he'd do his best – a warning that it would be a pretty
patchy job at best. And then he came back, started to sing in a continuous
wobbly baritone and finished in just the same time as Vincent, never a wobble
in the line dividing one colour from the next. 

Well, when I began, I hadn't intended to mention Vincent at all, I was going
somewhere, though I can't think where, with that quotation from Dickens. But I
kept hearing that Verdi which is not what I usually dream up the prose by and I
just read a piece in the New York Times about a labour dispute which was laying
down stipulations about making work and setting limits to double time and other
niceties of pay scales and it struck me that maybe Vincent is an innocent.
Maybe his sons and grandsons will have caught on and learn there's no
obligation to do that huge painting chore in three days. 

I recall the bitter but true comment of Henry Frick, the steel king, who
noticed the way immigrant labour was wonderfully satisfying to the employer
when it was first generation, but how, when the next wave of innocence arrived,
the last one began to get tough about working conditions, and rightly so. Mr
Frick, seeing the mills idle in the middle of a long and fractious strike,
said, 'The immigrant, however dumb, however illiterate, always learns too
soon.' Vincent, evidently, hasn't learned. 

However, I also think of Mr Mencken's lament more than a generation ago that
'competence', just sheer competence was vanishing from the modern world and his
sighing afterthought, 'The older I grow, the more I have come to admire
competence in any field, from adultery to zoology.' 

Oh! I remember what it was now about Scrooge and Co. I had a letter the other
day from an Englishman, I gather either a clergyman or a lay preacher, who
wanted me to send him a quotation, or rather to recall and cable to him 'the
explanation you gave to a small child on what Christmas was all about. You must
have done this talk,' he says, 'about 15 years ago.' 15 years ago!! My dear Mr
Scrooge that's at least 750 talks ago. I don't sit down and fashion these talks
like medieval illuminated manuscripts. I don't make careful notes through the
week, put together a set of orderly newspaper cuttings and then inscribe my
thoughts in Tudor Gothic on vellum, I look at this microphone and say what
comes to mind and, 20 minutes ago, Vincent was no more than a slight, if
amiable nuisance next door, what with the pipings from Verdi and wrapping my
books in bed sheets and all, he was just an interference with what I had
thought of talking about – Jimmy Carter's Cabinet. 

Still, I thought of this optimistic parson who wants to tell his flock next
Sunday what Christmas is all about. All I can guess is that long ago I made the
quaint point, which has probably escaped the last two generations, that
Christmas has nothing to do with office parties or boosting the economy or
decorating department stores with a thousand light bulbs. It has to do, if I
may be dogmatic, with the birth in Bethlehem of a Jewish child, who for 20
centuries transformed the thoughts and feelings of at least one-third of the
population of the world. By now the origins of this festival are as forgotten
as the myths of Odin or the Saxon gods. 

Having said which, may I send you the old-fashioned wish for a Merry Christmas
and a Happy New Year.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP