The Ford presidency

A few days ago, the New York Times published a remarkable bit of dialogue taken
not from a play but from an actual exchange of private conversation between the
President of the United States and one of his closest friends.

This man's name will be totally unknown to this generation and barely
remembered even by people alive and politically kicking in 1952. He's the
former governor of Pennsylvania, William Scranton and he's one of the seven
close friends whom President Ford keeps on tap not as political advisers so
much as friendly outsiders who are called on from time to time to say frankly
what's right and what's wrong with the president's performance. 

This sounds like a healthy, sensible thing to do but in fact it's a very
startling innovation. When you look back in our time, all the way to Hoover who
departed from the White House in 1933, it's hard to find a close friend of a
president, let alone seven, who isn't there, right inside the White House,
maybe grumbling from time to time about this issue or that, but on the whole a
friend dedicated to blowing the president's trumpet almost as a routine act of
political loyalty. 

It's true that every president, like every king, has a court jester – a
non-political buddy who's on call to provide diversion for the president when
he's up to his gills in controversy or political machination. Such men, like
the wealthy Vincent Astor in Roosevelt's day, take the president out on their
yacht for a fishing trip or, like Johnnie Maier, they lighten the dark nights
with a poker game and funny stories. 

But it has been, increasingly in our time, the rule and maybe the curse of the
presidency that it has turned the White House into a court where even the
closest friends are political generals protecting the president from his
enemies; some people say protecting the president from the people. But, at any
rate, men who, certainly since Truman on, regard their first duty of
citizenship as unwavering personal loyalty to the president with the ghastly
perversion of citizenship we all saw in the American record between October
1973 and October 1974, namely the first resignation in history of a vice
president in the face of criminal charges, the first resignation of a president
and the first pardon of a president for alleged criminal acts. 

So now we've just learned, President Ford keeps on hand seven men who are not
in the government, don't work in the White House, are not friends called in to
boost the president's morale when he's feeling low, but constitute a kind of
informal review board of the president's actions, telling him as often when
he's wrong as when he's right. 

Well, to come to that bit of dialogue recounted by Mr Scranton, it went like
this: 

The president: Bill, you're opposed to the Nixon pardon.

Scranton: That's right.

The president: You weren't very enthusiastic about my economic programme.

Scranton: That's right.

The president: My food stamp decision drove you right up the wall.

Scranton: It sure did.

The president: You didn't favour military aid to South Vietnam.

Scranton: No, I didn't. 

The president, said Scranton, paused a moment there and said, 'Then why are you
for me at all?' And Scranton replied, 'Because you're honest and decent and the
first president I ever knew, and I've known several, who could talk to me like
that.' 

Well, you wouldn't exactly build a presidential campaign on a snatch of
dialogue like that but I suspect it bodes a lot of ill for the almost
innumerable number of squabbling Democrats who have either announced they're
running for the presidency next year or will, sooner or later, do so. 

If there's one thing the political commentators, and most politicians in both
parties, agreed on, say, six months ago, it was that President Ford would be a
caretaker president. After all, the people didn't vote him in. He's the first
appointed president and the general view of his political performance in
office, as the polls kept showing, was dim indeed. 

A good friend of mine, a lawyer who might be described as an embittered
idealist, certainly a lifelong Democrat though he's now disgusted with the
feuds and fractions that have made the Democrats in Congress fail so far to
stop any of the president's programmes, this lawyer had a cutting response for
me when I suggested some time during the winter that it was something to have
in the White House a man who might not be the most intellectual president in
history but presented the novelty, these last dozen years or more, of a
transparently honest man. 'Listen!' said my lawyer, 'You have a grandson who's
blue-eyed and comical and honest as the day is long, you want him to be
President of the United States?' 

Well, the other day I dropped in to see him and he was as restless and moody as
ever, no sign on his horizon of a Moses or an Adlai Stevenson. He'd just read a
piece in a national conservative magazine proposing the ideal ticket for 1976.
'Can you believe it? Can you believe it!' he kept saying, gingerly holding the
offending journal at arm's length like a bad, but still wriggling, lobster,
'Can you believe it? They say the country can be saved if we elect Ronald
Reagan as President and George Wallace as Vice President. Reagan and Wallace?
Ye Gods! They're not conservatives,' he said scornfully, 'they're far
rightists. Might as well call in a couple of Portuguese generals!' 

Well, that's a pretty intemperate sentence but I quote it because it was only
the preface to his next remark and it came, remember, from a man who I don't
think has ever voted Republican in his life. 'But,' he said, with a gusty sigh,
'they're not going to make it. And you know why? Because an awful lot of people
like me are going to vote for Gerald Ford.' He announced the name incredulously
as if he'd said Woody Allen or Mrs Whitehouse. This was an impulsive remark,
obviously, not one based on the careful balancing of pros and cons that so many
serious newspaper editors seriously believe is how people vote. 

That same evening, I asked the lawyer's wife how she felt about her husband's
dramatic switch. 'Well, for myself,' she said, 'I think I might vote for that
Texan, what's his name? Benson, Bentson, Bentsner? I like his looks and his
voice somehow reminds me of Roosevelt.' 

That is the stage we are at with the line-up of Democrats who have already come
out as runners. We barely know their names and we have quite a time attaching
the proper name to the proper face. We all know Senator Muskie of Maine and old
Hubert Humphrey of Minnesota. It's hard to realise now that he was once the
'terrible Turk' of the young Democrats nearly 30 years ago. Harder still to
think of him way back there as the vice president and now he's the bouncing old
liberal of the party. And if the Democrats have to skip over the seven or eight
already in training and fall back on him, I should think that the Democrats,
saving some unforeseen catastrophe, are in a very bad way indeed. 

What, the well-informed person will want to know, but what has Ford done? Well,
there again, I think a lot of Americans who've come around to more than a
liking for him would have to hedge a little. What he's done, in the main, is
manage to veto the Democrats programmes on energy, tax raising, prohibiting
strip mining, and for as long as anybody can remember, the Democrats have
failed to rally enough votes, the necessary two-third majority in Congress, to
override the president's veto. 

The president's veto on legislation – which was invented in the constitution as
an emergency check on any majority that might ride roughshod over the country –
the veto was always regarded in the early days of the republic as an
extraordinary weapon but for a hundred years or so it's been a regular weapon
of a president who sees the Congress trying to frustrate his own legislative
programme. 

Under Ford, it has become 'the' presidential weapon and you might well wonder
why it has succeeded so often when you consider that, for the last 40 years or
so, both the Senate and the House have had liberal Democratic majorities. In
the present Congress, the Democrats have whopping majorities, 62 to 38 in the
Senate, 290 to 144 (better than two to one) in the House. 

Surely it shouldn't be difficult for the Democrats to whip around on issues
that are more regional or humane than party issues and get a two-thirds
majority to override any veto the President could slap down? But they've failed
time and again and what this does, I think, is to impress on people not so much
the rights and wrongs of the liberal Democrats programme, but their woeful
inability to unite with the other factions in their party and get anything done
at all. 

It was a dreadful moment in the history of the Democratic Party when the
Speaker of the House, Mr Albert, who in the American system is not just a
referee of debates, he's also the leader of the majority party in the House, Mr
Albert confessed in public that his party was weak through its divisions. 

But people don't judge the political temperature only by the fevers and chills
in Congress. They look to see what's happening in the country and if it's good,
they tend to attribute the good to the man in the White House – a simple
inference but one made by the people of every nation on earth. 

When President Ford decided to give everybody a rebate on last year's income
tax, literally, every one of us got a cheque from the government for a thousand
dollars or a hundred dollars or something in between. The Democrats who were,
of course, forced to pass such a gorgeous little bonus, they said it would have
no effect on inflation or anything else. Well, maybe it didn't, but another
rule of politics is that, when B happens after A, B happened because of A. The
tax cheques came in and in one month the average worker was taking home four
per cent more goods than he'd bought the month before. A year ago, the
inflation rate in this country was 12 per cent. The president said it would
come down to eight. Well, it's down to six per cent and while unemployment is
at nine per cent, the House has unanimously passed a bill which the president
re-drew to make many thousands of new jobs this summer. 

It's a sketchy picture of statesmanship but if the recession is over and
inflation stays down and the Democrats go on fiddling and feuding, Gerald Ford
next year might well unite enough of the people fed up with the liberal left
and scared of the conservative right and bring them over to take possession,
with a massive majority, of the centre which is the place that most Americans
love to live and deposit their votes.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP