Ford bounces back in opinion polls

An English friend of mine has sent me a book which has put together a
collection of letters written to The Times, the London Times that is, over the
past 75 years. My only regret about this hilarious collection which ranges from
the informative to the outraged, from the expert to the idiotic, from the
serious citizen to the comical busybody, my only wish is that they'd not
printed the dates when the letters were written or at least printed them in
tiny type upside down at the bottom of the page as they do with those general
knowledge quizzes.

My point is that you'd very often guess that a letter, say one about race
relations was written in September 1976 and it turns out to have been written
in 1948. These surprises abound and many of them only go to prove the thesis of
my old Washington chief on that same paper when one day in, I think it was
1940, he suddenly handed me his White House pass, his Senate Gallery pass and
his press tickets to the coming Republican convention. Why, I asked him, would
he want so suddenly to leave me the plums of the Washington assignment? 'My
dear boy,' he said, 'what happens today has happened yesterday and will happen
again tomorrow.' I need hardly say that he was nearing the end of his reporting
days, for if that isn't the epitaph of a reporter, I never heard one. 

Well, certainly, if you wanted to gather ammunition to prove to yourself that
nothing much you do can affect the course of events and that, anyway, they've
all happened before, you couldn't do better than read through these published
letters written throughout three-quarters of a century. They made me think
again about the vanity of commentators, especially when they venture into
prophecy. The newspaper columnist is much like the soothsayers and oracles of
the ancient world. He hears bad news or he's consulted by anxious people who
fear bad news and he stirs the ashes of the fire in front of him or takes a
closer look at the eye of a newt and he comes up with some grave prediction.
And I don't doubt that by the time he's consoled people or told them the worst,
they've forgotten his sage prophecy by the time it didn't come true. 

One of the letters in this book was from an alarmed citizen who had somehow
picked up the frightening statistic that four Britons in ten run their
practical lives, decide when to sign a cheque or go on a trip or start a
flirtation, entirely in obedience to the astrological charts conveniently
interpreted for them in the newspapers with people with names like Madiha or
Cassandra. This letter ran over the page so I couldn't guess the date of it
right away, it could obviously have been written yesterday. It was written in
fact some time just after the Second World War. Now I'm not going to start up
again explaining my own view that this whole pseudo-science is nonsense if only
because the astrological signs on which Mars rising in Jupiter by the light of
a new moon referred to a totally different calendar among the ancients who
devised this mumbo-jumbo or that their knowledge of the stars was ingenuous but
woefully wrong, quite apart from the glaring fact that I know, and you know,
people born under your sign who are about as far apart in character and destiny
as Mrs Thatcher and W. C. Fields. 

Anyway, I didn’t mean to knock these soothsayers but to sympathise with their
trade because it is so much like that of a commentator who has to pretend to be
a jump ahead of you. My sympathies with these ladies become intense at the end
of each year when they're called on to predict what's going to happen, not
today or tomorrow, but next spring and next December. They are faced with a
crucial exercise in hedging their bets. Apart from saying confidently that
there'll be more trouble in the Middle East, which even I without beads or
charts or crystal ball, will predict right now. They have an obligation to
prophesy the immediate future of the weather, the intentions of communist China
and the love life of Jacqueline Onassis. 

By the way, I forgot now, did I tell you about the British diplomat who was
allowed a private interview with Mao Tse-tung a dozen or so years ago, and
said, 'Mr Chairman, what do you feel would have happened if Mr Khrushchev had
been assassinated and not Mr Kennedy?' Chairman Mao thought long and wisely,
not unlike I imagine an astrological lady, and then quietly replied, 'Of only
one thing can we be certain, Mr Onassis would not have married Mrs
Khrushchev'. 

Well, I was saying... the life of an astrologer must be most painful on the
verge of a new year when they have to commit themselves to a range of prophecy
knowing they'll be lucky if a tittle of it comes true. I had the privilege of
meeting, by chance, one of the most eminent of these soothsayers, two days
after the assassination of Bobby Kennedy and she told us with the greatest
gravity that the night before the assassination she'd had a dream or vision and
saw the whole thing clearly, even down to the serving pantry of the hotel in
which it happened. If only we'd called her the following morning, she could
have prophesied the whole event with astounding clarity. Well, of course,
nobody called her. 

And I've been reminded of this whole, weird business by the shock given to us
last week by the public opinion polls. Just when everybody was saying that
though the president had delivered to the Republican convention the best speech
of his life – not in itself an immense achievement – he was still 33 percentage
points behind Jimmy Carter in popularity among the voters. Just then a new
Gallup poll came out came out showing the president to be lagging not by 33 per
cent but only by ten per cent. Thirty-nine per cent of the voters were now for
President Ford and 49 per cent for Carter. And if 39 and 49 don't add up to a
hundred that's because there remain 12 per cent who haven't made up their minds
and if they all went for Ford, by golly he could win! 

Well, the panic button sounded among the soothsayers of the press, the pundits
whose whole profession has to do with explaining surprising things as nothing
surprising at all. The results were beautiful to behold. A magazine that had
given the election to Carter and was practically calling for his inauguration
now, acted like an art expert suddenly caught with a Rembrandt that turns out
to have been painted by Fred Rembrandt. Whatever panic they had originally felt
was nicely overcome by the time they settled to their typewriters and there has
issued this week a ream of splendid columns for all the world like a lecture
given by a very patient and gentle maths teacher to a bright pupil who had
failed to spot the exception to the rule. Never mind that they'd been saying a
month ago that Carter would take every state but two. Never mind that they'd
been recalling the immortal amendment to an old folk saying coined by Franklin
Roosevelt's first campaign manager, Jim Farley. 

Before 1936, one of the sacred axioms of American politics which was based on
the results of many presidential elections in which the result from the state
of Maine tended to come in first and was always an uncanny foretaste of what
was going to happen to the whole country. The axiom was 'As Maine goes, so goes
the nation.' Well, in 1936, Maine came in and had gone for the Republican
nominee and a little later the returns came in from Vermont and Vermont had
followed suit. And then the other, in those days, 46 States came in and 46
States went for Roosevelt. Old Jim Farley asked for his interpretation of the
Roosevelt landslide said gravely, 'As Maine goes, so goes Vermont.' 

Well, no sooner had our pundits recalled this and similar jocosities at the
expense of Mr Ford than that stunning poll came in. Ford so lately trailing by
the colossal gap of 33 points was now only ten points behind. Why? Why? Well,
on Friday morning, the mature, bright explanation was to hand. It came from a
New York Times' columnist who at all times battles bravely to disguise his
preference for the Democrats and his despair over the mediocrity of Mr Ford.
You know why Ford bounded back in popular esteem? Well, very briefly, this man
says the president's rebound is without precedent in presidential polling but
not without an explanation. Mr Carter, it says here, is a new face. The polls
registered the wonder of his meteoric rise but... but his success could only go
so far. Hesitations developed, he says. Not on his part but apparently on ours.
The novelty has worn thin, if not off. 

The American public knows next to nothing about Carter. On the other hand, Ford
has advertised all his weaknesses, his physical and verbal slips, his political
choppings and changings, but the economy has recovered. There is peace. There
is a revival of trust. Quote, 'His call for television debates rang loud and
clear. Hence,' it concludes, 'the abnormal spurt.' Well, I hope that convinces
you more than it convinces me. 

I must confess that I was on the verge of finding some explanation myself. The
rebound did seem more than was warranted by Ford's exposure at the Republican
circus and the glow of his triumph over Ronald Reagan who, by the way, is going
back to his first job as a radio commentator – poor fellow! Now he's going to
have to find explanations for sudden shocks. 

Well, I didn't have to explain anything because in the same newspaper, in a
column adjacent to this learned explanation of Ford's rising popularity, was
printed the result of the very latest poll. Carter has now surged ahead from a
ten per cent lead to 15. So now 52 per cent want Carter and only 37 per cent
want Ford. Thank you Dr Gallup. I'm not going to explain this because by the
time you hear this talk it may be time for another explanation of another
shock. 

Also, I'm... I'm treading carefully this weekend, under my astrological sign in
last night's paper, it says: 'Tomorrow, (that's today), don't pin too much
faith on the successful practice of your profession.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP