Ford-Rockefeller squabble over NY finances

Some years ago when – I'm now shocked to realise – I had a daughter 10 years
old, I remember an evening when one of our oldest friends had just dropped in.
I, err... I make an awkward pause here because it's one of the perilous hazards
of radio that in order to produce a picture in the listener's mind, you have to
identify a man quickly and maybe by his profession, and once you've done that
it's too late to stem or contradict the listener's prejudices.

If you could see the man I have in mind, you might take him for a chemist's
assistant, genial to the point of comicality, shrewd as only an immigrant can
be who came into this country as one of a small Hungarian minority in New York
and looked on Manhattan with the wariness of a Highland shepherd dropped for
the first time in Shepherd's Bush. 

I would defy anybody who saw this grinning bald head, sitting up at a country
diner, gobbling a hamburger plastered with ketchup, I'd defy you to pick his
profession or his interests. Seeing him there with his blacksmith's forearms
and his check fawn slacks and a blue or yellow golf shirt, you'd be pretty
close to the mark if you thought he was a truck driver stopped for lunch. 

To be exact, this man is a retired investment banker and one of the world's, I
suppose, score or so experts in Chinese jade. What he has retained from his
early wariness and humour as an immigrant is a blessed ability to cut through
the jargon of politicians and sociologists and pseudo-intellectuals and all
those other types educated beyond their intelligence who pretend to have
thought their way through to the fundamentals, but haven't and must vamp, till
ready, with a flourish of polysyllables. 

Long before Wendell Willkie said something of the kind, this old comic banker
had defined politics as 'who gets what and when'. He's toying with the idea now
of writing a small book about the recession and the economy, the central idea
of which is that the government is nuts to go on moaning about the number of
people who've lost their jobs. He points out that, today, more Americans, by
several millions, are at work than ever before. Where we've fallen behind is in
creating millions of new jobs for the seven million or so, you might say,
newborn Americans who come into the workforce every year. 

Well, to go back to, err... to that evening years ago when he dropped in and
there was some kidding talk about an absent friend, one of those types who
folds his morning newspaper at once to the stock market reports, a man who, as
the market rocketed between the pit and the stratosphere, worked himself into
alternating frenzies of joy and despair. One week he'd glow with the news that
he'd just made $10,000 and the next week he was broken by the thought that he'd
just lost $20,000. 

My ten-year-old, sitting in on this tale, suddenly upped and said, 'I don't
understand, I thought you put your savings away. How can you be rich one week
and the poor and then rich again?' And my friend said, 'Susie, you're
absolutely right. It cannot be done. This man hadn't won anything or lost
anything.' She didn't get it. 'Well,' he said, 'suppose you have a doll.' 'I
have a doll', she said. 'All right,' he said, 'what did it cost when it was
new?' I chipped in, 'Two dollars.' 'And what,' said my friend, 'would the same
doll cost today?' 'Five dollars?' I said. 'OK!' said Susie, bright as a button,
'So I've won three dollars?' 'Only,' said my friend, 'if you sell it.' 'But I
don't want to sell it!' she said. 'You wouldn't sell it for ten dollars, would
you?' 'No, I wouldn't,' she said, 'anyway, it's kind of ragged.' 'That's it!'
said my friend, 'You might only get fifty cents for it. But to you it's worth
more than the money. And it's the same doll and it means something to you and
you haven't lost a cent or won a cent if you don't sell it. It's just the same
with the stock market.' 

Well, he knew it wasn't quite the same, but near enough to illuminate the manic
depressive temperament of the people who watch themselves, every day, win and
lose fortunes on nothing but paper. 

The other night we were all tangled up, as everybody is, in the knot of New
York City's finances. I've not yet met anybody who is able to give you a
child's guide to the mess or even a simple, subtle account that somebody else
will not indignantly refute but, just in passing, my old friend said for the
enlightenment of any puzzled ten-year-olds present, 'You know, you'd think that
a man who six years ago earned $30,000 a year and met his obligations and was
comfortably off and who now earns $120,000 a year, you'd think he'd be managing
pretty well, even with inflation. But in fact he's spent $128,000 – he's $8,000
in the red.' 

That, in a nutshell is the correct ratio between New York City's income and
improvidence down the last half-dozen years. In the beginning – say, five
months ago – when we first heard about the dizzy juggling with the city budget,
New York City's fiscal headache was a joke and then it was a scandal. And now
it's a threat not only to the safety of the city, but to the national economy
and to the confidence of other nations in America's ability to keep house. But,
as I mentioned last time, it took the chancellor of West Germany to frighten
the White House into taking a national view of New York's impending
bankruptcy. 

At the moment that I'm talking to you, there is a rather embarrassing squabble
going on between President Ford and Vice President Rockefeller though the vice
president has hastened to deny such an undignified word as 'squabble' and said
that his differences with the president about whether the federal government
should come to the rescue of the city are minimal. 

Well, as old Al Smith used to say, 'Let's look at the record'. Two months ago,
President Ford's most direct comment on New York City's financial woes was
this, 'They don't know how to handle money. All they know is how to spend it.'
About a month ago, he said there would be some repercussions nationally if New
York City defaulted but it would not be catastrophic. And only a week or so
ago, he said, 'I don't think it's a healthy thing for the federal government to
bail out a city, and I mean any city, that has handled its fiscal affairs as
irresponsibly over a long period as New York City has.' 

The same week, Vice President Rockefeller talked in public in general about the
plight of our cities and in particular said that New York City's need for
immediate federal aid was desperate. To this, the president said nothing but he
let various spokesmen for the White House be quoted as saying that Mr
Rockefeller was speaking only for himself. 

Well, it's not possible under the American system for the vice president to
speak for himself, except on such un-debatable topics as his taste in paintings
and how he likes his steaks cooked. It has also been an iron rule of the vice
presidency that its occupant keep his mouth shut on all matters of national
policy unless his remarks have been laundered by the White House or are meant
to serve as a trial balloon for some policy that the president himself is not
quite ready to float. 

The even more iron rule is that the vice president doesn't do anything
official. He is by no means an assistant or deputy president and, in every
administration, he is a long, long way down the ladder of presidential advisers
and assistants. His main job, as Mr Mencken said long ago, is to sit in the
outer office and hope to hear the president sneeze. 

Mr Rockefeller has been attacked by two forces: by veteran congressmen who wish
the vice president would adhere to his traditional role and by conservative
Republicans who want to see Mr Rockefeller unseated as President Ford's running
mate next year. Many of these conservatives are, indeed, the vanguard of the
'Ronald Reagan for President' army. For 15 years, since they booed Rockefeller
off the podium at the presidential convention, they have hated Rockefeller as a
liberal renegade in the Republican camp and, in truth, many of them would like
to see both Ford and Rockefeller thrown off the ticket. 

Some of the sniping at Rockefeller would, at one time, have been thought
vicious in the extreme but, in our time, when a so-called liberal crusading
newspaper isn't above printing the private, dinner-table conversation of the
Secretary of State, just because it was secretly recorded by some miserable
eavesdropper, in our time, such sniping as Mr Rockefeller has received is
considered a public service. The snidest hint at Mr Rockefeller's motives has
been the remark that he is the brother of the president of Chase Manhattan
Bank. 

Well, any sneer at this fact of life is instantly wiped away by the more
horrendous fact of life that Chase Manhattan and a couple of other banks, as
large as any in the country, own between them something like 25 per cent of New
York City's useless bonds. Whoever may be the brothers of their combined
presidents, it would offer a very mean sort of satisfaction to anybody if these
banks followed one of the largest supermarket chains in the nation and went
into spectacular bankruptcy. 

Last time, I went into the peculiarity of New York's plight as contrasted, say,
with a solvent city like Chicago and we picked on the city's preposterously
high burden to pay for all welfare as the villain of the plot. There are other
villains but it would be an easing of an enormous load if Washington lifted
that one off the city. To do that, Washington would certainly insist that New
York require some residency qualification for people going on relief. 

As it is, anybody can come here, give a local address and, within the month, go
onto welfare. The parks are crowded these golden fall days with families who
together get, for free, more than two or three of them could earn. They saunter
cheerfully under the trees learning about their new hometown at the expense of
the New Yorker who, alone, among 200 million Americans has to pay a national
income tax, a state income tax and a city income tax. 

Sooner than later, let us hope, Mr Ford will listen to his vice president and
to the Europeans who can tell him that there is not a city in Europe that is
unsupported by the national government, not one whose budget is not scrutinised
– in some places controlled – by the government, in exchange for the guarantee
that the government will simply not allow the cities to go bankrupt.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP