Equal Rights Amendment – 21 March 1975

Five years ago, a young couple got married in New Jersey. She was a school
teacher, and after they were married, she went on with her job and earned
$10,000 a year, which is roughly, for simplicity, let's say £4,000.

Her husband, describing himself as a consultant, self-employed, which could
mean anything from a press agent, or a man dabbling in publicity for anybody
who'd take him, a man hoping to come up with a better hair pin or a mousetrap.
Anyway, there it is. A consultant. He made never much more than a thousand
pounds a year. So, two years go by, and she's about to have a baby, in fact,
she dies in childbirth. The baby survives and is now a healthy three-year-old.
Now, under the Social Security law, the widow of a man who has fathered any
children by her may claim and get something called Survivor's Benefits. This
provision was enacted into the Social Security Act thirty-six years ago.
However, here we had a widower with a child and suddenly five-sixths of the
family's income has vanished. So he applied for Survivor's Benefits. What the
courts gave him was money for the child, but none for himself. They told him,
correctly, that the law allowed Survivor's Benefits for a widow but not for a
widower. Well, he appealed to a district court – a federal court, since he
argued his case on constitutional grounds, namely on the guarantee given in the
constitution that every citizen shall receive the equal protection of the laws.
The district court said he was right and the opposing lawyers eventually
brought it up for final jurisdiction to the Supreme Court of the United States.
And, a few days ago, the court ruled, and unanimously, that the widower has
just as much right to Survivor's Benefits as a widow. And so it struck down the
thirty-six-year-old provision of the Social Security Act.

There was a moment of jubilation among the founding members of a new and
growing group called Male Liberationists, and, at first glance, it does seem as
if the court was saying that it was time to assert the equality of men in those
delicate matters, and maybe they are few and far between, where the law runs in
favour of women. But that was not the argument of Justice Brennan, who wrote
the opinion of the court. He gave it a pretty twist by making the argument turn
on the right of women to be regarded as equal breadwinners. He said, the
constitution will not tolerate – I ought to say it has very blandly tolerated
till now – the constitution 'will not tolerate the assumption in the Social
Security law that male workers' earnings are vital to the support of their
families, while the earnings of a female wage earner do not significantly
contribute to the family's support'. So, in granting the widower money to take
care of himself, as well as the baby, the court maintained that it was, in
effect, striking a blow for women's rights. By the same reasoning, some months
or maybe a year ago, the court wrote another Gilbertian line. It's always been
accepted by American courts that if a woman were called for jury duty, she
could be excused simply on the grounds that she was a housewife, much too busy
by the nature of her God-given or man-made profession to help in the execution
of the laws. In our fuzzy, old-fashioned language, we used to say that women
had the right not to serve on juries. Well, now this right is being refused in
the same breath that the courts say that they're asserting a woman's right to
be the equal of a man. In other words, since a man cannot say he won't serve
because he has to cook breakfast or stoke the furnace, she has an equal right
not to be excused. It's clear from these recent cases, I think, that from now
on the courts are going to give some surprising turns to the word 'right'. In
the armed services, for instance, women have long been members of the navy, the
air force and the army (I'm not sure about the marines), but always in jobs
that the male of the species thought of as typically feminine chores –
housekeeping, secretarial work, driving cars for generals and the like. 

A few months ago, a woman in the navy protested this domestic definition of her
service and applied to go aboard an aircraft carrier as a full-fledged member
of the crew. Apparently, she is the only one and, so far, no unbearable tension
has been reported among the fifteen hundred-odd males aboard, though many men
aboard and ashore must remember the case of the two girls, a year or so ago,
who joined a carrier as crew, married on board, got pregnant – I hope I've got
the sequence right – and then wanted to stay afloat with their babies. I don't
know how it came out but, for sure, the babies are being taken care of on dry
land. Fire women, too, they're something new, though in the prissy usage of our
day they're now called firepersons. Have you noticed, by the way, that 'person'
as a suffix is always used for a female, when you'd think 'woman' would be
clearer? We used to call female members of Congress congresswomen. Now they are
congresspersons and if they get to be the chairman of a committee, they are not
called chairwoman but chairperson. I'm afraid that this ridiculous habit is
here to stay because the test of any idiom's ability to general acceptance is
whether or not the television commentators and newsreaders can make it stick.
I'm sorry to tell you that men, and I mean men who'd normally use the language,
if not with distinction at least with directness, are now coming on and saying
without the flicker of an eyelash, or the hint of a chuckle, such things as
chairperson and I heard the other night 'charperson' when it was clear as a
bell that the person being described was a charwoman, certainly not a charman.

Well, on Long Island a few months ago, there was a brief uproar when a woman
joined the fire brigade of a town and it came to the attention of the wives of
the firemen that, like the rest of the crew, she was required, from time to
time, to be on call through the night. 'On call' means sleeping in the
firehouse, bunking down alongside the men. The men insisted that she was not a
nuisance, a regular sport who played poker as well as the rest of them, and
added a merely decorative note to the watches of the night. The wives, however,
raised a rumpus, evidently subscribing to H.L. Mencken's famous dictum that at
the end of one millennium and over nine centuries of Christianity, it remains
an unshakeable assumption of the law in all Christian countries and of the
moral judgement of Christians everywhere that if a man and a woman entering a
room together, close the door behind them, the man will come out sadder and the
woman wiser. Well, the uproar has died down and the wives have had to take it,
simply, imposing a few requirements on the part of their husbands, such as
specifying what time they clock out to go home and, themselves, setting an
alarm so as to be able to calculate the time it takes the good man to get from
the firehouse to his hearth and home.

Some time ago, the Congress acted in favour of a crusade that has been waged in
this country for just about fifty years, namely a new constitutional amendment.
You know that since this country has a written constitution and the job of the
Supreme Court is to interpret this famous eighteenth-century document in terms
of today's way of life and since it was granted from the very beginning that
the constitution wasn't perfect, and might, from time to time, require new
clauses, amendments, so the procedure is this. Any amendment proposed must be
taken up by the proper committees of Congress and, if it's reported out to the
floors of both Houses, it is then voted on. The usual procedure follows whereby
if Congress passes the amendment by a two-thirds majority in both houses, it
then goes to the fifty legislatures of the states. It comes into force
automatically when three-fourths of the legislatures approve it, that's to say,
today, the moment that the thirty-eighth state says 'so be it'. Well, the
pending constitutional amendment, which would be the tnwety-seventh in this
nation's history, is known officially as the Equal Rights Amendment. ERA. And,
popularly, as the Women's Rights Amendment. It's agreeably brief. It says,
'Equality of rights, under the law, shall not be denied or abridged by the
United States or by any state on account of sex'. You'd think, if only going
back to the little windfall that the widower from New Jersey has inherited,
you'd think that the fourteenth amendment would be enough since it was the one
that the Supreme Court acted on behalf of the man left with a child, and it
says that neither the United States nor any state shall deprive any person of
life, liberty or property without due process of law, nor deny to any persons
within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws. That amendment,
incidentally, was adopted in 1868. But women, and not only fervent Women's
Rightists have maintained, with a lot of justice, that for at least the century
since the fourteenth amendment was passed, the laws have not given women 'the
equal protection of the law'. And there ought to be a new amendment making
their equality more specific. 

Well, so far, thirty-four states have passed it. Only four more to go, but the
remaining sixteen states seem, at the moment, to be pretty adamant. And a few
states that have already passed it are talking about cancelling their adoption
once they've seen where it might lead them. For instance, states in the South
and the West which do a roaring business in quick and easy divorces have
realised that the equality amendment could be cited to give equal treatment to
a divorced husband, and give him the right to what has always been regarded in
this country as a woman's right – to alimony. And this stimulates votes from
some unlikely quarters. From the Male Liberationists, for instance, who love
the idea that aggrieved husbands might soon come to live off the fat of a
female fortune, as the women have been doing for so long off men, both rich and
poor. 

Down from the southern mountains the other day came the old battleaxe, former
Senator Sam Ervin, who conducted the first Senate Watergate hearings. He calls
the new amendment 'an evil measure'. You cannot, he says, put equal
responsibility on men for being 'mother' to children. His point is the existing
laws, especially the fourteenth, are enough and that if the laws about divorce,
child support, property rights, and so on, are transferred from the states to
the Congress, chaos, as Othello said, will come again. He faced an audience of
women wearing badges saying, 'Equal Rights – Yes', but also in the audience was
a large bunch of women wearing badges saying, 'Stop Equal Rights'. They cheered
him in unison, however, when he recalled the debates in Congress over the
amendment and sorrowfully confessed, 'I could have found more intelligence in
the most demented ward in any mental institution than I found in my time in the
United States Senate'.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP