Republican convention Kansas

As everybody knows, we're on the verge of Kansas City, where the Republicans
are about to choose the man who will – you'll hear the phrase in many, fancy
variations in the coming week – the man who will lead us all into the Promised
Land.

Until a week ago, the Republicans could offer only two impersonators of Moses,
both of them beardless, the Honourable Gerald Ford – the latest of the nine
what are called 'accidental' presidents, that's to say men who got there not by
popular acclaim, but by the accident of the incumbent president's sudden death
or assassination or, in Mr Ford's case, resignation. Ford is unique in having
inherited both the vice presidency and the presidency by the freakish accident
of two disgraced men in a row.

The alternative Republican choice is, or was, Ronald Reagan, whose detractors
love to think of in his 1930s and the Forties in that incarnation as a
second-string Wyatt Earp. But it ought to be remembered that, in those days
also, he was better known – and painfully known to the moguls who ran the movie
industry – as the president of the Screen Actors' Guild, a very tough
negotiator, a leftist liberal and an idolater of the man whom the movie moguls
regarded as a dictator, very little to the right, if at all, of Joseph Stalin –
the name, Franklin Delano Roosevelt.

Many of the trade unions' protections that now cushion the life of struggling
movie actors – and the vast majority are struggling to reach the top rung of
the ladder where the stars live and luxuriate – many of those benefits and
fringe benefits and unemployment relief and the like are due to the successful
battles that Reagan fought with the film companies. However, he's reformed
since then and hopped over from the left lane of the road to the outer lane of
the right. If in his old, or young, days, Roosevelt was the true saviour and
all his competitors for the Democratic nomination were wishy-washy
middle-of-the-roaders, today President Ford is to Reagan's flock a wishy-washy
middle-of-the-roader, suspect as a liberal, and not the man to move the
Republican Party to the place it belongs on the extreme fringe of the right.

Now the problem for Mr Reagan here is that the only Republicans who have ever
believed that's where the party belongs have always been defeated in Republican
conventions. For two, maybe three, generations now, the presidential battle has
always been between Democrats who were a shade left of the middle-of-the-road
and Republicans who were a shade to its right. Through all the upheavals of
history and ideology in the Western world and throughout the blasts of ridicule
that ideologues have unloosed on the middle-class and the
middle-of-the-roaders, the middle-of-the-road has been the place where an
overwhelming majority of American voters want to live. From Roosevelt on, from
the time over 40 years ago when the British and American political parties
began to use the continental lingo of 'left and right', the American voter at
the showdown, that's to say in the election, has always shrunk from either
extreme and not only from the extremes, but from any candidate who seemed to be
well over on the left. And it has to be said, as a simple matter of record,
that for the past 40 years, the Republicans have been working the wrong side of
the road.

Eisenhower was simply a tremendous oddity. He had no ideology at all – no
politics – until he was persuaded to run. He was simply a conquering hero on a
white horse, the man who, like George Washington, like Ulysses S. Grant, had
won the latest big war and the people rewarded him with the only gift in their
power, they made him president.

Well, I said at the beginning that, until last week, the Republicans could
offer us only two candidates to fight it out in Kansas City this week. But now,
a third Moses has popped up and he's not only beardless, he must be the first
man to run for president with a crew cut. His name is Senator James Buckley,
the junior senator from New York and the first in history to run for the Senate
in New York and win as a declared Conservative with a capital C. For however
conservative with a small c a Republican might be, he's usually sufficiently
sensitive to the instinct of the American voter not to declare himself a
Conservative with a capital C, which in America signifies that to you even the
Republicans are too liberal.

In other words, an American who belongs to the small, but powerful Conservative
Party – there is such a thing – would be well to the right of Mrs Thatcher or
Mr Heath. He could be somewhere between Mr Enoch Powell and the National
Front. 

Now Senator Buckley is a handsome, boyish-looking, extremely engaging and
high-minded New Englander, son of an Irish millionaire but schooled in the
right places and with an accent as invincibly upper-class as Roosevelt's.
Strangely this does not alienate him from immigrants or the sons and daughters
of immigrants with, what we used to call, 'broken' accents. On the contrary, he
has a very powerful appeal to Italian Americans, Polish Americans and what you
might call the old traditional immigrants who were once looked down on as
gormless newcomers and who, themselves, now tend to look down on the latest
newcomers, the Puerto Ricans especially. Maybe Senator Buckley's success, in
being elected senator from New York, has much to do with the peculiar ethnic
brew of New York City for there's never any question that a conservative
Republican can capture the farm vote in upstate New York. 

Well, Senator Buckley this week declared himself as a candidate by saying that
he wished to provide a symbolic candidacy that would ensure a second ballot
'and', I quote, 'help free up the convention to help the delegates make a free
and mature decision.' The senator's witty and literary brother, William F.
Buckley, must have been out to lunch when that tongue-twister was thought up.
What the senator meant – what I think he meant – was that Ronald Reagan has
every chance of going down once for all to Mr Ford on the first ballot and
since Senator Buckley is an ardent Reaganite he wants to introduce his own
name, drain off enough wobbling delegates on the first ballot and so diminish
the strength of a tidal wave that would swamp Reagan and carry Ford to the
nomination. 

It used to be called, to mix the metaphor, 'a blocking move' and it may be
frustrated before it gains any momentum because in order to have his name go
into nomination, in order to make it possible for delegates to vote for him at
all, Senator Buckley will have to get the promise of a majority of delegates in
five states, that's the new rule for being let in as a bona fide candidate. In
Kansas City, most people seemed to think that it was already too late to shake
five states away from their prior commitment to Ford or Reagan, though over the
weekend it is possible that if there are enough Reagan-committed states who
hear the thunderous approach of that tidal wave, they might, at the last
minute, release themselves or be released by Reagan to go for Buckley and thus
deny the nomination to Ford on the first ballot. 

Whenever a strong favourite fails on the first ballot, he's in, well, temporary
danger, especially if he didn't get as many sure votes as he'd counted on. The
delegates say, 'Well! Lookee here! His whole campaign has been a bluff!' or
'He's not the blockbuster we've been led to believe.' 

If Senator Buckley's plan works, then what most likely would happen is a few
more votes for Buckley on the second ballot, markedly fewer votes for Ford, and
Reagan holding firm. If Buckley's votes went up by only a handful on the second
ballot things would begin to look rosy for Reagan on the third. This stratagem
has worked dramatically in the past but it may collapse even as a possibility
over the weekend. Maybe we are playing with a fantasy, the sort of fantasy that
was so often a thrilling fact in the days when conventions were conventions,
the most exciting of American poker games. In the days, however, when
candidates did not travel the length and breadth of the land before the
convention and more or less tie up the nomination on the first or second
ballot. For we have to remember that we've had no convention of either party
that ran to five ballots since 1940. 

So what I've been doing, I'm afraid, is performing an exercise in wishful
thinking. For suppose Reagan did get the nomination! Or Ford! Or Buckley! Is
that going to change the result in November? Practically nobody thinks so. This
is, indeed, one presidential election that most good reporters wish they didn't
have to write about. 

I'm reminded of the time that an American film producer brought into the United
States three pictures he maintained were genuine Van Goghs. They were held at
Customs as forgeries or new works. The movie producer refused to pay the duty
so they brought in an international tribunal of famous curators, one from
London, one from Amsterdam, one from New York and they looked over the
paintings. What were they to say? Their problem was not to say if the works
were fake or genuine, their problem was to hold on to their reputations as
experts, so they... they got out a long report which was summed up in a phrase
that kept repeating, 'on the one hand, on the other hand' – well, finally the
FBI brought in its stroboscopic chemists. They photographed the pictures and
found under the overpainting the signature of Van Gogh. And the experts said,
'What did we tell you!' 

Since every sign suggests that this week the Republicans will be sweating it
out in Kansas City, temperature one hundred degrees Fahrenheit, in order to
pick the loser to Jimmy Carter and since we remember what happened where we
were equally certain in 1948, I'm looking around for an assistant who can
handle these reports so as to suggest that whatever happens in November, I told
you so all along. 

It's Carter then. Not a prayer for Ford or Reagan. And yet... and yet, I
remember, also, what happened in 1916. Chief Justice Hughes went to bed on
election night the winner. And then the California result came in late and
Woodrow Wilson had gone over the top. An AP reporter telephoned the chief
justice's house and a butler said, 'I'm afraid he cannot be disturbed, the
president is asleep.' And the reporter said, 'Better wake him and tell him he's
not president.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP