Anxiety over Soviet superpower

I suppose it was at least a dozen years ago, it was about 5 p.m. and all the
office workers were pouring out of the skyscrapers in midtown, down around
Grand Central Station and suddenly there appeared an oddity that's no oddity at
all in London – a boy, with a batch of newspapers under his arm, shouting out
something.

They've never had newspaper posters over here bill boarding the big feature or,
for the afternoon papers, the scariest item of the day's news. You know the
sort of thing, it's one of the American tourist's favourite London sights, the
posters scrawled in mid afternoon with nothing less than 'Europe Bomb Plot' or
'Film Star Sensation' which turns out when you read the fine print that Robert
Redford, or perhaps even only Sam Redford, has signed a new contract or grazed
his shin. 

Well, as I say, they haven't discovered such come-ons over here and please
don't tell them. About 15 years ago, a city father went to London and came back
and said, 'Say! They have advertising on the buses in London!' So, shortly
thereafter, the city council decided if it was tasteful in London, it was
tasteful in New York. So our chaste green buses sprouted splashy invitations to
smoke this and drink that and now, I regret to say, on the imitative of Boston,
another cultured city, advertising boards have started to be planted on the
roof of our taxis. 

Well, so it's ten, fifteen, years ago and we're minding our business and
crossing Park Avenue near Grand Central Station and the thousands are on their
way home. And this boy comes screaming out of the railway station, bawling
something that's very audible but nonsensical. It may have been that he'd just
coined a new verb. It was one that we soon learned. It was, 'Skyjack'. Some
people had seized control of an airplane flying to Miami and had forced the
pilot to go on to Havana, Cuba. Can you imagine such a thing? It was a real
shocker at the time, till the Havana detour became almost a part of the
airplane timetables and then other maniacs with television sets saw the rumpus
it had kicked up and it became a worldwide hazard. 

I know a little boy, well, is ten years old, anyway, who's bright and something
of a whiz at mathematics who'd assumed, till he was enlightened, that airports
had always X-rayed luggage or searched handbags. So quickly do we adjust to
outrage. 

That day near Grand Central Station is the one I always remember as the
historical date when anarchy moved out of the history books as an occasional
bizarre horror committed by Central Europeans with unpronounceable names and
became a regular tactic of the dispossessed and the demented. Yet, last Tuesday
afternoon, three masked men wearing ski masks and gloves came briskly out of a
stairwell in the basement of the New York Daily News building, drew guns on two
guards and made off with 20 bags of money. The name on the delivery truck – it
was just about to deliver the bags to a city bank – was Wells Fargo. It made
New York seem, more than ever, like a frontier town. In all the books I've read
about the hazards of the Pony Express and, after it, the Transcontinental
Railway, I don't believe I've ever read about such an impressive haul –
$851,000. 

Well, the New York Times had it tucked away at the bottom of a column. They
don't report the subway bombings in London any more. A friend of mine, just
back from England, went on and on the other night about sandbags and other
desperate protections. We've come to absorb outrage as a hazard of daily life.
It says something for our capacity to cope, though not much for the
civilisation we're having to cope with. 

I mentioned a week or two ago how the resignation of Mr Wilson had been given
most impressive reporting in our papers and ever since there's been – in
Washington, at any rate, where it counts – the most alert interest in who would
be the new prime minister. And though Mr Callaghan is now barely a name to most
Americans, his election caught the first spot on the nightly television news
round-ups. It's been stressed here and I hope it's true that, of all the
original candidates, Mr Callaghan is the one who is most concerned to
strengthen the alliance with the United States. Maybe that's why he's getting
such generous coverage. If so, it is not a sentimental gesture which it might
have been ten, a dozen years ago. 

There has been only very recently a sequence of events that, to Americans,
anyway, traces the symptoms of a new anxiety. More than anybody, Mr
Solzhenitsyn started it with his BBC broadcast which was not heard or reported
much here until Lord George Brown retired from the party. That made news. Then
the Solzhenitsyn interview was played here twice and the columnists took it up.
And, by osmosis, so did three of the presidential candidates who are stumping
the country. On the Democratic side, Mr Henry Jackson and on the Republican
side Mr Ronald Reagan and, at a seemingly reluctant distance, President Ford. 

Mr Ford's apparent distaste for getting into a brawl over the strength or
weakness of America's national defence is very understandable. He backed both
Johnson and Nixon all the way on Vietnam and he doesn’t want to start rattling
sabres just now and give the large Democratic and liberal vote the idea that
he's drumming up any other overseas adventures. He did beg the Congress for
money for Angola and he didn't get it and history, not us, will have to decide
whether Angola was only a squalid African incident or a fateful turn in our
joust with the Soviet Union. 

But neither the right-wing Democrat Mr Jackson, nor the right-wing Republican
Mr Reagan, has anything to lose by scaring the daylights out of us and
suggesting, as Mr Reagan does, that we have yielded the world role of
superpower to the Russians. Mr Reagan last week went farther. He quoted an old
admiral as testifying that the Secretary of State, Dr Kissinger, had privately
admitted that part of his job was to arrange to accommodate the United States
to the role of number two. This is surely nonsense. Nothing in Dr Kissinger's
background or his thoughtful prose suggests that he has jibbed before the
notion of Soviet superiority in naval power, in conventional arms, in nuclear
capability. Even if he believed it was so, it would be an impossible position
for an American secretary of state. 

Well, Mr Reagan's quote, or accusation, let off a storm. Dr Kissinger said he'd
never said any such thing and then a most awkward and lamentable thing
happened. President Ford's campaign manager, an old politician, Mr Rogers
Morton, told a private meeting that he was sure that the president had every
intention of firing Dr Kissinger once the election was over. This is just what
the Republican right wingers have been yearning to hear. And it may have been
Mr Morton's ploy for swinging the party's right wing over from Reagan to the
president. 

But, like practically everything confided in private by a public man these
days, it was leaked and printed in no time. And President Ford, reminding us of
his principle that he's a good footballer and a team player, said that Dr
Kissinger was a fine team man and could stay on as long as he wanted. Well, at
several thousand miles, this might sound like a very domestic squabble and a
storm in a teacup, but it turned out to be a very lucky break for Dr Kissinger.
And, perhaps, for all of us. 

It made him mad, mad enough to recall what he said to a meeting of 28 American
ambassadors gathered in London last December. A long summary of what he said
was 'obtained', in quotes, by the New York Times. Of course, that meeting had
been a private meeting but, for once, the leaking or the 'obtaining' of a
private talk is very much in the public interest. And by 'public', I mean the
public interest of every citizen of the United States AND Western Europe. 

After the spate of secret documents 'obtained' by some reporter or other and
spread out for all to see, I find it difficult, in this case, to believe that
Dr Kissinger regrets the five columns the New York Times gave the other day to
printing the 'Official State Department Summary' of Dr Kissinger's remarks in
London which, of course, the State Department neither published nor perhaps
ever sanctioned. 

Anyway, Dr Kissinger's position was elaborately expounded in London. It is, I
have no doubt, a summary of his deepest convictions and because they concern
nothing less than the survival of the West, they're very important news for all
of us. In the first sentence, he says, 'The problem of our age is how to manage
the emergence of the Soviet Union as a superpower at a time when Western Europe
is (as he puts it) the backbone of our foreign policy.' 

This is no 'hands across the sea' minuet. Dr Kissinger is thinking of the North
American Treaty Alliance and he's deeply concerned about it enough to fear and
to say 'that if Communist parties of whatever national variety came to power in
West European governments, the NATO alliance could not survive and the United
States would be isolated in its own values.' 

He does not attribute this parlous situation to anything that has gone wrong
with détente. What disturbs the United States is the evolution of left-wing
domestic policies in Europe. He sees no hope in truculence towards the Soviet
Union with everyone beating his chest – see Reagan and Jackson. The Soviet
Union, he says, must be drawn into relationships which are both concrete and
practical and a fratricidal conflict would be folly. 

But the United States is trying to resolve a paradox. We are asked to be tough
with Moscow but to have a dialogue with Communist parties in the West. He
doesn't believe it can be done. It doesn't matter whether or not these parties
follow the Moscow line, 'the impact of an Italian Communist party that seemed
to be governing effectively, would be devastating on France and on NATO, too.'
He believes, in a word, and it is surely not fanciful, that NATO cannot survive
with Communist partners. This, indeed, I'm saying now, would be like the
Britain of World War Two surviving while Austria, Italy and the Nazi-occupied
countries had full access to Britain's military plans, the plans, say, for
D-Day. We have been warned. 

If NATO goes, he's saying, then Britain and France would be on their own and
so, 3,000 miles away, would be the United States – an island in its own values.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP