Anne Armstrong appointed London envoy

Tucked away on page 47 of the New York Times the other day was a little
three-sentence squib which announced, as briefly as possible, that Mr Robert
Anderson, who's been the chief press spokesman for the press department, had
been nominated by President Ford as United States ambassador to Morocco.

For some odd reason that I cannot explain, maybe I got up yawning and started
riffling through the paper from back to front, this was the first item I
spotted, way off there, three-quarters way through the Times which had 76 pages
that day. My immediate response was a hackneyed one, though it's nonetheless
true for that, it was to the tune of 'how are the mighty fallen'. 

I was recalling the days when the nomination of any ambassador to any country,
even one as minute as Central Park, and I think there are two of them –
Lichtenstein is one, what's the other? – well, those announcements were always
big stuff, proclamations practically and always hit the front page. I suppose
this was done on the principle that here was another fine, simple, upstanding
American going off to try and defend American interests against those foxy
foreigners and maybe everybody should know his name. But, as I first suggested
years ago, right after the invention or installation of the hot line to Moscow
or perhaps it was after the first flight of a jet airplane, ambassadorships are
not what they were in majesty or political importance. 

I remember the first British ambassador to Washington I ever ran into. He was
in print in the papers and magazines here at least once a week. That was, of
course, 40 years ago and the British ambassador to Washington was a special
case. After all, Great Britain owned about a third of the planet and was
absolutely top dog and if the British ambassador telephoned the White House and
said he'd like to see the president, the president didn't exactly snap to
attention but he cleared the first half-hour he could on his calendar. And the
White House press corps would break away from their little huddles and
poker-playing sessions in the press room and sharpen their pencils and put on
their jackets to be ready for a call from the president's press secretary. 

In those days, it was front-page news if the British ambassador appeared before
the president and so much as hinted that His Majesty's Government took a dim
view of such and such. The man I have in mind was Sir Ronald Lindsay. Any
American who can read and run knew the name because, as I say, it was there all
the time and it spoke for Britain and the government of the day. Sir Ronald was
about six foot six inches and Americans who read Time, the magazine, got to
know him through Time's definitive double adjective – 'moose-tall' they called
him. He was a memorable type. 

But by now there must be Americans, old Americans, who'd have a rough time
recalling any other British ambassador since then except, possibly during the
Second War, the late Lord Halifax. I hasten to say that the obscurity of
ambassadors today is not due to any perceptible decline in the quality or
talent of the present-day ambassadors, it's due to what taxi drivers call
'progress'. That's to say, to the growth of useful gadgets, like the jet engine
and transoceanic telephones on which you can dial the prime minister or the
president in 15 seconds flat. 

In the days of 'moose-tall' Ronald Lindsay, no American president ever expected
to meet a British prime minister in his lifetime. For one thing, there was a
very old and firm tradition that sitting presidents do not leave the country.
Woodrow Wilson was the first to do it in 1919 but then that was for the
extraordinary purpose of saving mankind. Franklin Roosevelt broke it again on
several wartime jaunts which were never publicised till they were over for
security reasons, obviously. 

But, after him, once the jet was invented, the temptation of whizzing to Europe
in something over six hours was too much for the presidents who now had, always
revving up and gleaming on the runway, their very own private jet and between
that and the ease of the long-distance hot line, the ambassador's goose was
cooked. As everybody knows who's ever replaced a dishtowel with a dishwasher,
you never go back and the more amusing and ingenuous the gadgets people invent,
the more irresistibly we tend to use them for their own sakes. 

Today, if President Ford has a bright idea or a misgiving about something
happening to Americans in England or simply some common interest that 10
Downing Street is working on, he says to a twinkling console in front of him,
'Please get Mr Wilson!' And within a minute, it's, 'Hello, Mr President,' and
'How you be, Prime Minister?' – possibly by now it's 'Hello, chum!' and 'Hi
there fella!' Not much point in the British ambassador summoning his chauffeur
and his protocol and driving to the White House and being closeted in the
president’s office just to deliver a formal message from Her Majesty's
Government about something the president has been chuckling over the phone
about with his buddy, Her Majesty's first minister. 

Only a few years ago, the most merciless of Washington's journalistic snoopers
thought it worth a mention that the president – not anyone alive – who'd then
been in office a couple of years, thought it about time he had some ambassadors
in. He hadn't seen them since they formally presented their credentials, so
they were invited, one by one. And they were considerably miffed when they got
to the White House to find that they'd been ordered up in a job lot, so to
speak. The British ambassador was among them. There were about six or seven of
them and the president gave them tea and a cookie and was mighty proud and
pleased to see them all and, after 20 minutes or so, it was 'Goodbye' and
'Don't let it be so long again'. And then back to work. 

A year or two before that, an American ambassador who'd had the top job not
only in one European capital, but in three, told me that the only
qualifications required today for an American ambassador in the big jobs was a
lot of money and an iron stomach. 

Well, it's time we started rustling last Wednesday's New York Times backwards
again from the 47th page to the first and whoops! What do we find there? Just
like old times, a three-column spread and a three-column headline which says,
'Anne Armstrong, a Top Aide to Nixon Expected to be Named London Envoy'. The
Times always hedges against the possibility of a howler but there seem no doubt
at all that the well-placed administration official who tipped them off was
very highly placed indeed. The British embassy here, told that there'd already
appeared a story to this effect in England said, 'It's a bit awkward for us
since it's not been announced yet'. Well, by the time these words are crackling
into your set, maybe it will have been announced. The Senate, of course, in
accordance with the constitution’s precaution against presidents appointing
spies or brothers-in-law or other prejudiced types, the Senate has to confirm
Mrs Armstrong. 

She's not, by a long shot, the first woman ambassador. There have been, indeed,
14 others since the Second War. Six of them are, at this moment on duty
overseas, including the most memorable, the most adorable American moppet of
the century, Shirley Temple, now grown up and become the United States
ambassador to Ghana. 

I think it was Roosevelt who, before the Second World War, appointed the first
American woman ambassador ever, the daughter of William Jennings Bryan, Mrs
Ruth Bryan Rohde and that was quite something at the time. It didn't suggest
for a minute that the dawn of equal rights was breaking, only that Franklin D.
did seem to have a penchant for appointing women to high posts. His long-time
Secretary of Labour was the extraordinarily able Frances Perkins. I don't
believe there has since been a woman in such a high and responsible Cabinet
post. 

But Mrs Armstrong has seized the attention of the papers because we are still
in the wake of International Women's Year and any woman appointed to anything
outside a role in a Hollywood film is going to hog the spotlight for a little
while as proof that the female of the species is on her way as an equal,
independent, equally able, if somehow slightly different, member of the human
race. The Times's headline description of Mrs Armstrong as 'a top aide to
Nixon' is surely a little pejorative. She could just as well have been dubbed
'former Truman campaigner', for that's what she was as a young girl – oops,
woman, sorry! – just out of Vassar in 1948 and an eager beaver for 'Give 'em
hell, Harry!'. 

Mrs Armstrong is a Creole, a descendant, that is, of one of the old New Orleans
French or Spanish families. Her father was a coffee importer named Armand
Legendre and she went to school in Virginia and she was bright from the start,
bright and managing, in a nice way. She was president of the student body. She
got a job as an assistant editor on Harpers, the magazine, and maybe she could
have gone soaring into the rarefied atmosphere along with Dorothy Thompson,
Anne O'Hare McCormick and the other top women journalists. 

But one weekend she went to visit an old friend down in Texas on the huge King
Ranch, which is about the size of Wales. A neighbouring rancher, who had a mere
18 square miles of land, was a fellow named Armstrong and Mademoiselle Legendre
became Mrs Armstrong. After the Truman caper, she became a Republican and has
been in politics for 23 years since the first Eisenhower campaign. She's been a
national committee woman of the Republicans, a delegate to two conventions and
the chairman of the Republican Party. She went to the White House in 1972 and
has been an adviser to both Nixon and Ford on Spanish Americans in the country,
on women and has done a lot of work on food and famine and on American foreign
policy. 

All in all, I'd say that she's strikingly better qualified as an American
ambassador than most political appointees. Since she's going to London, it's
also a very lucky thing that the Armstrongs are very wealthy. Her confirmation
goes, I should think, without saying. A senator who voted against her might
once have been thought un-chivalrous but in the liberated air of today, he'd be
branded by every woman in his state as an MCP – a Male Chauvinist Pig. 

Maybe some swine will raise a dissenting voice. There is the tiny loophole that
Mrs Armstrong is, after all, white. If she were a black woman, there's not one
senator in the hundred of them who would dare say her 'nay'.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP