Spring heatwave, 1976

A week ago, my wife called up the man who stores furs and winter coats and such
and said, 'Hold everything!' We'd had an up and down February and March, mostly
up, during which Washington's famous cherry blossom trees had flowered five
weeks before their usual appearance for photographing by the Easter tourists.
And then a week ago, it was suddenly in the 20s, just like the sometimes
endless days of February and March when you walk across town into the knifing
wind and have to touch your ears to see if you still have them.

And now, here I am doing this letter with a pair of slacks on and no shirt,
requiring only a necklace of Indian beads to look like a hippy in Southern
Arizona writing home to mum to say it's time to go out and squeeze a little
cactus juice. 

Naturally in April we haven't yet had the air-conditioners brought out of
winter storage, so here I am with the windows open – a novelty that never
happens in either winter or summer – and the shades drawn and it's 96 degrees.
And from time to time a naked female taps around the house on the way between
the bed-making and the dishwasher. It's my wife, I believe. 

So, what's happening in New York and Washington? Well, it's the heat, that's
what. And the willingness of people to slump and complain about nothing but
their personal discomfort reminds me of the old days in Washington, before the
Second War when Congress lit out for home and the grass roots before the blast
of the long summer heat came on. America was a world power even then. And I
sometimes wonder whether America didn't have a more settled, certainly
understandable, foreign policy then when the Senate went home for three months
and hadn't the energy to sit in silent, air-conditioned committee rooms and
browse over the change in China's leadership and brood over how the United
States should react, if the Italian Christian Democrats and the Communists form
a coalition government. 

There has been one consequence of the fall of Richard Nixon which very few
people, I'm sure, anticipated. It's the determination of the Congress to
dispute American foreign policy with the two people who normally don't exactly
run it, but initiate it and guide it, with, of course, as the constitution
prescribes, the advice and consent of the Senate, namely the president and the
Secretary of State. Even the liberals and the left and the far left who gloated
over the unmasking of the villain Nixon and who are now proceeding to probe
into all the private, as well as the public, symptoms of that ghastly ordeal,
even they did not expect a radical change in the conduct of American foreign
policy. Mr Nixon's worst enemies grudgingly allowed that that was the one
policy in which he'd made striking gains. His continuing close contact with the
Russians, which has now cooled under Mr Ford, and his – Nixon's – opening up
friendly relations with China. 

I ought to remind you that the people who deplored these moves were not Mr
Nixon's traditional enemies, but his former supporters on the right. The
conservative wing of the Republican Party saw, and sees, no good coming out of
any buddying-up to communists, whether of the European, African or Asian
variety. But, on the whole the most moral editorials on the chicanery of
Watergate, and Mr Nixon's steady lying to the Congress and the people, even in
those editorials they gave him high marks for his initiatives in foreign
policy. 

However, Watergate and the Nixon debacle, once over, spread their stigma over
the whole executive branch. The revelations about the CIA's poking into the
lives of Americans at home heightened the bad smell. And the result has been
that Congress is suspicious of the presidency and its staff on all counts. 

There's just been a series of interviews with congressmen and it comes out they
believe that for 25 years, from the end of the Second War until 1970, Congress
accepted with too much 'docility', was the word they use, the presidential
conduct of foreign policy and they mean to change it. This is not only an
impression, a hunch, it's a judgement made by a score of thoughtful congressmen
who seek to explain some drastic changes that have crept in, all of which
reflect the new determination of Congress to have an equal, if not decisive,
say in the working-out of foreign policy. Even the house is getting into the
act, though foreign policy is not normally the business of the House of
Representatives, except when it comes to voting money bills. 

Also, congressional committees, for some time now, have been hiring more and
more foreign policy experts who are qualified to argue with the presidential
experts. Perhaps the most striking, if not alarming, sign is the willingness of
members’ congressional committees, after they've held secret meetings to look
into this or that episode of foreign policy, their willingness to leak to the
press items discussed in secret and sometimes even the whole verbatim report of
the secret sessions. There's a case pending now which involves a newsman who
got access to the Senate's secret report on the CIA and he published it. 

Now this trend, this new alertness, of Congress to the conduct of foreign
policy is what is making life very difficult for the president and his
Secretary of State and, more than anything else, may sooner, I should guess,
than later, break Dr Kissinger. A few people you talk to about his policies can
mobilise chapter and verse of his actions in order to condemn him. There's just
a vague, powerful feeling abroad that a man who's so close to Nixon, a man who
keeps his counsel with the president – Nixon or Ford – (as he is by his oath
bound to do) is not to be trusted. And I believe this feeling will pass over to
any other Secretary of State and make the practice of secret diplomacy an
almost impossible job for some time to come. 

Well, you see I'm trying to be serious and responsible talking about knotty
things while we're all dripping in four days and nights of the all-time record
heat for April, for this part of the country anyway. 

Easter Sunday was an oddity – greatly changed in its civilian appearance from
even a decade ago. One of the quaint things about what they used to call
'little old New York’ was the way upper middle-class people got themselves
rigged out on Easter Sunday, with cutaways and top hats and wing collars, not
necessarily to go to church, but just to join in the conspicuous stroll along
Fifth Avenue afterwards. Well, last Sunday, a man in a cutaway and a wing
collar would have been surrounded and jeered at as some sort of circus freak.
The weather, of course, assisted the revolution in dress. There was hardly a
jacket in sight. Only very old gentlemen, who lived for years in New York when
air-conditioning was unheard of, went out in suits. For the rest, it looked
like the Coney Island crowd lifted en masse and deposited on Fifth Avenue, down
to bikinis, except in and around St Patrick's Cathedral. For once, the
requirement that women in Catholic churches shall have their heads and arms
covered if only by a token wisp of silk or cotton net, was forgotten. 

Up at the Episcopal Cathedral, which is close by the river, the Hudson River,
there was a blockbuster of a sermon that, more than the weather, made people
very hot under the collar. This church, by the way, is the unfinished cathedral
of St John the Divine. They started building it in 1892 and we are promised
that, when it's finished, it will be the largest Gothic cathedral in the world.
Maybe so, maybe not. After all, they've only been at it 88 years. Well, the
Episcopal bishop of New York, Paul Moore, plainly felt the time had come to
dispense with the dollops of Irving Berlin molasses which are usually ladled
out from the pulpits at Easter time. He began almost with a sneer at the
traditional Easter sentiment. 'This is going to be', he said, 'a funny kind of
Easter sermon with no flowers, no bunny rabbits, no 'sunrise' sermon.' 

He went at once into his scalding theme which could well have been inspired by
a depressing study put out, last week, by the United States Census Bureau. It
is that in the five years between 1970 and 1975, the white population of New
York City has declined by more than 600,000. The borough of the Bronx is the
first borough now to have an actual majority of blacks and Puerto Ricans. Yet,
the black population has increased by only 29,000 which means that more blacks
too are now leaving than are entering the city. But this enormous white exodus
will surely be accelerated by the decision of many big industries to leave the
city. It will accelerate or it will leave more and more blacks and Puerto
Ricans shored up in unemployment. 

These figures provided Bishop Moore's stark text. 'The businesses that are
departing', he said, 'are rats leaving the sinking ship and the suburbs they
are going to will become soulless, urban wastelands where social
irresponsibility also slinks through the night. And New York City,' he said,
'is plunging down the Galilean slope.' 

Without feeling quite so hopeless, a lot of New Yorkers think back with a
strange yearning for the days when gangsters were taking a king's ransom from
the citizens of this town by way of levying protection on our vegetables, our
laundry, liquor, everything that came onto this island by truck over the
bridges or through the tunnels. And then appeared the man we think of with such
longing, Fiorello LaGuardia, the cocky little whirlwind of a mayor who was as
tough as the Tammany bosses he skinned, a brilliant administrator but wily,
industrious and totally incorruptible. 

I suppose it's a melancholy sign of the times that last week the School Board
of a Harlem school, named in LaGuardia's honour voted to change its name to the
Pedro Albizu Campos School. Pedro Albizu Campos founded the Puerto Rican
Nationalist Party whose members tried to assassinate President Truman in 1950.
And they did shoot five congressmen in the House four years later. The school
board, its chairman said rather limply, felt it should be an Hispanic name. 

Well, no time to sit and fume over such things. I must be off and to the
airport, to LaGuardia Airport or whatever they've decided to rename it by the
time I get there. How about the Sirhan Sirhan Airport?

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP