Carter vetoes defence bill

In the present blackout of New York's newspapers, there's no problem about
keeping up with the news. You just don't pretend to. Of course eager citizens
can drive themselves into delirium – or stupor – by watching the many more
hours of coverage that the television networks are giving while the strike's
on. And I suppose there are conscientious voters who make a point of it.

But strangely, the strike has not increased television watching in these parts,
it has diminished it. People who normally drop in on me around barley wine time
and fret about the SALT talks or the Camp David summit or who's thinking of
running for president, such well-briefed types now sink quietly into an easy
chair, no knitting on their brow, and wonder how your summer's going or the
golf swing or have you heard any good stories lately? 

The newspapers' strike is about how many old employees, like linotype
operators, shall be laid off now that the papers have gone to what they call
'cold' type and don't need linotype operators any more. It's a real throwback
to the machine-smashing days of Ned Ludd. In this situation several small
papers have sprung up using workers at other papers not on strike from out of
town and plucking willing reporters from the struck papers. I think at the
moment we have three going. In the last strike, which lasted four months in
1962-63, we had six maverick newspapers that cantered around for a time and
died. 

But this time, since the national wire services, the Associated Press, the
United Press are honouring the strike, the news coverage tends to be pretty
snippety. Still, some things do percolate through. You have to be blind and
deaf not to have heard about the horror of the burnt-out cinema in Iran, the
gunshots in Grosvenor Square, the reprisal raids in Lebanon of Israeli fighter
jets. In short, the – by now – obscene monotone of terrorism about which none
of us, governments or individuals, seems to know what to do. 

It's also difficult not to hear something about the President of the United
States whose name is Jimmy Carter because he's been very busy this summer
trying to polish up his tarnished image, dashing from county fairs to the navy
academy and on back home to Plains, Georgia to be seen on television playing
softball – that is rounders – with his brother Billy, just to reinforce our
faith in the honest boy from small-town Georgia that we voted for. 

Which reminds me that towards the end of the second year of any president's
term of office, jokes about him begin to roam around and take hold and I
believe do more than political scientists will ever allow to plant a comic or
sinister or otherwise distorted stereotype at the back of the voters' minds,
like powerful cartoons. It's odd by the way, isn't it, that historians writing
about political campaigns 30, 40, a hundred years ago, regard it almost as a
duty to reprint telling newspaper cartoons of the period. 

By now, everybody grants the enormous force in the late summer of 1939 of a
cartoon, by David Low, published when even ardent leftists were reeling under
the shock of the Nazi-Soviet Pact. Low called this 'the bitterest cartoon of my
life'. It was captioned 'Rendezvous' and showed Hitler and Stalin bowing
genially to each other in the smoking ruins of Poland. Hitler's saying, 'The
scum of the earth, I believe? ‘and Stalin is saying, 'The bloody assassin of
the workers, I presume?'. 

And yet I have never heard a statistician or a political analyst examining the
results of an election held yesterday even mention the probable force of some
brilliant cartoon or some nationally popular joke, which is why I ought to
retell one that's going the rounds and which even disillusioned Democrats are
telling, though it may cost them dear in the next presidential election. 

It's about a Democratic politician who's just been to a meeting of county
chairmen or whoever, the main item on the agenda being what to do about the
sinking popularity of Jimmy Carter. It was a depressing get together as you can
imagine and, when it was over, the man got in a cab and tapped the nearest
available citizen, namely the cabby, for his opinion. 'What do you think of
Carter?' asked the man. 'Carter?' the cabby came back, 'Why, I think he's
wonderful. Great. Yes sir, he's my kinda guy!' 'You mean,' said the delighted
passenger, 'you mean you don't think he's done anything wrong?' 'No sir!' said
the cabby, 'Not put a foot wrong but I tell you, that dopey brother of his in
the White House is doing everything wrong!' 

Well, last week, Mr Carter's old fans and many of his disillusioned supporters
perked up a little and began to mutter far and wide that he was at last showing
some 'guts', is the usual word. This was about the president's veto of a
defence bill passed by Congress. There are two stages to the passage of any
money bill, what's called an authorisation bill which authorises the president
to spend a lump sum and also says, roughly, how much is to be spent on
different parts of it. When that bill's passed, the Senate and the House then
get down to the effective bill which is called an appropriations bill and this
specifies exactly what is to be spent on what. Of course the two Houses don't
always agree and the regular procedure is for the House to work out its bill,
then the Senate looks it over, makes changes, and then there's a joint
conference of two committees, one from each House. And they hammer out a final
bill in committee and that's the one that goes to the floor, first of the
House, then of the Senate for a vote. 

In all money bills, the House has the keener concern and the greater authority
because members of the House, congressmen, are elected for two years only
against the senators' six and their interests are much more topical and local.
If your constituency is begging for a new trade mart building or a big bridge
or a new stretch of highway, and you don't manage to pry the money out of your
fellow congressmen, you can look forward to losing the next election. So though
the House of Representatives is called the Lower House, it's 'upper' when it
comes to shelling out money for anything. The House controls the purse
strings. 

Now ever since Mr Carter got in and the proper committees – military affairs
committee, appropriations committee, so on – started to draft a defence budget
of their own, after getting the president's estimate of his defence bill, the
House has been wedded to one big project more than another. It was not in the
president’s bill, but it soon appeared in the House drafts. It is a
nuclear-powered aircraft carrier and it will cost to build $2 billion. 

More accurately, this bill is called a weapons authorisation bill. It is to
authorise the money to be spent on new weapons of war and more of the same. The
total estimate of the bill is $36 billion. The president vetoed it.
Incidentally, a military spending bill is the only money bill the Constitution
allows him to veto. Now Mr Carter, he wasn't objecting to the total sum. He'd
estimated much the same as the cost of his own bill. What he did object to was
the $2 billion nuclear aircraft carrier. Its supporters in the House were many
and their public point was that this new carrier would be an impressive symbol
of American power and would give the navy the advantage of a mobile, flexible
launching pad of enormous range and power. 

Mr Carter's point was that those $2 billion would deprive us of money better
spent on conventional weapons, especially on the European front line of the
North American Treaty alliance. What neither the House nor the president said
outright was, on the House's side, 'Listen! I have promised idle shipyards in
my constituency that they will be soon humming again'. And, on the president’s
side, 'A huge, new aircraft carrier, nuclear-powered or not, is likely to be a
sitting duck for any Russian missile directed at it'. In other words, the
president might have said, 'the day of the aircraft carrier is over'. 

Still, the opposition in the House is going to be tough and continuing. Two
billion dollars is only the beginning. The carrier would require a new fleet of
advanced fighter planes and a permanent escort of cruisers and destroyers. The
complete job, the so-called 'carrier task force' will cost in all more than $6
billion, which would be spread around many thousands of workers in many naval
districts around the country. 

So, the navy is bitter. The army naturally backs the president. 

It all, inevitably, recalls the peppery, famous figure of General Billy
Mitchell, an aviator in the First World War who, when it was over, crusaded for
an air force independent of the army and navy. And he was so sure about the
coming superiority of air power that he managed to put on two demonstrations in
the early 1920s whereby the navy offered him, as targets, captured German ships
and obsolete American battleships. 

In the result, he staged an air attack which sank three battleships and a
destroyer and a cruiser. 'You see?' he said. His superiors were dazed but
unconvinced, whereupon Mitchell appealed to the public through articles and
blazing interviews. And he got so out of hand, that he was court-martialled for
defiance of his superiors, sentenced to a five-year suspension but resigned
instead. 

Well, the great Billy Mitchell furore died down and by 1939 we were all
restored to our conviction that the battleship was the mightiest of seagoing
weapons. In 1941 the Japanese bombed and sank one battleship and severely
damaged seven others – Pearl Harbor. And two months later, the Japanese bombed
and sank the Prince of Wales and the Repulse off Singapore. Twenty years after
Billy Mitchell's audacious demonstration, we, too, decided that the day of the
battleship was over. 

In 1946, the United States Congress authorised, with no dissenters, a
posthumous Medal of Honor for General Billy Mitchell.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP