Tehran hostage crisis

I ought to say right away that I am not talking from the bottom of a barrel.
I'm simply the victim of what a friend of mine calls, 'the most underrated of
all human afflictions', the common cold.

A little less than four year ago, I saw a bare-headed American man standing on
a street corner in a small town offering his hand very shyly to any passer-by
who would take it. He was slim, smallish, had pepper-and-salt bushy hair and a
diffident manner. This man was a sort of evangelist and he was pleading for a
hearing. He was also out of a job. He was always on a street corner somewhere
and, in the evenings, since he couldn't drum up a big, excited audience to
listen to him, he eagerly accepted invitations to speak to small town women's
clubs, boy scouts' troops and the YMCA. 

Well, he stayed at it and in the end he got the job he wanted – the presidency
of the United States. 

Some time in the, I think, the spring of 1976, a national news magazine got out
a rundown, a series of profiles of the men running for president who had either
an inside or an outside chance of making it. Gerald Ford, as the incumbent, of
course led the list. Ronald Reagan was high up there and the big, Democratic
threat was young Pat Jerry Brown of California. But there were other impressive
names that you will readily, perhaps, recall – Morris Udall, Bob Dole of
Kansas, remember? And, of course, such giants as Senator Percy and good, old
Lloyd Bentsen. 

If you feel you've lost me at this point, so would 99 Americans in a hundred
who could no more list those eight main candidates than they could recall Harry
Truman's, or for that matter any other president's, former secretary of the
treasury. Ex-secretaries of the treasury are probably the most quickly
forgotten men in American history. 

Well, that news magazine's roster of biographies of probable, or possible,
presidents did not contain the name of the man on the street corner. For the
longest time, newspapers and TV networks assigned only their greenest cub
reporters to forlorn little Jimmy Carter. The crack reporters followed the big
shots, Ford and Udall and Bentsen and co. So, look what happened. 

I have a memory of Jimmy Carter – I wasn't sure at the time whether he was
Jimmy or Johnny Carter – talking to about a score of ladies at a meeting in
some small Southern town. I wish I had this picture permanently over my desk
because it's a picture that has never faded and it comes sharply to life
whenever I hear anybody calling off, as people are doing with increasing
dogmatism, the name of the candidate who's going to make it and the ones who
are positively not. 

Well, I recall it now as a cautionary note before I talk about two other
candidates who have joined the lists, one or the other of whom you may have to
get to recognise as the Republican presidential candidate. Or not. Senator
Howard Baker is a dapper, handsome – I almost said midget but if he makes it, I
imagine that could amount to slander – he is then a small, compact man from
Tennessee. His family's been in politics for three generations. He married the
daughter of the late Senator Dirksen, an orator who was the supreme basso
profundo of the Senate, a man who could teach him any tricks. Baker is now the
minority leader in the Senate, that is to say the Republicans' leader there.
He's dead against the SALT II treaty and if it were rejected, he would carry
the blame, or the credit, more than anybody. 

Otherwise Baker has been busy making himself agreeable, if not irresistible, to
his colleagues in Congress. In his so far only appearance on television, when
he declared his candidacy, all that I, and no doubt millions of others, can
remember is that he swore twice that if he was the Republican nominee and found
himself up against Senator Kennedy, he would make a point of never mentioning
Chappaquiddick. 

Ronald Reagan, the former governor of California and rated by unprejudiced
onlookers as a very good one, the former B-movie star is by now an old and
familiar story. This is his third go. He attracts passionate devotion,
especially from Western conservatives, from yearners after old American values
and he attracts ridicule from all liberals. This is the most interesting thing
about him to me because few liberals seem to recall his battling days, his
warrior's devotion to Roosevelt and the New Deal and the really impressive,
pioneer work he did in organising the Screen Actors Union and giving them a say
in their contracts and conditions of work. He was to the whole profession of
movie acting what old John L. Lewis was to the miners. 

In those fighting times, the Democratic party was not quite left or liberal
enough for Reagan. He formed a powerful, national, not a party so much as a
college of liberal cardinals who handed down the true liberal doctrine and put
out score cards after every session of Congress giving every congressman and
every senator a percentage mark for his or her adherence to, or lapse from, the
liberal faith. It's, at the very least, fascinating to recall that this party,
college, board of examiners or whatever you want to call it, the ADA –
Americans for Democratic Action – had two co-founders, Ronald Reagan and John
Kenneth Galbraith. 

Well, Reagan appears to have gone half circle. The more he got into state
politics and then national politics, most of all when he became governor of
California, he found that the old Roosevelt liberal doctrine, especially the
recipe for soaking the rich and spending and spending public money for the
public good, the result of this appeared to have landed California with a
permanent deficit while thousands and thousands of Americans poured into the
state, from near and far, having heard about California's willingness to put
you on welfare within a week or two of your arrival in the state. 

Well, Reagan put a stop to that. A reformed liberal is almost as interesting as
a conservative who grows radical with old age and in his first two tries for
the presidency, Reagan orated with all the bitter fervour of an idealist who's
been burned in the fires of actual government. He was, incidentally, easily the
best orator of the past two campaigns. He's one of the very few American
politicians who talks straight, gutsy English and is at his best on his feet
fielding impromptu questions. 

But something has happened to him. His first campaign speech this time, the
television exposure cost him about $400,000, must have puzzled or disappointed
his hot disciples for he has cooled considerably. His advisers have told him
what all fiery candidates are told sooner or later, that no candidate
positively on the right or positively on the left ever gets to be president.
However bubbly the early rhetoric of a campaign, however flaming the speeches,
they simmer and cool as the conventions draw near. 

The American people, this century anyway, have an absolutely dependable
distrust of rightists and leftists, however bracing or downright they might be
in their early campaigns. So – and it's happening earlier than usual this time
– the candidates begin to move from one extreme or the other towards the
centre. Reagan now seems to be trying to shake or expunge the old image of
himself as Wyatt Earp or Gary Cooper returned to hand out punishment to the bad
guys and justice and mercy to all widows. 

On the positive side, he says that he is most worried about three things which
are certainly the three things that most worry America's military allies and
trading partners. First, the deterioration of American military strength,
second, the declining productivity of American workers and third, the declining
reputation of the dollar as a stable measure of value. 

The big mark against Reagan, as he hates to be reminded, is his age. Now in his
69th year, he would be not only the oldest man who'd ever gone into the White
House, he'd be, going in, almost as old as the oldest president who ever left
it. Gerald Ford, standing patiently back there on the sidelines, or should I
say the fairways of Palm Springs, once said that Reagan was the only man he'd
ever known who, as he got older, grew naturally orange hair and these gibes and
cracks at Reagan's furiously glossy appearance and bracing step, will not die
down, but if he can withstand the murderous ordeal of a campaign, maybe age
will not seem to wither him. 

He has two main problems ahead of him. The new, downright, forceful
conservative he has to beat is Senator Connally of Texas. The other problem
would follow on the first – the possibility of a stand-off in the Republican
convention between Reagan and Connally and, in that case, it now appears that
the man who would move in and inherit the centre would be none other than the
California amateur golfer and ex-president, Gerald Ford. 

Now before Iran seized the American hostages, a reliable poll showed that the
man who was closest to the centre and the most acceptable to most Americans was
not Jimmy Carter but Gerald Ford and that, today, Gerald Ford could beat Jimmy
Carter. Or rather, yesterday – not now. Since President Carter has refused to
turn in the Shah, since he froze Iran’s official deposits in American banks and
their overseas branches, not one presidential candidate has abused him. They
all – Kennedy, Baker, Connally, Bush, Reagan – have praised his name. Nobody
has suggested sending in the marines, an impossible, old-time bit of gunboat
diplomacy which, after all, President Eisenhower did in Lebanon as late as 20
years ago. 

But faced with the enormous complexity of the Iranian situation, stumped by the
insoluble problem of terrorism – that is, the success of violence – all the
presidential hopefuls have retreated into murmuring that Jimmy Carter is
behaving like a statesman and, what's worse, a leader. Not to be too cynical
about the political consequences, it could be the best thing that's happened to
President Carter since the Arab/Israeli peace treaty.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP