New York looting

I had in mind to talk about the packing of the New York City jails with those
three to four thousand looters, the ones who were caught and what might come
out of the desperate slowness of the law in America where picking a jury can
take as long as three weeks. However, we'll let that wait. Call this, if you
like, a letter about America, since it's being done from a distant place, from
London, seeing America as others see her.

By the way, it occurs to me that sooner or later Women's Lib may have something
to say about the ancient, but quaint, custom of making all countries feminine,
whether they're placid countries like, say, Finland or ferocious countries like
Uganda or Ethiopia. And that reminds me of a similar custom that's always
followed by the United States Weather Bureau. I suspect it's a custom that's
going to be changed very soon, maybe a month or so from now, which is the
beginning of the hurricane season along the North Atlantic seaboard. 

September 1938 was the first time in nearly a century that a massive hurricane,
coming up from the Caribbean as usual but staying on a northern course, which
is not usual, dealt a lethal blow: 635 people dead, to the coastline of New
Jersey, Long Island and all of New England. 

And since then there have been many hurricanes that threatened or even swiped
us in the north and it's only since then that we've become familiar with the
custom of identifying hurricanes by female names. The Weather Bureau starts
each year at the beginning of the alphabet so that the first hurricane warning
goes about one called, say, Alice and after her, Beatrice, and then Catherine,
and so on. This has been going on, even in my memory, so long that the bureau
begins to get hard pressed, and one year they're having to reach for Alma,
Bathsheba and Coreen and pretty soon now they may be reduced to Aphasia,
Boadicea and Celeste. In fact I think we've had a Celeste. 

Anyway, a few years ago there were faint but facetious protests in the press,
but so far Women's Lib has been silent about the plain inequity of assuming
that one of the most terrifying natural disasters is always a female. I'm
bracing myself against the day when the Equal Rights Amendment to the
constitution is passed, which can't be more than three or four years away, and
the first hurricane of the season is called Alistair. 

At this point, some of you may wonder at the workings of the human mind. Of my
mind, anyway. But I have a growing sense that I'm going somewhere, starting
from that preoccupation, when I started to talk, with the darker side of the
New York blackout. I mean the wild, looting and plundering of shops and stores
in Harlem, Brooklyn and the Bronx. 

What has this got to do with hurricanes? Well, many commentators in the United
States have been sufficiently disturbed by the sudden spurt of freewheeling
violence in black slums to wonder if we weren't in danger of another eruption
of city violence such as the one that shook America in the late 1960s, most of
all in the terrible black year of 1968. 

That was the year when Martin Luther King was shot, when a week later Baltimore
and Washington blew up and then Bobby Kennedy was killed and Detroit went wild.
Then we had the Republican Convention in Miami which looked more like a
besieged city, fortified and ringed as it was by police with guns. And after
that came the obscenity of the Democratic Convention with police and protestors
gone berserk in the streets. 

When it was all over and 1969 came in, and then 1970, people began to say,
sociologists especially, they began to go back in history and come up with the
reassuring news that these periods of city violence were epidemics and did not
usher in a revolution, but were more like boils on the body politic which burst
and pretty soon the body returned to normal. 

I remember saying at the time that I hungered and prayed that they were correct
but that since nothing radical had been done to cure the causes of the
outbursts or boils – the blacks were still packed in the worst parts of town –
the Supreme Court 1954 integration decision had given them new spirit and
since, nevertheless, unemployment among the blacks was still three or four
times that of the whites, I feared that the general calm after the general
blow-up was not the end of the violence but only the eye of the hurricane. 

It's one of those phrases we all use without, I think, giving it too much
literal thought. Like saying that somebody is a stubborn as a mule, a phrase
which existed, for me, only in the dictionary until the dreadful day when I
went down the Grand Canyon on a mule and learned that the man, the person, who
coined it spoke nothing but the awful truth. If a mule, staggering firmly down
the narrow path that winds sometimes it seems almost vertically down to the
canyon floor a mile below it, if that mule sees a tasty bit of flora sprouting
from the edge of the precipice, nothing you do with your reins or your heels or
your voice is going to stop him going over to take a nibble. 

Well, let me tell you about the eye of the hurricane. In 19... I think it was,
yes... 54, we were hit directly by a hurricane called Carol, and for an hour or
two I was convinced, cringing there in the roar of it in the living room of our
house, high on a bluff, overlooking a bay at the end of Long Island, I was
convinced that pretty soon the house itself was going to be airborne. There's
no suspense in that sentence because plainly I'm here. But for an awful time I
was sure that it was, as the cricketers' say, 'close of play'. 

We were six in the house – my wife and I and our daughter, then aged five. An
old college friend, a doctor and his wife visiting us with their daughter, also
aged five. A hurricane warning had gone out the night before but there's
generally no need to get excited until they shift the word 'warning' to the
word 'alert'. Anyway, we... we went to bed, all was calm and quiet, not a leaf
stirring which, if we'd only read the books more carefully we should have
known, is the normal prelude to a hurricane. It doesn't seem to build up at
all. We had another one the following week by daylight and by then knew enough
to pack up and get out, when the wind died and the leaves seemed frozen and the
sky turned a leaden and quite motionless grey. Back to Carol. 

We went to bed and by about four in the morning there was such a hullabaloo
going on outside that none of us, not even the children, could sleep. A
strange, awful sound. Not... not a big wind such as Dickens described, like a
maniac on the loose, sometimes screaming, sometimes sighing, sometimes moaning,
but an absolutely steady, toneless roar, like no sound I've ever heard. The
trees were tossing around like paper fans and, from time to time, some of them
cracked and fell over or suddenly came up by their roots and then keeled over
as they do when a logging team is at work. 

All the noise and the wind was on the south-east side of the house, the doors
were straining at their jambs, a big plate-glass window bent and bulged, and we
collected mattresses and such to cushion the splinters if the thing burst
which, subsequently, it did. So this went on until we could see nothing
outside, neither the bay, nor the terrace, nor the trees. Nothing even six foot
away, only an encircling, great, grey, roaring gloom, and the house from time
to time shivering and creaking, but standing still. 

By about eight o'clock, this grey pall lightened and the roar went down to a
normal high wind and then to boisterous puffs, and we began to see things, and
then the sky broke up and soon the sun came blazing out of high, scudding
cumulus clouds. An hour later, it was all over. Still a blustering high wind. 

We told the doctor that there was a family in a house almost at sea level at
the end of the point where our little peninsula drops sharply from its high
bluff into the bay. And it occurred to the doctor that if they had not kept one
crack of a window, if they had locked themselves in tight, as you'd tend to do
in a normal storm, they would be more subject, down below there, to the
whirling pressure of the storm. It moves like a huge doughnut, the ones with a
hole in the middle, spinning counter-clockwise. So he and I went out and strode
against the quite bearable wind and went down to the house to see that nobody
was hurt. 

We found a pretty scared family and, sure enough, all their windows had been
locked and had exploded. But no bones broken and no cuts, no blood, just a
forlorn family in the middle of the living room, looking fairly bloodless. They
were grateful to be visited and all was well and, anyway, it was all over. So,
on what was now a glorious, windy day, the doctor and I climbed back the
quarter-mile or so up the dunes to our house. 

We just made it. For the last 50 yards we had to go on hands and knees to stay
from being blown over. The sun had gone in, the sky had darkened over and gone
to lead again and we were just safely inside when the whole thing started up
again, in a light that can only be described in Milton's phrase, as 'darkness
visible'. The roaring wind came thumping at us now from the north-west against
the other side of the house, the other bending windows, and it went on for
about forty minutes or an hour, and passed on to do its deadly work up through
New England. Meanwhile, our neighbour's house which was a Cape Cod cottage,
clapboarding painted white, shutters black, showed now not a flake of paint. It
had been sandblasted down to the naked wood. So the interval of the glorious,
if boisterous, sunny day was the eye of the hurricane as it went over. The dead
calm hole in the doughnut. 

My own feeling about the looting in New York and the slow, dangerous business
of packing these people into rotting jails in a hundred degrees is that maybe
this is an isolated horror, but we have no certain reassurance yet that what
we've been living in since 1968 is not the eye of the hurricane, and that the
violence last week may not be the first slap of the old storm coming at us from
the other direction.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP