Carter's popularity slumps

I hesitate – which is fine thing to do at the beginning of a talk –
nevertheless, I hesitate to say anything definite about President Carter's trip
to Cairo and Jerusalem because we've been there before. And since Christmas
time in 1977, we've been alternately hoisting flags and hauling them down at
embarrassingly short intervals. And it could be that while I'm thinking aloud,
on the day that Mr Carter got back to Washington, something else will have
happened by the time you hear this that will turn the fruits of victory once
more into ashes in our mouths.

All I'll say at the moment about the actual promise of a peace treaty is that
we should not forget to read and listen to the reactions of the other Arab
countries to it. It would be a mistake, I think, to look on a peace treaty as
the keystone in building a solid agreement between Israel and the Arab world
just as a lot of people were so busy cheering the American recognition of
Communist China that they didn't bother to shudder at what the Russians might
do about it. So there is a dangerous inclination here, if there is a peace
treaty, to believe that it will solve much more than the relations between
Egypt and Israel. We might, I suggest, now keep one eye cocked on Mr Yasser
Arafat. 

What makes me talk about the Middle Eastern trip at all is the effect it's
likely to have on the political fortunes of Jimmy Carter which have been
plunging disastrously in the past couple of months. Before his trip, he had
sunk lower, in popularity simply, than Richard Nixon during the fatal last
stretch of his presidency and what that did was to open the gates to a stampede
of Republicans who would not only like to be president, but have come out to
declare that they're in the running. I think there are about half a dozen
declared Republicans already assembled in the paddock and there must be at
least half a dozen more who are chafing in their stalls, including Mr Gerald
Ford in his lavish stables in Palm Springs, California. 

Now you might think that when a president is in alarmingly low esteem, the
stampede to succeed him would come from his own party. Thirty-two years ago,
President Harry Truman was about as unpopular as it's possible to be, so much
so that the party split into three with his own former vice president running
against him with something called the 'Progressive' party and a posse of
enraged Southerners, fearful of any power coming to the blacks, broke away and
formed a so-called 'Dixiecrat' party. 

This three-way split guaranteed, of course, that President Truman couldn't
possibly be elected and the Republican candidate, Mr Dewey, started picking his
Cabinet before the election. It was a mistake. Mr Dewey, to the astonishment of
everybody but Mr Truman, lost. Mr Truman went grinning back into the White
House and the Progressives and the Dixiecrats disbanded. 

It's very difficult indeed for the party in power to spring a rival to the man
in the White House. First of all, anybody who tries it is in danger of
committing political suicide. Secondly, even a weak or very unpopular president
has an enormous trough of political patronage to draw on in federal
appointments throughout the 50 states from Supreme Court judges to postmasters
and customs inspectors. Party discipline, though it's not as absolute as it is
in Britain, is strong enough to make even the president’s enemies in his own
party think twice before breaking with him, unless they have decided they are
retiring from the next election. If they run for Congress and he runs for the
presidency again, and both of them win, the rebellious senator or congressman
is not going to get anything from the White House during the next term. 

So, for the most part, the Democrats, who are now disillusioned in Mr Carter,
fuss and fume and make what we used to call 'goo-goo eyes' at Senator Edward
Kennedy, but otherwise they keep their traps shut. The last thing they want to
do is to give aid and comfort to the Republicans. For Mr Carter, there is the
stony evidence of the polls which show that though he might narrowly win
against any of the Republicans who've come out so far, including Mr Ronald
Reagan, they also show that any Republican now in sight would go down to a
smashing defeat if the Democratic candidate were Senator Kennedy. 

Senator Kennedy keeps saying that he's busy and content in the Senate and means
to work for the re-election of Jimmy Carter, but at this stage he'd be a fool
to say anything else. Unlike the champing Republican contenders, who are busy
collecting funds and campaign managers and touring the country making rousing
speeches before plastic chicken lunches, Senator Kennedy doesn't need to lift a
finger or a telephone. The more he imitates a shrinking violet, the more people
beg him to take the crown. 

Now, I could have said all this before Mr Carter went to Cairo and Jerusalem,
in fact, I could have said it last Monday night when the president was a
despairing man ready to pack up and come home with empty hands. But a two-hour
breakfast, a quick flight to Cairo, an airport meeting with Mr Sadat and a
telephone call to Mr Begin and, on Tuesday evening, we heard that peace was
just around the corner. The effect on Mr Carter's reputation at home cannot yet
be measured but it was certainly an eye-opener to read the first two sentences
of Wednesday morning's New York Times editorial which said: ' Thanks to Jimmy
Carter the making of a peace treaty has become as exciting for Americans as the
waging of war. That alone is a singular achievement in a nation so obviously
searching for dreams to dream.' 

Those sentences would not have seemed possible even a week ago and this is
spring 1979. Before summer 1980, lots can happen. Who knows? Senator Kennedy,
by the time of the Democrats convention next year, may be seen to have been a
very shrewd cookie in biding his time and keeping his mouth shut. It could be
that he would not be electable even if he chose to run. Jimmy Carter could
prove, once again, what every Washington politician knows from the past, but
hates to believe can happen in the present, that except in a time of national
disaster, like a massive depression or the first American defeat in war, it's
very difficult to unseat a sitting president. 

'Yes, but...', some people say, 'if Senator Kennedy has already this glowing
advantage in the polls and Governor Brown of California could probably beat Mr
Carter in the west, why aren't they a threat to him?' I think the answer to
that one is that they are a threat in the polls that show how Carter would do
against a given Republican, or several – Reagan, say. And also, how Kennedy
would do against Reagan, say. What's misleading, almost perverse, about these
polls is that they canvass people on a choice that won't be offered. A
presidential election is not a national referendum on the popularity of the
incumbent. It's a choice between single candidates of opposing parties. 

I'll try not to go into this much in the immediate future but the way the
Republicans are talking you'd think that the presidential election was going to
happen next month. They make the dangerous assumption that because last month,
last week, Jimmy Carter seemed to be disappointing a majority of the American
public, but he's already been dumped by his party. They are cogitating on how
to run against Senator Kennedy. But I suspect that Kennedy has a real personal
problem which he may already have resolved. He's devoted to his family, he's
the remaining head of three families, in other words he has with him always the
memory of two assassinated brothers and he does not need to be warned that a
third Kennedy going for the presidency would present a tempting target to some
one, two, three lunatic. 

What it comes down to, I believe, is that while he is the only American
powerful and popular enough to decide Jimmy Carter's fate, he can only do this
at the Democratic convention next year and that if he truly decides that the
presidency would offer a cruel strain on his family and a great physical risk
to himself, he will throw in his hand with the president. 

And once he did that, he would throw in his delegations and that is the massive
opponent with which the Republicans would have to deal. So, all I'm saying is
that the way popular feeling about Jimmy Carter swings between enchantment and
disenchantment, it's much too soon to talk about a one-term president. 

Well, I've been in Mexico and seen no American papers for ten days until this
past week. Mexico's enthusiasm for its new oil bonanza and the promises Mexican
politicians make about using the coming vast revenues for public health, more
rural schools and the like, these things were naturally of more concern to the
Mexicans than American politics and American doings, all except – it was very
noticeable – Mr Carter's goings-on in the Middle East, simply because the
Middle East is the main American oil supply depot. 

One other American got a deal of space in the Mexican papers and his prominence
is directly connected also with America's need for oil. He's Mr James
Schlesinger, the Secretary of Energy. Mr Schlesinger was saying, a month ago,
that the cut-off and then the slow-down in supplies of oil from Iran, would
very likely force up the price of petrol here by the summer, but no plans were
afoot – plans were sketched out but not afoot – for petrol rationing. Now he's
saying even if the full production is resumed in Iran, the country faces a
serious crisis, that voluntary efforts to conserve energy seem to be failing.
Americans are using more oil than ever. And then he dropped his bomb. He said
the other day if, for any reason, oil from the Persian Gulf were cut off for a
period of one year – and now I quote him – 'we would not only have gasoline
rationing, but the free world, as we know it since 1945, would be over.' 

Mr Schlesinger is no demagogue or doom-and-gloom man. He never talks like this.
It is, I think, a herald or trial balloon of rationing by the summer. 

There's one other thing that strikes me on coming back, though not much is
being made of it in the media. The armed forces system of voluntary enlistment
has been a flop. The army's chief of staff says we'll have to go back to
conscription and the National Students' Organisation says if the draft is
re-introduced, they will take to the streets again. 

It looks like a long, hot summer.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP