Carter's first Europe visit

As everybody must know by now, Mr Carter is about to make his first visit to
Europe as President of the United States. Well, since the Second War, there
wouldn't seem to be anything very spectacular about that, thought it's
difficult now to recall the shock and exhilaration that Americans felt when
Harry Truman made his first post-war visit to Europe, simply because there had
been the firmest and longest tradition that, while he's in office, no American
president is ever expected to leave the country.

There are probably subtle diplomatic reasons for this tradition, but it's
certainly had to do also with two simple facts of life. First, that until you
could cross the Atlantic by airplane, a trip to Europe took three weeks out of
your life and that was too long for this country to be left without its chief
executive in the event of any national emergency. Also, after the First War,
especially, Americans turned very sour and cynical about Europe. Woodrow Wilson
was the first president to cross the Atlantic during his term of office. He
went over in 1919 with the lofty idea – the missionary idea – to save the world
for democracy. In the rude collapse of this vision, Wilson returned a
disillusioned man and a defeated president. 

And between the two wars, many of even the most intelligent Americans grew
petrified with fright whenever a high official of the government, let alone a
president, went on a mission to Europe. Americans wanted to stay out of Europe
forever. And the popular fear was that if an American Secretary of the Treasury
went to London, or Paris, or Berlin, he would have his pockets picked, and an
American Secretary of State would be seduced into some alliance that called for
American help in time of war. 

Well, thank goodness, there's today no question among Republicans, Democrats or
practically any other stripe of American, there's no question of isolating
America or retreating, as a famous American publisher advocated as late as
1940, into what he called 'fortress America'. America, since 1941 at the very
latest, has been one of the two world superpowers and isolationism, as a
practical way of life, let alone a theory, is as dead as the horse and buggy. 

Even so, the recent presidents have held very different judgements, not so much
about the importance of Europe to America as about which of the European allies
had enough effective power to influence the turn of history. For a few years
after the Second War, and because, I'm sure, of the sentiment that had been
born of the fighting alliance between Britain and America, Britain was assumed
to be the main ally. 

This assumption of Anglo-America being the hub of world power was really a
hangover from the pre-war world, but once the Marshall Plan had put Europe on
its feet and we began to face the rising industrial power of Germany and Italy
and then Japan, the assumption wobbled and was knocked flat on its back by the
rude remark of the late Dean Acheson that Britain has lost an empire and not
yet found a role. 

What worried succeeding American governments though was that Britain had not
somehow found her way into a thriving post-war economy and could no longer
afford to maintain armed forces that could make her THE most powerful member of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation. 

And thinking back now to the Kennedy days and, to put it very bluntly the
American presidents who followed Eisenhower, ... inherited the conviction that
while Britain could bring to the councils of the United Nations and American
discussions with Europe a lot of commonsense and intelligence and diplomatic
expertise, none of these things seemed to work very well in restoring Britain
to her former power in Europe, let alone in the world, and therefore you had to
look around elsewhere for the leadership of Europe. Which was the country, who
was the man America could turn to to speak for Europe? 

Let me say, by the way, that if it seems odd or dangerous for a democratic
nation to be looking always for 'the big man', this was a reflex form of hero
worship after our experience of big men during the Second War. There'd been
Hitler and Mussolini and Stalin. Dictatorships, by definition, must breed big
leaders, otherwise there'd be no dictatorships. And we produced our own 'big
men' – Churchill and Roosevelt – who were able and allowed to make big,
sweeping decisions, precisely because during a war for survival you have to
suspend much of the democratic freedom of choice that nips big men in the bud
and makes big, sweeping decisions impossible. 

But the hankering for another Churchill to consult lasted through the 1950s and
into the Sixties, and the oracle that Kennedy chose, and after him Nixon and
Kissinger, was General de Gaulle. I remember, with a trace still of the
embarrassment I felt at the time, a day in Palm Beach in, I suppose, it must
have been the winter of 1960 when the new President Kennedy had a dozen or so
members of the press in to talk about his policies, domestic and foreign, and
especially to sketch out his plans for a visit to Europe. 

He would go, he said then, and whether or not he followed this itinerary and
(the) sequence he anticipated doesn't matter, he would go first to General de
Gaulle, then to Berlin and he would certainly pay a sentimental visit to his
forefathers' village in Ireland. I should have waited till the get-together
broke up and put the question privately, but I was so puzzled at his not
mentioning Britain that I ventured, as casually as possible, to say I assumed a
trip to London was part of his plan. He looked half curious, half amused and
said, to a wave of laughter, ‘London? No! What's in London?’ 

Well, we let it drop there, but that evening I got hold of one or two of his
night-time cronies – they were the so-called Irish mafia, quite different from
the policy highbrows whom I always thought of as 'the graduate school' and with
whom he spent his days. ‘Why,’ I asked, ‘had he brushed off London so glibly?’
And one of the cronies said, ‘It's very simple. London simply doesn't count any
more. He's got to brace the Berliners against the Russians and he's got to see
de Gaulle. And maybe, as a courtesy, he'll drop by Downing Street, but at the
moment it's not in the works.’ 

I apologise for recounting what must sound like a brutal anecdote but it's
always useful to know what's on the mind of powerful men whose public
statements must cover up, with eloquence or politeness, what they really think.
I mention it now because once that famous trip was over, Kennedy began to think
again about the power and influence of de Gaulle and he was encouraged to have
deep misgivings about him by none other than that same Dean Acheson, no longer
Secretary of State but an advisor, always on hand. 

The standard cliché about de Gaulle at the time was that he had, more than any
other European then alive, a 'sense of history' and the compliment was parroted
automatically for the next eight years – it was a favourite of President Nixon.
Acheson said one day to Kennedy, ‘A sense of history is a dangerous weakness in
a public man. He plans his actions in order to appear well in a great pageant
of human life reaching back into the mists and moving into the clouds. Too
often it's a concern with oneself. And I say’, said Mr Acheson, in a sudden
descent from his usual, cultivated irony, ‘I say the hell with it!’ 

Now, what this pungent opinion did was to make Kennedy think again, and after
him, Johnson, about the danger of bypassing the State Department, ignoring your
own staff of experts, in the course of searching for 'the big man'. But I'm
afraid that this healthy misgiving was abandoned again – and for the longest
time – during the reign of President Nixon, who thought there must always be a
single key to everything, and saw the key as the latest hero, whether it was
the Shah of Iran or Mao Tse-tung. And Dr Kissinger... any man on a foreign
affairs desk, whether in Washington or Bangkok, could tell you that Dr
Kissinger would not delegate responsibility or inform his subordinates. He was
temperamentally so attracted to the commanding nineteenth-century diplomatic
figures, like Metternich and Talleyrand, that he revelled, and we ought to say
sometimes rewardingly, in being the one-man band. But for all its successes,
it's no good as a system. Today's big man is too often tomorrow's exile. Or
worse. 

Which brings us to President Carter. He's been in office now for that hundred
days that has become, for no reason I can discover, the mystical period of a
president's apprenticeship, and during that time we've seen him reiterate many
of his campaign promises and then, when the departments began to brief him, to
retreat from them. And this habit already alarms the many people who expect a
new president to maintain the missionary fervour of the speeches that elected
him. But to give him the benefit of the doubt for the time being, it can be
that Mr Carter is learning how the idealism of the men outside the White House
is bound to be tempered by the realities that buffet the man inside. 

Only one thing's for sure. He has, throughout the campaign and during his
hundred days, not wavered from his view that for the past decade, the European
alliance has been belittled in the rush of dealing with the Middle East, with
Russia and with China. He brings, I should say, not a whisper of sentimentality
to bear on reviving that alliance. If he wants America to think again about
safeguarding the life her children will have to cope with by way of arresting
the nuclear insanity and having enough energy to warm our toes with, he also
wants Europe to think again about invigorating its defences and about the way
Europeans might work as a team towards a stable economic life together. 

He is not wooing any special leader. He's not searching for the big European
spokesman. He's been remarkably well briefed and he will listen to everybody
and, in his cool way, commit himself to nobody.

It's not a change that lends itself to dramatisation but it is one, and one
that should quicken the initiative not only of the leaders but of the men and
women under them, and after them, the people.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP