Equal Rights hold-up

Programme recording incomplete

In Raleigh, North Carolina, there was a moving scene the other evening that
could affect... I was going to say one half of the population of the United
States, but really the entire population. 

The upper house of the North Carolina state legislature, its parliament if you
like, the North Carolina Senate, was in a tense and wordy session. For days,
senators had been wising and mustering whatever gifts of eloquence God had
given them, on two sides of an issue that more and more musters the energies,
we'd been told, of American women. It's known throughout this country as ERA.
The Equal Rights Amendment. This is a new amendment to the constitution. 

Now since 1790, there have been only 26 amendments to the original constitution
which came into effect on 4 March 1789. The first 10 amendments are known as
the Bill of Rights and after that people found that life had changed, or their
view of life, enough to suggest the need for new principles to be added to the
old charter. Such as, for instance, the way a president and vice president are
chosen, the abolition of slavery, the setting up, alas, of an income tax,
giving the vote to women – that came in, as in Britain, at the end of the First
World War. And so on. 

Well, this new amendment that's proposed is popularly thought of as giving
women equal rights. That is a simple, but crucial, mistake. And we'll go into
it in a minute. This is how it reads: ‘Equality of rights under the law shall
not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any state on account of
sex.’ That's it. An astonishingly clear statement to come out of Washington. It
adds that Congress has the power to enforce it by new laws and that the
amendment shall come into effect two years after it has been ratified. 

Now, ratified, that is quite a different step from being passed by the
Congress. Congress passed this amendment in March 1972, the house had passed
it, it went up to the Senate - we're talking now, of course, about the federal
government – the United States' Senate passed it by the thumping vote of 84 to
8, five years ago. However, the approval of Congress, no matter how
enthusiastic, is not enough to bring a constitutional amendment into force.
It's a serious business. 

Once engraved in the constitution, it takes a Herculean procedure to blot it
out. It takes, in fact, another constitutional amendment to repeal the one that
the country decides was a mistake, and this... this has only happened once in
200 years. And those of you who are not absolute and devout teetotallers will
recall that it took 14 years to wipe out a catastrophic mistake, the mistake
which even teetotallers now concede as that of the 18th Amendment, the one
that, from 1919 on, banned the making, the selling, the transporting of
alcoholic liquors. The so-called Prohibition Amendment. What that amendment
did, instead of converting the United States into a pure and sober nation,
turned it into a paradise for gangsters and excited a couple of generations
that might never have drunk much at all. Excited them into hankering for the
forbidden fruit. 

Well, as I say, it took another amendment to get rid of it. The 21st Amendment.
All right now. To... to bring a new amendment into force throughout the whole
nation, first Congress passes it. And that was done, as I say, to the Equal
Rights Amendment five years ago but then it cannot come into effect until the
legislatures of three-quarters of the states also pass it. That means it will
take 38 States to approve. So far 35 States have said yes. We need another
three for ratification. And, on the face of it, that doesn't sound too
difficult. But it is. 

During those four years – years, years – all the states have had the
opportunity to debate and to vote on it and the states that were hot for it
passed it long ago. But there are, as you see, at the moment, 15 hold-outs and
according to the original proposers of the amendment, it's going to be very
tough to squeeze three more 'Yes' votes out of the adamant 15. 

North Carolina was looked on by this administration as a crucial test. It had
been stubbornly against the amendment since its passage and if it could get
through North Carolina, President Carter felt, at least two other states would
throw in the sponge. He and his wife put in telephone calls and urged the two
United States' senators from North Carolina to do all they could to urge the
men and women they knew in the North Carolina Senate. So on Tuesday, after an
emotional session in which both sides cited powerful arguments – I hear some
ladies demanding to know what arguments could possibly be brought against their
having equal rights – but as I hinted earlier, the amendment doesn't say it's
about equal rights for women, it's about equal rights for men and women, and if
we can just hold it for a minute, I'll try to say why the difference is both
crucial and, for some people of both sexes, excruciating. 

On Tuesday evening, then, it came to the vote in North Carolina and it was
defeated by 26 votes to 24. The North Carolina Senate immediately did something
grimmer still. They, quite legally, voted by 27 to 21 not to bring the issue up
again for two more years. Several states, by the way, have first defeated the
amendment, then worked up a lot of support for it, heard it all over again and
voted to pass it. 

Now, the effect of this clinching second vote was to dispose of any prospect
that North Carolina, for one, would ever pass the amendment because the
constitution says a proposed amendment has seven years in which to be debated
and ratified by the states. And if, by that time, the amendment still lacks a
three-quarters approval by the states, then its congressional approval lapses.
To get anything like it, the Congress would have to start all over again. Well,
to prevent that happening, the Equal Rights Amendment must get the votes of 38
states by March 1979. North Carolina has voted not even to discuss it again
till then. So, if three other states come through with their approval in the
next two years, North Carolina, we must presume, will be one state that bows
its head and reluctantly obeys. 

Now why should any person, let alone 15 States, hold out against the obvious
equity of the new amendment? It's crystal clear. Equality of rights under the
law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States, or by any state, on
account of sex. Not an account of belonging to the female sex, the new
amendment means to give men also rights once exclusively possessed by women. A
lot of comfortable American women are against the amendment on the grounds
that, if it passes, they could be called on to give alimony to divorced
husbands who are needier than they are. The amendment also would require
overhauling the labour laws in a lot of states, laws which may not say but
imply that only men can be hired for some jobs: trucking, mining, construction,
for instance. And only women for others. 

A couple of years ago, a woman wanted to be a jockey and threatened court
action on the grounds of an amendment to the constitution that's been there
since 1868. The famous 18th says, 'All citizens born or naturalised in the
United States shall enjoy the equal protection of the laws'. She won her case.
But, so far, no races. 

In fact, many appeals, especially from women and minorities – blacks, Puerto
Ricans, Mexicans – which would probably come to court on the basis of the new
Equal Rights Amendment, have been argued successfully on the basis of the old
14th's equal protection of the laws. Many lawyers who are in the state
legislatures have opposed the new amendment on the grounds that it's already
covered by the 14th. However, in a nation of lawyers – never less than half the
Congress is made up of them – there is enough experience of the ingenuity of
human beings and the whimsicality of judges to know that in some court cases
you can drive a freight train through the gap between the equal protection of
the laws and equality of rights on account of sex. 

The day after North Carolina voted, the United States Supreme Court used the
14th Amendment to strike a blow for the male of the species which, I should
imagine, a year or two from now would have appealed to the new Equal Rights
Amendment if it gets into the constitution. The case had to do with a widower
from New York. He's retired. His wife worked as a secretary for 25 years in the
New York public school system. She died, whereupon, he applied for her benefits
under the social security law. She'd paid in full, down all the years, all the
social security taxes that are regularly 'nicked' from your salary. There is,
he maintained, rarely any difficulty when a widow applies for her dead
husband's benefits. Women are not required to show that they were financially
dependent on the husband. I suppose we've always assumed it was so. But men, to
get their wives' benefits after death, had to prove that since their retirement
they were dependent on their wives. The Supreme Court ruled that it should be
equally easy for men, as for women, to collect the benefits of the dead
spouse. 

One of the odd, but interesting, things about this case was that the plaintiff,
the widower, was represented in court by Women's Libbers, by Women's Rights'
advocates. They argued that because it's harder for a widower of a woman wage
earner to get her benefits, the law thereby gives a woman wage earner less
protection for her surviving family than is given to the children say of a dead
male wage earner. Which figures. The Supreme Court gave a narrow majority, only
five to four but the consensus is that the women's liberation argument was
decisive. 

Well, I leave you with the kind of IQ test or game to dream up situations in
life, situations of work, leisure, love, play... in which the new Equal Rights
Amendment would lift men from servitude as much as it would lift women. There
must be a lot of such situations, otherwise I don't think a poll, just
published, would come up with its astonishing result: over the whole nation,
only 51 per cent of American women are in favour of the Equal Rights Amendment
but 63 per cent of the men.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP