Chinese visit rattles USSR

One of the odder sights in the winter, in fine weather and knifing winds, has
been a long queue lining up every morning down the steps and along Fifth Avenue
outside the Metropolitan Museum, the majestic pile and, let's face it, a
treasure house, that stands on the edge of Central Park.

There have popular and splendid exhibitions in the past but I don't remember
one that had people lining up early, very early, every day of the week, earlier
than they do for the big movies on Saturdays and Sundays. This one is the
Tutankhamun show. Nobody has given it a bad notice, in fact everybody's so
bedazzled by it that they develop a yen to have some part of it for themselves,
something, so to speak, to put on the mantelpiece. 

This urge was happily anticipated by all sorts of commercial firms and the
stores are awash with Tutankhamun scarves and jewellery, both junky and
precious, and reproductions of the goddesses who guarded his tomb done in
painted wood and metal. At one of the leading department stores, you can buy a
head, several heads if you like, of Tutankhamun done in porcelain and covered
with gold leaf at $2,000 a head. 

I've not heard of anyone's boycotting the show on anti-Egyptian grounds, on the
ground that Mr Sadat is asking more of Israel than she can safely give up but
this thought is by no means as philistine as it may at first sound. Not even
national museums stage tributes to an ancient or modern culture without a
second thought about the political popularity of the subject. And anyone who
knows the weird and twisting bypaths that marketing research can get into these
days would not expect a big American department store to manufacture in large
quantities just now, say, cushions, scarves, chocolate boxes or T-shirts
emblazoned with the likeness of the Shah of Iran. 

Pretty soon, however, I imagine that we shall all be sipping soup out of
Chinese bowls and some glittering Dallas store – no stores are more glittering
– will get out Christmas presents of chopsticks in solid gold inscribed 'His'
and 'Hers' for $4,000 the pair. 

The first, big positive effect of Mr Deng's visit is the signing, drafting at
least, of contracts with soft drink companies, with tractor manufacturers,
computer makers, purveyors of industrial raw materials, airplane parts and, no
doubt, airplanes. He did visit Seattle, the great Boeing plant, but all this on
the firm understanding – which the president kept making firmer every time Mr
Deng talked about Russia – on the understanding that nothing is to be used for,
or converted to, military use. Well, considering how quickly the Chinese got
busy ordering steel and aircraft parts and tanks from Britain and France,
nobody believes, least of all the Russians, that the Chinese are not capable of
putting two and two together, two peaceful items and two adaptors, and coming
up with a weapon. 

I don't think there's any question that the administration is worried about
this. The president said very loud before Mr Deng arrived that whatever else
the Chinese got from America they would not get any arms and the president and
the Secretary of State, Mr Vance, became more and more edgy and worried every
time Mr Deng went on about the Russian bear and how wonderful it was that China
and the United States were united in their view of the Soviet threat. 

I'm convinced that there was no... no fakery in this embarrassment and no
duplicity on the part of the president and Mr Vance. In fact Mr Vance had the
Soviet ambassador in twice, I believe, to try and calm down the Russian fury
and their understandable fear that Mr Deng went to Washington, in the main, to
conclude a military alliance. 

Now, if this is true, which I believe it to be, I mean if the administration
was embarrassed on this score, every place Mr Deng got up to make a speech and
tout his anti-Soviet line, we're bound to ask: what did Mr Carter and his
advisers think they were doing when they invited Mr Deng? Was there
intelligence (I mean their diplomatic reporting) from Peking so uninformed that
they didn't know how Mr Deng felt and couldn't guess that the new drive in
China for modernisation and technology, not to mention MiGs and missiles, was
bound to agitate the Russians? 

I really don't know the answer, except to say, yes, American intelligence out
of China must have been pretty inept because surely Mr Carter would not
otherwise have imagined that Mr Deng could go charging about America glorifying
the new Chinese-American stand against the Russians? Surely Mr Carter wouldn't
have assumed he could then sit down in sweetness and light with the Russians
and sign the long, impending treaty to limit strategic arms. 

There are emerging two schools of thought, both of them gloomy, about the SALT
treaty. One says that the Russians will punish the United States for her craven
hospitality to Mr Deng by refusing to sign a SALT treaty. The other school
says, 'No. Things are worse than that. The treaty will be signed which will
only go to prove that it's worth even less than all the other treaties we've
signed with the Russians, whether on SALT No. 1, or on human rights at
Helsinki, that the Russians will sign and then go about their business of
strengthening their already incomparable conventional forces – which is a
bland, neutral phrase and means a colossal army, a great navy, an unmatched
fleet of submarines, both conventional and nuclear – and will proceed with the
furthest reaches of the nuclear weapons' race. 

I hope... I hope that when Mr Deng was in Washington getting off his cute
little Chinese proverbs that he didn't mention the late President Kennedy's
favourite, the saying of some sage – maybe it's all right now to quote
Confucius again – that the best prayer a Chinese can send up is a prayer to
live in interesting times. Mr Carter, who confessed early in his administration
that he prays on an average over 30 times a day – well, that's one prayer
that's been answered before he made it. 

He must feel pretty rueful these days when he considers, I think it was the
most recent national poll, the one that the New York Times and the Columbia
Broadcasting System do together, which showed that while people are not
satisfied with the way Mr Carter has been handling domestic policy, he has been
commended by a majority of Americans for his conduct of foreign policy. That
favourable percentage must be dropping day by day for, I'd say, Americans have
been fascinated into despondency by Iran and while they enjoy the rush of happy
feeling over the new relationship with China, the ecstasy of it was pretty
brief. 

Maybe Mr Carter and his advisers suspected the coming anti-Russian line of Mr
Deng and thought they could ride it out but didn't guess at his being so
publicly belligerent about Vietnam, let alone practically announcing that he
might have to go into Vietnam to punish the Vietnamese for invading Cambodia,
making no bones about the fact that it was the Vietnamese who did it and that
they are considered lackeys or running dogs of Moscow. 

And so, on Thursday night, we read from Tokyo that the Chinese were massing
hundreds of MiG fighter planes on the Vietnam frontier and, from Singapore,
that Russian warships were sailing into the South China Sea. And in Washington,
we read that Mr Brown, the American Secretary of Defence, had gone to Saudi
Arabia to try and persuade the Saudis that though they are hemmed in with
Russian-dominated countries on the south, east and west, and Iran in turmoil on
the north, all is not lost and America is at their side. 

The shaky position of our main oil supplier was advertised the morning that
American papers reprinted the second of two articles by Dr Henry Kissinger, the
former secretary of state, attacking the Carter administration on a wide front
for its foreign policy. These reprints have received some unfortunate newspaper
headlines abroad as well as in America. One I saw flatly saying that President
Carter was responsible for the fall of the Shah of Iran. 

Dr Kissinger is never quite so simple, or so unfair. What he did say was that
while the Shah's government was un-progressive and noticeably flagrant in its
abuse of human rights, American indecision and the badly timed human rights
policy made the collapse of the Shah inevitable and that the next regime might
be worse than his. 

Dr Kissinger's main accusation is that Mr Carter leaves an embattled or wobbly
ally in doubt about how far it can depend on the United States. He's afraid
that these doubts have spread to Saudi Arabia and the Gulf and may spread to
other trouble spots so that, as he puts it, there may be a growing perception
of the potential irrelevance of American power to the most likely dangers that
these countries face. Dr Kissinger warns that if this goes on, if necessary
allies come to feel America is not a sheltering power, then they will seek
reassurance in Moscow. 

He also went after the president on the very thing for which, six months ago,
Americans were most ready to praise him, namely the Camp David agreements. Dr
Kissinger says they ought to have been carried to a conclusion rapidly and in a
more dominant fashion. Since they have not, maybe the Egyptians and the
Israelis too will conclude that, quote, 'the United States is incapable of
shaping events'. That is the most damning and I'm afraid to a lot of Americans
the most persuasive of Dr Kissinger's criticisms. 

It is the burden of the song of the several Republicans who are now beginning
to make signs of running for the presidency in 1980. The other day a national
magazine printed a bleak piece with the title, 'If America Goes the Way of
Britain'. It wasn't lurid; it was a depressing but pretty factual account of
domestic disorder and productive paralysis. I doubt it made a very wide or
fearful impression. Americans just now are wondering where America is going,
especially whether she is any longer being looked on as the effective protector
not of the whole free world but of those parts of it that affect her vital
interests.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP