Harvey Milk killing

One day last November, I was having the pleasure of fiddling with this book and
that newspaper, as you do when you're on holiday in a hotel. I was in San
Francisco and I was waiting to be picked up by a friend for an afternoon down
the peninsula among the fairways and the cypresses and the eucalyptus trees.

It was noon and I turned on the telly to get the midday news and weather. And a
very wobbly, drunken picture came on, to the accompaniment of panicky cries.
The cameras were in City Hall because there was about to be a meeting of the
mayor and the councillors, or supervisors, as they're called. It never happened
but the cameras showed us the aftermath of a gruesome incident which had
wrecked the prospect of a meeting. 

What we saw were supervisors ducking into rooms, policemen barring people at
the end of corridors, weeping secretaries and a very handsome, very shaken
lady, Dianne Feinstein, who'd suddenly become acting mayor and was standing up
before a hubbub of reporters and rocking cameras to tell us about it. 

It seems that a man named Dan White who had resigned as a supervisor because he
couldn't, with a large family, possibly make ends meet on an annual salary of
$9,000, that's £4,500. He'd had a date with the mayor, Mayor Moscone, well only
a few minutes before noon, he'd walked into a back entrance of City Hall and
thus evaded the security check at the front entrance which would have shown him
to be carrying a gun. He walked into the mayor's office, told him to get down
on his knees and shot him dead. White then dashed down the corridor into the
office of a harmless sitting supervisor named Harvey Milk and shot him dead,
too. White was then out of the building and in his car and driving round town
in a quiet daze. He was soon picked up and he was charged with murder. 

There was never any doubt that he had done the killings. The question of motive
was the great thing and that was gone into very quickly and pretty persuasively
because Dan White and his two victims were all very well-known men in the city.
Dan White looked like an all-American boy, clean limbed, a sportsman, born and
brought up in a San Francisco fringe district, what they call a neighbourhood
boy. He became a policeman and he worked his way up to run for city office and
in time became a supervisor. 

A month or so before the shootings, he'd resigned for the reasons I mentioned.
Mayor Moscone was just about to appoint another man in his place when White
asked to see the mayor. He said he'd changed his mind, he wanted his job back.
After a rather strained meeting, the mayor said he was sorry 'no'. White went
home and thought it over and then, on that November morning, he took out his
revolver, pocketed some extra bullets – and that was a big point with the
prosecution in trying to show premeditation – and went off to City Hall and the
murders. 

Killing the mayor, Moscone, however atrocious, was not difficult to understand.
But why the harmless supervisor, down the hall, Harvey Milk? Harvey Milk was no
threat to White's job at any time. He was a well-liked and able man, but he was
also a homosexual. In fact, in a city where there are over 75,000 enrolled
homosexual voters, he'd been appointed by Mayor Moscone to pay special
attention to the needs of the homosexuals. The peculiar status of Harvey Milk
was what riled Dan White. Dan White was alarmed by homosexuals. He hated them
and often said so publicly. And at some moment long ago, or while he was
packing his gun or just after he'd shot the mayor, perhaps, he headed for
Harvey Milk to perform his symbolic slaying. 

Well he came to trial and last Monday he was found guilty. He'd been charged
with first-degree murder and the prosecutor had asked for the death penalty.
But the jury, seven women and five men, could find no evidence of premeditation
and they found him guilty of something called 'voluntary manslaughter' – an act
committed under stress. The district attorney was bitter. 'It was a wrong
decision,' he said, 'the jury did not sufficiently analyse the evidence that
this was deliberate, calculated murder.' A woman supervisor said she was
stunned by the verdict and Mrs Feinstein, now Mayor Feinstein, said she got the
word of the verdict with disbelief. 'It will,' she said, 'throw under scrutiny
the whole criminal justice system.' 

Well, the effect on the city could only be guessed at but it was very swift to
show itself. Once it happened it was not hard to see why it would be violent.
Dan White was a self-proclaimed hater of homosexuals. He was also a policeman,
or had been. He'd killed a well-loved man who was also a homosexual. San
Francisco has 75,000 homosexuals who would have been less than human if they'd
prayed for a mild verdict and a light sentence for Dan White. As it is, he can
get, at most, seven years in prison and he will be out on parole in five
years. 

It was too much for the temper of the homosexual neighbourhoods. On Monday
night, the day of the verdict, thousands of people moved on City Hall, broke
windows, burned police cars and started a riot in which 140 people, including
60 policemen, were injured. It was early morning before the streets had been
cleared and the shell of a wing of City Hall was allowed to simmer and smoke
itself out. 

To one faction of the rioters, justice had been flouted and the flouters were
the police themselves. To the other, homosexuals were the sinister menace Dan
White had always said they were. It was a crude, ugly show unredeemed by a
decent motive on either side. And there was every prospect of another squalid
showdown the next night, when a homosexual neighbourhood had been given a
permit to hold a rally to commemorate what would have been the 49th birthday of
the dead Harvey Milk. Mrs Feinstein took a calculated risk in not revoking the
permit. She told the police to stay away at a distance and she put it up to the
homosexuals to police their own rally. Her judgement was wise. Three thousand
people gathered and sang and quietly paid their tribute to the dead supervisor.
There was no trouble. 

I suppose there's more than a moral, a lesson in this – a lesson in what we
call 'law and order' and what the founding fathers of this country called
'domestic tranquillity'. The lesson of the second demonstration, the quiet
rally is, I suggest, that if you don't like a particular social group, however
bizarre or offensive to your taste, if it threatens no harm to the neighbours,
it's better to leave it alone. This restraint works everywhere with religious
cults and self-improvement movements that may seem dotty to most people on the
outside. But the trouble with the homosexual population in other places than
San Francisco is that while, so far as I know, they don't threaten their
neighbours in any way, a good many of the neighbours feel threatened, work on
their fears, find the notion of tolerating homosexuals in public places, in
schools especially, impossible to bear and invent chimeras, as a lady in
Florida did last year – the chimera that a homosexual teacher is more likely to
seduce the pupils than a heterosexual. And then the enmity most of all, the
deep fear, boils over. 

In the Monday riots in San Francisco, I don't think there's any doubt that the
threats came from both sides. This was one time when the fearful heterosexuals,
chanting offensive slogans about the gays, were matched by vicious homosexuals
shouting, 'Dan White is a pig. Lynch Dan White!' And, more surprisingly, 'Hang
Mayor Feinstein!'. 

Now you might have guessed, if there was one public official in the clear,
blameless to both sides, it would have been Dianne Feinstein who is a vastly
popular mayor, who was prompt to appoint another homosexual supervisor to
replace Harvey Milk and who, in this instance, didn't pause to calculate the
risk in denouncing the lightness of Dan White's verdict. But here we come on a
nasty aspect of San Francisco which is a continuing threat to the reputation
and the public order of the city. 

San Francisco is the national factory of hardcore pornographic movies both for
public and home consumption. And when I say hardcore, I ought to stress that an
X-rated movie in the United States is about as horrendously pornographic as you
can get. There are four categories for labelling motion pictures. G means
general and suggests nothing that would harm a child, PG means there are
pictures or dialogue a little rough maybe for adolescents, wherefore PG –
parental guidance – is suggested. An R film is one that contains four-letter
words and/or partial or total nudity, possibly some long-shot sex. An X film
goes the limit of showing sexual intercourse in clinical detail. 

San Francisco makes about 40 per cent of all the X-rated movies shown in this
country. Most of them are very tatty indeed, but they pour out of the small
studios and improvised production companies at a fearful rate. Young people
willing to perform in them naturally abound in San Francisco and, along with
them, a dependable quota of so-called producers and pimps, drug pushers and the
like. The city has several neighbourhoods which are glutted with what we call
'gay bars' – some of them are harmless enough, no more harmless certainly than
their heterosexual equivalents. Some of them are grim. Simply, sleazy houses of
assignation where homosexuals can go, meet and take their pleasure in back
rooms. 

Mrs Feinstein, a beautiful lady and very far from prim, knows the city's sordid
and well-deserved reputation for these things and she's dead against
pornography. She'd like to clean up the peep shows and the home-movie
pornography stores, the magazine stands that traffic in nothing else. Naturally
she's against degraded bars, no matter what genes they cater to. And that's
where the mean and vicious types of homosexual have it in for her. While
threatening harm to her, they also, of course, do enormous harm to the great
mass of responsible, peaceable, San Francisco homosexuals. They help to inflame
and legitimise the fears of ordinary householders. 

Mrs Feinstein knows all this. She does her brave best and bides her time until
the distant day when public prejudice catches up with the law and settles down
peaceably with it.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP