Gromyko's threat to SALT treaty

It's usually a good sign when the President of the United States announces he's
going to take a holiday even though, at best, it will be a three or four-day
holiday. It means that while Congress and the newspapers may be viewing with
alarm and discovering crises every other day, one man in power is keeping his
head.

I remember what a tonic thing it was during the worst days of the Second War,
the worst days for Britain, with the south coast fortifying itself against a
German invasion, to read that Mr Churchill went to bed at 10 p.m. as usual,
woke at five, zipped up his siren suit and said, 'Where are the Narzies?'. 

Now surely no one would begrudge Mr Carter a holiday after an exhausting summit
in Vienna and a frustrating summit in Tokyo. He would, he said, stop off on the
way home and spend three carefree days and nights in Hawaii, which is one of
the most majestically beautiful of all the states. 

When this holiday was announced, I leapt on it as an opportunity to talk about
the joy, the useful safety valve, if you like, of summer games. Wimbledon in
England, the baseball season getting into high gear in the United States, the
happy convention in most countries around the world at this time of the year,
whereby tired politicians and anxious businessmen and even factory owners and
shop stewards slump by the telly in the evenings and watch the only simple
heroes left – the superstars of the cricket field, the baseball diamond, the
tennis court, the racetrack. 

A correspondent feels more grateful than most men for these breaks because, for
the one and only time, he can say,' Well, if the President of the United States
is surfing in Honolulu or working on his back swing in the Rockies, surely you
don't expect me to be worrying you with talk of SALT and OPEC and VAT?'
However, this happy prospect was very short-lived. 

On Thursday Mr Carter announced that his holiday was off after the petroleum
exporting countries jacked up the price of oil. All along, the administration
had been saying what it desperately wanted to believe, that the OPEC countries
would probably raise their price from $14 a barrel to, say, about $16 or $17
and that Saudi Arabia, the biggest exporter of all, would very likely refuse to
go along with any increase at all. Consequently, the jump from OPEC from $14 to
$23.50 dollars was a shocker. And even while President Carter and Mrs Thatcher
and the others were beginning to agree about conserving oil, the Saudi Arabian
price was jumping by 24 per cent. 

Now, you know, wherever the president goes, he's paced, surrounded and harried
by a team of aides, secretaries and technicians. The moment he arrives in the
guest suite of some statesman's house or in a hotel, he finds that the
telephone has already had its dial implanted with a circular disc saying 'The
White House'. The diplomatic cables come pouring in, holiday or no holiday. The
hotline, several hotlines, have been linked to his bedroom, to Moscow, to
Washington, to the underground headquarters of the Strategic Air Command in
Omaha, Nebraska. There's always, never more than ten seconds away, the
anonymous man who carries the day's variation of the scrambler code that can
signal, in a flash, the war alert to bases on land or sea and missile silos
around the world. 

What Mr Carter didn't expect – and what he got this time – was a threat from
the OPEC nations to ease the oil bill of importing nations by forcing down the
international value of the dollar. What he didn't expect was an explosion of
anger in the Senate over Mr Gromyko's threat to abandon the SALT treaty if the
Senate dares to amend it. What he might have expected, but not so soon, was a
firm recommendation by his chief foreign policy men and defence aides to begin
strengthening American naval and air forces in the Indian Ocean and the Gulf
partly to protect America's main sources of oil from the spreading Soviet
presence in the Middle East, not to mention the worsening news about violence
and strikes at petrol pumps across America. 

And if he still meant to go ahead and loll in Honolulu, he heard at the
beginning of the week about a Soviet underground nuclear test set off last
Saturday which, in the view of his scientific advisers, exceeded the 150
kiloton limit to which both countries agreed in the first SALT treaty.
Although, at this moment, we've not had the official Russian answer to this
complaint, it seems to be wildly improbable at the moment that the Senate's
telling Mr Gromyko to mind his own business and Senator Goldwater was inviting
him to go to hell, improbable that Moscow would come back with an apology and a
prayer to be forgiven. 

I think that must have done it. Anyway, Mr Carter decided to get back to
Washington and face the music. The hullabaloo of discordant sounds that batter
the White House and make you wonder why anyone in his senses would ever think
of running again next year for president, which Mr Carter undoubtedly means to
do.

By the way, the Democratic National Committee has just voted to hold its 1980
nominating convention once again in New York City where, three years ago, Jimmy
Carter was received in rapture as the man best able to lead us into a life of
peace, prosperity and simple dignity.

Well, with apologies to OPEC, I think the main thing this week is the early
damage that was done to the SALT treaty by Mr Gromyko's warning, or threat,
that if the Senate, in its forthcoming debate, tried to amend the treaty there
would be grave consequences and perhaps no SALT treaty at all. Certainly he
said no more negotiation. Now if Mr Gromyko were a tyro, a newcomer to
American-Soviet diplomacy, the scolding editorial of the Washington Post would
be, I think, well taken. 

The Post said that Mr Gromyko was arrogant and had made a blunder in not
leaving the selling of the SALT treaty to Mr Carter. The Post instructed Mr
Gromyko about the 'double streak of deep pride in the Senate, in the United
States as a nation and in the Senate as an institution. It is depressing,' the
Post sighed, 'how poorly the Soviet leadership understands the US political
process.' But does it? 

Mr Gromyko is not merely a veteran of Soviet-American jousting, he is, in the
Soviet system, something of a marvel. He was the number two Russian at the
organising conference of the United Nations in 1945. He was their chief man in
the early battles in the United Nations Security Council, walking out so often
by way of registering his veto that 'pulling a Gromyko' became an English
idiom. And while the lords and masters of the Soviet Union died or were
liquidated – or like his first chief, Molotov, were banished to oblivion in
Outer Mongolia – Gromyko, with an uncanny gift for survival, has remained with
us. 

Surely the longest-running foreign secretary of any nation, Communist or
non-Communist, this century – 34 years. He's lived in, or visited, the United
States on and off for 34 years. He cannot be ignorant of the pride of the
United States' Senate or naive about the way it works. A foreign minister who'd
been in Washington a couple of months would have learned that if you want the
United States to come to an agreement with your country on anything, one thing
you do not do is to insult or threaten the Senate. So we really have to look a
little longer at Mr Gromyko's threats. 

Maybe the masters of the Kremlin don't really want a SALT agreement, not this
one, anyway, but went along with the ritual of the signing till the ailing Mr
Brezhnev is no longer in command. Maybe they genuinely feel that the terms of
the treaty discriminate against them and are engineering a crisis which will
force President Carter to go in for a round of shuttle diplomacy on the
Egyptian-Israeli model. 

Whatever the explanation, it seems to me highly unlikely that Mr Gromyko didn't
know what he was doing and that, simultaneously, the Soviet nuclear boys didn't
know what they were doing when they set off last Saturday that underground test
which was measured by Americans as 50 kilotons above the limit of an agreement
that has been honoured for the past five years. 

At any rate, the Senate took the rebuff at its face value. 'Who does Gromyko
think he is?’ was the instant and general response. Senator Goldwater's earthy
invitation was predictable but, to us, anyway, what was not predictable was the
serious reaction of the opposition leader, the Republican leader in the Senate,
the one man without whose collaboration it's very unlikely that the president
can swing the Senate's necessary two-thirds approving vote. 

Senator Howard Baker of Tennessee – who is, by the way, almost certain to
declare himself soon as a candidate for the Republican nomination next year –
Senator Baker is not a loudmouth or a flag waver or a man quick to anger. As
the leader of the opposition, he's by no means bound to oppose the president.
On foreign issues as serious as this one, indeed, it's normal in the American
process for the president to seek out the leader of the opposition and get his
support before he begins to work in private on his own party. 

Mr Carter had expected to discuss SALT with Senator Baker and see what sort of
amendments to the treaty both parties could go along with. There was never any
suggestion in Washington that the Senate would automatically swallow the
package that was put together in Vienna. Even the Democrats' foreign affairs
leader in the Senate, Frank Church, said that the Russians must understand that
some amendments were bound to be made by the Senate and, I ought to say here,
that nobody should presume that all the amendments will be anti-Russian in the
sense of wanting to improve America’s nuclear capability at the expense of the
Russians. 

There's one powerful senator from Utah, for instance, who thinks that the
permissible stockpiles of nuclear arms are much too high for both sides. But
Senator Baker, believing that the treaty provides a substantial superiority to
the Soviet Union, says he will work diligently to defeat the treaty if these
amendments are not adopted. Surely the Russians knew all this? They cannot
believe that the treaty would be presented to the Senate and passed at once by
a voiced vote, as no doubt it has to be by the Supreme Soviet. 

Mr Gromyko's threat seems to me to stem not from ignorance, but from
deliberation. I'd be willing to bet that he's foreseen, or encouraged, what the
Russians can interpret as a Senate rejection of the treaty. After that, I leave
you to puzzle out the next move but two.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP