Smallpox eradicated

There used to be a radio news commentator in America in the old days, before
Elmer Davis and Raymond Swing and Ed Murrow, at a time when news commentators
were practically indistinguishable from circus barkers, and this smooth and
unfailingly superficial baritone used to start his more cheerful commentaries
with the phrase, 'There's good news tonight.' And he would then pass on the
exciting word that a baby in West Virginia had been rescued from a pond or
maybe that Hitler had announced his admiration of the British Empire.

At the time, my father-in-law who was an epidemiologist – a public health
expert of awesome reputation, he'd been in charge of the American expeditionary
forces in the First War – he was fighting a senator from New York who had close
links with the powerful lobby of the pharmaceutical houses, the people who make
your pills and drugs. This senator could always be depended on to oppose any
extension of the Pure Food and Drug law and just then he was opposing a law,
which I'm glad to say my father-in-law eventually got through, which required,
and requires, the printing of the chemical ingredients on the labels of all
drugs and prepared foods. Let's call the senator, Senator Elmer Puffin. 

Well, one fine summer day I arrived at the end of Long Island and found my
father-in-law pruning trees on his farm. He was the dourest Puritan I've ever
met. His winning smile was as rare as a falling star. He never, in my
recollection, ever grinned, but on this day he was grinning like a stand-up
comic and he actually waved at me from a long way off. I went across a field to
see what this extraordinary mania was all about and he put his arm round my
shoulder. 'My boy,' he said, 'there's good news tonight. Elmer Puffin is
dead.' 

Well, by an obvious association I'm here to tell you there's good news tonight.
Smallpox is dead everywhere in the world. The natural thing is to say how can
they possibly know about the darkest jungles of Brazil, the wastes of Africa,
the far reaches of the Soviet Union, which has not been in the habit of giving
out anything embarrassing from the accidental death of an astronaut to a case
of smallpox? And remember it took the Chinese eight months to admit that that
appalling earthquake of – when was it? – early last year, I think, had killed
about a million people. 

Well they do know. Thanks to an organisation that most people know very little
about and yet it is one of, if not THE, most splendid thing to come out of the
United Nations, namely its World Health Organisation – WHO. There's never been
anything like it before. Its headquarters are in Geneva. It never sleeps,
around the clock there is a watchdog staff looking at its own worldwide ticker
service, consulting huge maps, sticking in flags and tracking the winking of
little lights that record the fact that some farmer in the Caucasus has a
suspicious rash or that one passenger flying from Singapore to Hong Kong got
off the plane and was held for a suspected case of beriberi. 

But now, smallpox. The head of the world organisation, one Dr Halfdan Mahler,
called a press conference last Tuesday at the UN headquarters in New York. It
must've been a proud day for him. He told how smallpox had been hunted all
around the globe and how, finally, the last cases were tracked down in
Bangladesh. It took 12,000 Bangladesh health workers and a supervising team of
one hundred from the staff of the World Health Organisation to spend two years
making house-to-house calls and searches. They found no other case than that of
a three-year-old girl who went down with smallpox in October 1975. They've
found no other cases anywhere since. 

I ought to say, by way of anticipating certain knowing people, that there is a
very much milder form of the disease that still exists but only it exists still
on the Horn of Africa. The thing anybody over 30 or so must have been taught to
dread, Variola major, which scoured Dr Johnson and George Washington and
generations down to many obscure people we all knew only a few years ago, has
vanished. 

It was done by applying technological methods to the smallpox vaccination
discovered two centuries ago by Edward Jenner. The World Health Organisation
started ten years ago to scan the world for smallpox and, the other day, the
man who started this campaign and conducted it for many years, said, 'If anyone
put up a million dollars as the price for being shown a case of smallpox, we
couldn't accept his one million.' I find this unreal to believe when I recall
that only, I think, three, four years ago, the United States required to seek
proof of a recent vaccination from everybody – citizens, non citizens,
immigrants, holiday makers arriving at any American port or airport. 

Well, maybe I've gone on a little about this marvellous release because we do
get to take for granted, in no time, the really successful revolutions that
have nothing to do with politics, I suppose most young people under 30 assume
that tuberculosis is a barbarous plague that flourished like the Black Death in
the benighted nineteenth century, especially afflicting talented poets in
garrets and glamorous sinners like Camille. But I myself have known at least
half a dozen close friends and relations who died of it and I have one friend
who got it three years ago. He never stopped work or went away in isolation
because he was treated by something that 30 years ago would have been ridiculed
as a possibility – a pill – or what Americans now universally call
chemotherapy. 

So having given two cheers for the United Nations, let's try and see how the
people are doing whose whole life and work are devoted to improving things. I
mean the politicians. Year after year, decade after decade, election after
election, they promise an end to poverty and suffering and injustice and yet
how very rarely can they claim anything like such a triumph as the conquest of
tuberculosis or smallpox. And how rare, still, it is for one political party or
system to say about another party or system, 'They promised and they
delivered'. 

We seem now to be at a stage, in the United States anyway, when the two great
political parties, the Democrats and the Republicans, which really ought to be
renamed the 'liberals' and the 'conservatives', when the two parties are
suffering from profound doubts about what used to be their fundamental creeds.
I don’t believe there's one responsible Republican who's prepared to say, as
the Republican gods all parroted in the 1920s, that the only way to prosperity
is through a free enterprise system with no government control or planning. And
what is more surprising still, there are fewer and fewer Democrats who believe
that everything is best solved by more and more federal control and more and
more money from Washington. 

Last week yet another study came out of the shambles of the present welfare
system which President Carter has sworn to reform. Unbelievable figures on the
exploitation, not to say the appropriation, of welfare funds by the local
officials who were supposed to be distributing it fairly to the needy, junkets
abroad, the transfer of welfare benefits from one part of a city to another. In
some places most of the welfare funds were being used for committee meetings or
printed studies on how to spend the money. The use of cripples and babies as
portable propaganda being shifted from house to house when the inspector came.
Not to mention the siphoning-off of welfare funds to drug pushers, crooked
politicians, crooked doctors and well-disguised agents of the Mafia. 

You can say, of course, that the abuse of a system is no argument against its
merit but any system is only as good as it's workable and once money comes
pouring into the states from Washington, the sheer size of the country and the
complexity of local politics make it impossible to keep honest tabs on it. And
yet... and yet, President Carter, looking over the whole complicated mess, says
the system is too difficult to replace as soon as he'd hoped. 

A sharp, woman commentator, Meg Greenfield, has put her finger on Mr Carter's
problem – which, I might say, is the problem of the centipede wondering which
leg to put forward first – by saying, 'The question is will the Democrats let a
Democratic president pursue a domestic policy that's different from plain old
"more is better" liberalism?' And the answer seems to be, 'No!' 

To put Mr Carter's ordeal very simply, say this. Mr Carter is constantly told
that he was elected by the great, varied pressure groups of the Democrats,
labour, racial minorities, social welfare bureaucracies, the education lobby
and the ideological liberals. These people all believe in old Rooseveltian
remedies, spend and spend and soak the rich. 

Yet Mr Carter knows from unquestionable surveys that the voters who really
swung his election were the unorganised millions of Democrats who have come to
believe that big government and massive federal spending have failed and cannot
meet the problems of the 1970s. So he finds himself loathe to forego the old
rhetoric, but he knows it's not working, and this leaves him saying, in effect,
‘I do believe the federal government should move in and take hold but I'm sorry
to say the money isn't there.' And this means he's alienating both blocks of
his own party. He would sound crueller than any Republican if he said he was
going to cut down on social services. 

At the same time, the government now has an annual deficit beyond its wildest
nightmares of a few years ago – $60 billion in the red. In a word, the
president is caught between his old ideology and his new recognition of the
painful facts of life. 

In the New Year, if he's not to see his legislative plans totally stalled, he
will surely need to be born yet again.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP