Carter's popularity soars

We're always being told by high-minded students of politics that to get a
sensible perspective on your own country you have to subscribe regularly to a
foreign paper or magazine and see how we look to the others.

There's no question that this is a good, and often a sobering, thing to do. For
instance, I have a friend in San Francisco who, like Americans everywhere from
the Florida Keys to Alaska, supplements his daily paper and television news
with a weekly dose of either Time or Newsweek. But he does have a different
angle on most topics that concern America and Britain, not to mention Russia or
France, because he also takes in the British Economist. 

Well, he and I have both been in Mexico and I noticed that, when he came home
to San Francisco, he eased into his daily life with never a ripple of
discomfort or misgiving. I find this difficult to do and it can only be because
I was born and brought up in one country and have lived most of my life in
another. Interviewers always say, 'I suppose you feel equally at home in
Britain and the United States?' And that's true, but it doesn't contradict the
other truth where I feel equally strange, especially on arrival, in both
countries. This is a fact of what they now call 'alienation' which many
novelists have made into a pathetic theme. The poor expatriate is always
rootless, moody, always yearning for his native pasture. 

Well, it's a matter of temperament and expatriates come in just as many
temperaments as other people. It comes as a shock to many people, for example,
to hear that P. G. Wodehouse who in life, as well as in fiction, seemed to be a
monumentally typical Englishman, first went to America when he was 23, returned
when he was 27, decided it was the place for him and for the next 68 years of
his life spent all but about ten of them in and around New York or on
assignment to Hollywood and from all his published letters, I never read nor in
his last years ever heard him express any homesickness for England or – which
is rarer still among expatriates – ever express any irritation about America.
He was, essentially, a simple man who never needed to be told or to learn what
most people have to learn, that the vast majority of people, everywhere, don't
represent or symbolise their country. They are human beings who happen to be
born and live in a certain place. 

Is this so rare? Extremely so, in my experience and absolutely non-existent
among learned and sophisticated people who make up for their intellect or ideas
with periodic fits of childish spleen against the foreigners they find
themselves living among. Wodehouse was a very rare bird indeed. A childlike man
who was never childish. 

Well, I was saying, I have been in Mexico and I find it took more than a day or
two to get used to being back in the United States, as it also would have done
if it was England I was returning to. Mexico already seems like another planet
and because of the ruins and artefacts you see everywhere of such early
civilisations as the Mayans, a very ancient planet visited centuries ago. I
think it was Balzac who said that the desert was God with man left out. Well,
Mexico is a god-like, harsh landscape with man put in and it's quite a test of
one's faith, of a Christian faith at any rate, to believe that man was blessed
in being put there for Mexico is part of that huge reach of the south-west
where for centuries there was not enough rain to produce anything but a grain
crop, where there was hardly any animal food, where in a landscape of blinding
light and relentless heat, the human being had literally to scratch for a
living, as millions in Mexico still do. 

I suppose I ought to throw in here the old but necessary reminder that God did
not create nations but only landscapes and if there weren't immigration
stations along the border, there'd be no way of knowing that you had left
Mexico and were in the United States. It was not much more than a century ago
that the United States, after a quick and very profitable war, annexed a vast
section of Mexico and pushed the Mexicans back below the Rio Grande. 

We all know that Arizona and Texas used to be part of Mexico but it may be news
to you that when Brigham Young took his Mormon family for its long walk west
after they'd be hounded out of New England and Ohio and Missouri, he decided
that there was no possible, peaceful future for the Mormons in the United
States and that 'we had better seek out a place where the devil does not rule'.
And when he came to look down on the white flats of the Salt Lake Valley, he
said, 'This is the place'. Not just because salt in such abundance offered a
sure preservative for their food but because what is now the state of Utah was,
then, another country. It was the northernmost province of Mexico. But,
obviously, a hundred years of American development in the northern part of Old
Mexico and a hundred years of so little development in much of present Mexico
have produced enormous differences. 

I don't find Mexico instantly depressing as, say, Calcutta seems, beyond all
human hope, because the people are not listless and doomed. Even the country
poor seem lively and the children are as sprightly as grasshoppers. I think
this can only be because they have a diet a good deal healthier than most of
us, with their corn, their maize and many vegetables and the huge variety of
fruits. 

One shock which reflects poorly I'm afraid on the Anglo-Saxon is the discovery
that the restaurants, however humble, and the restaurant kitchens and the
simple hotels and the ones that are converted convents and monasteries, are
strikingly cleaner than similar places in the United States and Europe. They
have, indeed, a passion for cleanliness not, I must say, as unflagging as that
of the Siamese, the Thais. An Englishman, even an American, is made to feel
very gamey if he attends a dinner party, even more a dance, in Bangkok, for not
only do the people bathe, in the American sense that is, I mean take a bath,
several times before the party, but in the middle of it the women retire to
take another bath and change out of no matter how exquisite a dress and put on
another. Later on, perhaps, a third, since they think it is fairly repulsive to
go through a hot evening dancing in sweaty clothes. 

The main shock of returning to New York was to realise what we put up with,
what we come to take for granted, until we are away long enough. And the most
glaring thing today is the awful wobbly state of New York's avenues and side
streets. I mean the state of the road surfaces. I came home last night in a cab
and had my liver thoroughly shaken by the crashing over potholes. 

I don't believe I've ever mentioned this before simply because down the years
we've got used to the fact that the city, on its economy spree, has not only
fired hundreds of policemen and sanitation workers and school teachers and the
rest, but have done two things that make a New York cab ride one of the most
jostling ordeal imaginable, something you would imagine as being typical of a
cab ride in darkest Africa. They have withdrawn the money for street repairs
and the city has abolished the bureau that used to inspect cabs and see that
they were safe and navigable. So the cab companies now inspect themselves,
which is never a recipe for good government. 

By the way, you may wonder how New York is faring in its gallant attempt to
save and save and retreat safely from the verge of bankruptcy. You may recall
that when the storm signals went up, the annual budget of New York City was an
appalling $11 billion. Well, the economy moves have been so strict and
self-sacrificing that today the city budget has been reduced from $11 billion
to $13 billion. 

And this brings us back with a bang to the topic that I find most foreigners
seem intensely interested in, namely how is Jimmy Carter doing as president?
After a month away that seems like six months, I found myself with a new and
lively curiosity about it. Well, so far as the people are concerned, he's doing
fine. The Gallup poll which when he took office found about 50/51 per cent of
the people approving of him now gives him 70 per cent approval. And there's
much evidence that people who were strong for Ford on election day are now glad
that Carter won. 

This popularity is quite an achievement; I mean a subjective achievement, apart
from the very palpable fact that Carter, in office, has a poise and confidence
he never had when he was campaigning. A friend of mine who did not vote for
Carter, a man who's been a close watcher of American politicians since
President Harding – and that covers a span of over 50 years – says, 'On his
present showing Carter might well be the most brilliant politician since
Franklin Roosevelt.' 

Now to hear the word 'brilliant' applied to a Democrat by this man seemed very
odd. He elaborated. 'After all,' he said, 'he promised to stay close to the
people. He gets 40,000 letters a week from the people. He went on his telephone
binge and talked to exactly 42 people, yet he gave the impression he'd taken
the entire American population into his home. He said the White House must set
an example of economy and self-restraint. So, he raised the salaries of his top
staff by $400,000 saying he couldn't possibly go to the $500,000 some people
had suggested. He swore to reduce what he called the "bloated bureaucracy" of
President Ford's staff. So his staff is 30 per cent larger than Ford's, but
only, he says, for the time being. He's won universal praise for castigating
the Russians about their denial of human rights. So now he's getting ready to
embrace and normalise relations with Cuba and Vietnam whose record of human
rights must compare equally unfavourably with the Russians. And he gets away
with it! 

'I tell you,' my friend said, 'he's making Franklin Roosevelt look like a
piker.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP