Presidential expectations

Some time ago – it was, I now realise, only a month or so but it feels like an
age and must feel like a lifetime for President Carter – I talked about the
sudden ascension to the glory of the White House and the equally swift
translation back to normal life of an ex-president. What I didn't say, in the
glow of Mr Carter's sudden eminence, was something that must be borne in upon a
new president every day he's in office, which is the impossible range of
knowledge that an American president is expected to span.

When we come to think of it in retrospect, we have to realise the enormous
difference between the role of a presidential candidate and a president or, put
it more vividly and say the people elect a president on the way he stands up to
a television audience – his bearing, his elegance, or lack of it, his smile,
the way he doesn't get rattled and, I believe, only second because of the stand
he takes on one or two policies – and these are policies he picks out for their
emotional or dramatic appeal. 

Just before the first television debate between Mr Carter and Mr Ford, the
networks played over one or two of the first presidential television debates
there had ever been, between Mr Kennedy and Mr Nixon in 1960. It seemed
frivolous at the time to say, what everybody now admits, that the comparative
appearances of Mr Kennedy and Mr Nixon were decisive. Mr Kennedy looking like a
very bright choir boy who had snappy answers that belied his youth and Mr
Nixon, looking unshaven and tired and on the defensive. And that was not
because he was unshaven – he might well have been tired since he'd damaged his
knee and was in some pain – but mainly the television lights were unkind to the
make-up he'd been given. 

Well, we saw all this over again but if you listened to the substance of those
debates, you'd have got the idea that only one issue divided the country
between the two parties, the two candidates and that was the issue of Quemoy
and Matsu. 'How's that again?' I hear you saying, 'Quemoy and whatsu?' 

Well, they are two islands that lie offshore from mainland China, as close to
Communist China as Long Island is to the shoreline of Connecticut and Rhode
Island. If you turn the whole thing round and make an enormous leap of
imagination, suppose that Long Island were no longer part of the United States
but was a tiny Communist state, and then suppose that the Russians had put out
a threat to the government of the United States that if she attempted to take
over Long Island, the Soviet Union would defend Long Island by force of arms.
It sounds as wild a turn of history as any you could suggest and about as
impractical an undertaking as any country could attempt at six, seven thousand
miles. 

And yet, in 1960, it was an issue that came to the boil because Quemoy and
Matsu were technically, in fact legally, under the control of Nationalist
China, exiled itself on the big island of Taiwan, or Formosa, which is itself
only 110 miles from the mainland. 

Quemoy and Matsu were two minute islands in sight of the mainland and there was
a tremendous fuss made in 1960 about America's obligation, many Americans felt,
to stop the Chinese Communists from moving into those offshore islands. Well,
there's no point 17 years later in going on about it – there was not much point
going on about it 17 days after Kennedy moved into the White House – it was a
hollow issue and promptly forgotten and ignored to this day. 

It seems incredible now to believe that the two candidates for the presidency
were so busy through those decisive debates trading figures and emotions about
this piddling issue, yet it was on this issue and the way the candidates looked
on television that the election of 1960 turned. 

Now what the election of 1976 turned on is already a subject of dispute. No
sooner had we learned and declared that the blacks more than anybody else put
Mr Carter in the White House than, a week or two ago, Lou Harris did a careful
analysis of the national vote and found that exactly as many blacks, and no
more, voted for Carter as voted for McGovern in 1972, that the big swing was of
whites away from the Republicans to the Democrats. But whatever put Mr Carter
in the White House, it was certainly not any palpable proof that he had
mastered the huge range of issues that now beset him every day. 

And this brings us to the point that is now as sharp as a tack. Which is that
the President of the United States is, unlike most prime ministers and most
presidents of other states – unless they're dictators – in that he is at once
the leader of the party in power and the head of government and the head of
state. We've often lamented that it is a triple job no human being could
possibly succeed in but, as the head of government who is also having to watch
the rise and fall of his party's feeling on a score of very different issues,
something else is expected of him that is beyond, I believe, the human
capacity. 

He's expected, the day he moved his own furniture into the White House to be
'the' expert on everything, from the energy crisis to the fate of Angola, from
nuclear warheads to inflation, from how to regulate the labelling of
antibiotics or ice-cream or cosmetics, to how to handle government welfare
funds in 50 different states with 50 different economies, and about a hundred
other issues on which individuals, here and there, have spent a lifetime trying
to master one of them. 

Of course you can say – you can say about any president – that he has at his
elbow, any time he cares to lift a telephone, every expert in the country on
anything that's troubling him. However, the question that nags at him all the
time, and will for the next four years, is who is an expert? The experts argue
madly between themselves and no sooner does a president adopt one way of trying
to solve inflation, say by making everybody a present of $50 off his income tax
– that was a Carter promise a month ago – than legions of economists groan that
that will only set a flow of money running through the economy and make
inflation worse. 

Or he decides on wage and price controls and half the country groans again with
the reminder that it has been tried and failed miserably in peace time. Or Mr
Carter's own ambassador to the United Nations says that the Cuban soldiers in
Angola were a stabilising influence and there's a huge outcry in Congress and
in the press saying, 'What is this? The president is saying in one breath that
we take a firm stand against countries that deny people a free press and free
speech, and then we say that an expedition of invading Communists was a good
thing in Angola? We slapped down the Russians for their treatment of dissidents
and then the president sends his son to visit Peking where the treatment of
dissidents is at least as ruthless.' 

Well, in the past week, the president has gone back on his promise of a tax
rebate of $50 a person. His own experts were divided enough to convince him
that it wouldn't work. He has announced that he will ask Congress for a bill
making American consumers pay as much for domestic oil as they pay for imported
oil. He's expected to keep up with the comparative safety to the human organism
of sugar and saccharine. He must know enough about Rhodesia to decide whether
to respond to or reject the British appeal for direct American participation in
the new Rhodesian constitution. 

Meanwhile, Spain is worried that Mr Carter's nuclear policy might arrest the
work being done on nuclear plants now being built in Spain by two American
companies, so Mr Carter will have to take that up with the Spanish ambassador.
And this week the most powerful of American labour leaders took a delegation to
the White House to protest against the president's move to lift the legal
minimum wage to $2.50 an hour. They say it's not enough and they were there to
bombard him with statistics about unemployment and housing costs and the steady
increase in big city crime, about all of which he must have some accurate
information and some ideas about policy. 

And then, assuming that he's been boning up on these things during breakfast,
he gets a call from the State Department saying that a Russian trawler, two
Russian trawlers, have moved inside the restricted zone off the coast of
Massachusetts which is off limits to their fishermen. He's already heard from
the senators of Massachusetts and its representatives in the House begging him
to stop the Russians and any other interloping nations from fishing out the
coastal waters of Massachusetts which lives by fish and, in the past year or
two, has been living very poorly. Then somebody tells him it's the job of the
United States coastguard to police the offshore waters, not the State
Department. So for a day and a night there's a fierce to-do between the two
agencies and meanwhile the fishermen are staging protest meetings. Does the
United States mean what is says about protecting its fishing industry? So one
day the president orders the State Department to see that the invading trawlers
are seized and the next day the coastguard goes into action. 

Then the president holds a meeting of advisers on his new energy policy and he
says he's going to see that the price of petrol will go up gradually by fifty
cents in ten years, which is not exactly an insurance policy in national
popularity. 

In the meantime, if you live in New York, as I do, you might well ignore all
these issues in the din of a great protest meeting that took place on Wednesday
from garment workers protesting the imports of cheap clothing from abroad which
have now eaten into 50 per cent of the American clothing industry. At the same
time, the shoe manufacturers are screaming that they're going bankrupt against
the competition of cheap and well-made Spanish and Italian shoes. And the
chorus swells in Congress for protective tariffs for any industry that's having
trouble in a score of States. 

Pretty soon, I fear, Mr Carter's 70 per cent popularity is going to plummet,
not because he's doing wilful or stupid or uninformed things, but because he is
failing to be what, in the dizzy glow of the campaign, we all expected him to
be – the world's expert on everything.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP