Armed service pregnancy

A listener who describes herself as ardent – at least she said she was ardent
when she could prop up a radio set on the bathtub on Sunday morning but now
finds herself a little less ardent as she bangs the pots and pans around in
preparation for Sunday dinner – she says I must be scrupulous about saying
where I'm talking from so she can, and I quote, 'Get the thrill at the start of
imagining you roaming the Barbary coast of San Francisco or lying by a pool in
Hollywood or risking your life on the streets of Chicago.'

Dear, dear! I can see that at least 31 years of my life, fifteen hundred weeks
anyway, have been lived in vain, for way back there in the austere and shivery
winter of 1946 when there were no lights at Waterloo Station as I arrived, when
friends wrapped their seat round with newspaper as they huddled over Bob
Cratchit single coal and when gin was served from pipettes in what looked like
eye-dropper cups, way back there, these talks were proposed and set up and
authorised by my old and, I trust, still hail friend, Windsor Wellington when
head of what was baffling called 'sound radio'. They were set up to counter, or
correct, just such lurid preconceptions about the United States as my ardent
lady still seems to possess. 

I'd hoped in the intervening fifteen hundred weekends that listeners, whether
ardent or lukewarm had come to learn that when I'm in Hollywood, for instance,
I'm more likely to be a guest of the splendid Chamber Symphony Orchestra of
California than to be lolling by any pool with some bikini in false eyelashes.
Alas, that San Francisco's Barbary Coast expired about a quarter of a century
ago and is now the high street of the chicest decorators, it's sometimes known
as 'boys’ town'. Yet the remnants of the old Capone gang, now dressed in tweedy
three-piece suits, send their sons to Yale and are, as we say, 'into' banks and
the unloading of ships at American ports, so that when I'm in Chicago I run no
risk that I'm aware of. I tend to divide my time between friends at the
university and the splendid Museum of Science and Industry and the shop on
Michigan Boulevard which has the finest collection of antique English walnut in
America or Britain. 

However, so the lady will not be deceived at the start, I'd better say that I
am talking to her from London. That's not London, Ohio but London, England. If
this talk were being heard in America, I imagine her ardent counterpart would
imagine me tottering along Fleet Street to meet my old friend Dr Johnson and
raising a tankard of ale to toast Princess Anne's baby son. If there are any
Americans catching this talk on the short wave, may I say that Dr Johnson is
dead and that few Englishmen ever raise a tankard and rarely ask for ale. 

On the contrary, I've been tottering along Oxford Street picking my way through
the leather jackets and the polyethylene pants and the din of hard rock looking
for a public telephone on which to call the Post Office and ask them to restore
to life the telephone in my flat which gave out an hour after I'd arrived.
Contact was eventually made with the Post Office engineers who assured me, at
hourly intervals, that the trouble was due to a slight defect in the equipment
that activates the dial tone. I could have told them that but they said an
engineer was on his way. 

Well, after three days, he's still on his way, perhaps to his uncle or
girlfriend, but not to me. So maybe this is as useful a way as any I can invent
of assuring my friends that I'm not callous or unmindful of their existence,
I'm simply marooned at the end of a dead telephone. I am, in other words, back
in England and am reminded again that sometimes things work and sometimes they
do not. 

Now New York, heaven knows, is only satirically known as Fun City. The potholes
in the streets are a disgrace, most of the cabs look as if they've just been
dredged up from the floods that engulfed us after five inches in one day, which
is a sixth of the normal year's supply. But in these domestic crises we are
undoubtedly spoiled. When I came in from the country the other weekend, I found
a bath tap that had developed a drip, the mechanical plug in a washbasin had
ceased to plug, the front door to the apartment had bulged so during the heat
of the summer that it was difficult to burst open and the ceiling in the hall
had developed a flaky patch in the plaster through which, at about two-hour
intervals, a drip of water dripped from the pool left on the roof by the
floods. 

I called the superintendent. He said, 'Pete'll be right up'. And Pete was up
within the minute, shaving the edge of the door against the lintel, installing
a new washbasin plug and a new washer on the bath tap and an hour later the
plasterers were there redoing the patch on the ceiling. And for this lightning
service, I thought they deserved no less than a two-dollar tip. 'Thank you,
Pete!' I said. Pete is a Puerto Rican. 'De nada,' he said. 'Any time, Mr
Cooke.' He's usually accompanied by Luis, another and singularly cheerful
Puerto Rican. 'What happened to Luis?' I asked. 'Ah! Poor Luis,' he said, 'he
goes to the hospital, he has the spastic colon.' I sympathised deeply because
long ago I myself had a spastic colon. 'No,' said Pete, going on his way, 'no
problem! He will live, I think.' Well then, I'm now in England which, let us
not forget, pioneered the Industrial Revolution but has never quite conquered
the telephone. 

The day before I left New York, enough things happened to keep us buzzing for a
week. First there were the banner headlines about President Sadat's willingness
to visit Jerusalem. I don't think there's a special American angle on this but
it's startling enough and novel enough to have caused for the moment as much
excitement as Neville Chamberlain's announcement – Lord, it's been 39 years ago
– to go to Munich and arrange with Adolf Hitler for, remember, 'peace in our
time'. And there was, the same day, the unpleasant novelty of clouds of tear
gas floating across the White House lawn and causing entirely automatic tears
to flow from the eyes of President and Mrs Carter as they greeted the Shah of
Iran and his empress. The tear gas was enough to provoke, I imagine, headlines
around the world but the troop of protestors outside the White House gates was
absolutely normal. 

Some mischievous publisher in a foreign country could, in fact, easily convey
the notion that Washington is in a perpetual state of siege by filming the
protest marchers practically everywhere that President Carter goes and
certainly wherever a foreign head of state or government travels in the United
States. Prince Charles had it in Chicago and San Francisco. The Shah will have
it. So would Mr Callaghan if he came, or Mr Sadat or Mr Begin or the prime
ministers of Sweden, Albania, Italy. Name the distinguished visitor and he will
be sure to get the distinctive treatment of chanting crowds, waving banners,
shaking fists and sporadic unpleasantness because in practically every city you
can name there is a sizeable and vocal minority which nurses a grievance about
something that's happening in the country from which they, or their fathers or
grandfathers, came. 

New York, of course, has by now at least five or six generations of
professional and voluble Irishmen. Britons know this but we tend to forget, or
not to know, about the Armenians of California, the Basques of Idaho, the Greek
sponge-fishers of Florida, and in cities like Chicago, Pittsburgh,
Philadelphia, the solid ethnic groups from Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Russia,
Poland, Lithuania – name your country. 

And we all remember, I'm sure, President Ford's thundering gaffe when he
ad-libbed during one of the election campaign debates with Mr Carter that
Poland was not under the domination of the Soviet Union. I live on the eastern
end of Long Island which was overrun at the turn of the century by immigrant
Poles seeking, as immigrants tend to do, the familiar soil of their own land.
The eastern tip of Long Island is sand country and there the Poles reverted to
their old trade of potato and cauliflower farms. They are Polish Catholics to a
man and woman and at all times staunchly Republican. The morning after Mr
Ford's remark, they switched, to a man and woman, to Carter. 

The final item I picked up before I took off on the three-quarters empty jumbo
jet was something that is surely as much as anything you can quote a sign of
the times. The three branches of the American armed forces – army, navy, air
force – have, or had until 1974, a rule. Any service woman who became pregnant
was discharged. This ruling was challenged by women's rights advocates and the
rule was changed. Now she's allowed to resign honourably or, if she doesn't,
she may be recommended for discharge which still is a difficult rule to
enforce. 

However, the air force has broken new ground and lawyers in the Defense
Department say that the other services are pretty much bound to follow. The air
force announced last Monday that a service woman who becomes pregnant may now
remain in service. The lawyers looked into the old rule and decided that if it
went to the Supreme Court, it would probably be declared unconstitutional.
However, if the girl then marries, the air force rule applies which bars
married women from the air force academy. This, too, I should guess, could come
up before the Supreme Court. 

I must say that the imagination – my imagination anyway – is tickled and the
mind reels before the prospect, say five years from now, of a midshipman going
about her duties with six children in tow so long as she doesn't give any of
them what used to be called a 'good name'. Aye, aye, sir! 

Ah! P.S: the Post Office engineer is still, I guess, on his way. Please call
me. I have no way of calling you.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP