Murder of Aldo Moro

You don't have to be a very old listener to remember the time when we used the
phrase 'the Western world' with offhand confidence, assuming that the listener
would picture the block of nations of Western Europe, the United States and
Canada, united by the North Atlantic Treaty Alliance against... against, if the
worst happened, the communist bloc behind the Iron Curtain.

Well, the Western world is a very uneasy collection of allies today and it
would be foolish to pretend that its military confidence is not at least
disturbed by the thought that communist parties flourish in or around the
governments of Italy and France, while the party itself has just been
legalised, for the first time in 40 years, in Spain. 

But this week the Western world and all its factions were united by the horror
of the murder of Aldo Moro. Everywhere, in this country, the finding of his
body and the grizzly circumstances that led up to it, overwhelmed all other
topics, domestic or foreign. I don't think that moral comment is much use
unless it can help defeat the plague that afflicts all of us in the Western
world and beyond, namely terrorism, or what I, thinking of the spread of its
tactics into street crime, I prefer to call 'the success of violence'. 

There are, however, two things that ought to be talked about. One is the
bitterness, understandable enough, of the Moro family and the other is the
different attitudes of the communist parties around the world. 

The Moro family, as we know, begged the government to negotiate with the Red
Brigades and the government refused. The recovery of a live Mr Moro, at the
cost of unloosing on the world 13 imprisoned terrorists, was too much. We know
also that Mr Moro himself, weakened and despairing, felt bitter enough about
this decision to request that none of the leaders of his own party, the
Christian Democrats, should be present at his funeral. When this became known,
surely several Christians around the globe must have been struck by a peculiar
embarrassment too awful to talk about. And how can I put this without seeming
to be flint-hearted at the wrong time? 

Well, let me say first that a political leader who feels bitter about such a
party decision is morally in quite a different position from a leader of a
party calling itself the Christian Democratic Party. The blunt and unavoidable
question is ought all professing Christians to be prepared, in extremis, to die
the death of a Christian martyr? There must be among all Christians a lurking
suspicion that the answer is 'yes’. But among all Christians, too, there is the
unspoken assumption that martyrs are akin to saints and that human frailty,
being what it is, martyrdom cannot be asked or expected of the vast majority of
us. 

Among all the commentaries I've read or heard, only one writer had the very
risky courage to bring this up. He is William F. Buckley Junior, the most
powerful, certainly the most intellectual, conservative commentator in this
country. Mr Buckley is also a Roman Catholic. And in a column written before
the fate of Mr Moro was known, he suggested, very circumspectly and with much
compassion, that if Mr Moro was still alive, his duty was not to demand the
freedom of the other terrorists, but to make his peace and steel himself to die
as a Christian martyr. All the rest of us, who may have thought this, didn't
dare say it because we thought first, as everybody must have done, 'Suppose it
were I who was in Mr Moro's place and my family on the rack on the outside?' 

The other point which has for us more than a morbid interest is the official
attitude of the communists around the world, at a time when the communist
parties in several countries are trying to prove to the world that they are the
only true communists and are free from the sins of dogma or of practice of
their communist neighbours. The Soviet Union took notice of the kidnapping with
the suggestion that it was a combined effort of both right-wing and left-wing
extremists. Nobody else, I ought to say, has dreamed of the Red Brigades as a
right-wing outfit. When Mr Moro's body was found, Tass reported the death
without comment, as did the official Chinese news agency. 

The interesting variations came from the Spanish and French communists who were
concerned to make the line of their comment very clear. Both condemned the
crime but the French leader seemed anxious to remove any taint of communism
from the kidnappers by sending condolences to the communists, the democratic
forces and all the Italian people on the propaganda assumption that they're one
and the same thing. He attributed the crime to a faction, very vague indeed,
the worst reactionaries. The Spanish communist party took much the same line in
seeing it as a crime against Italian democracy and one that would, quote,
'serve the darkest forces of reaction and imperialism'. The connection between
the Red Brigades and imperialism was never explained, but the Spanish dropped a
strong hint that Mr Moro had been murdered precisely because he had brought the
Italian communists in to, or close to, the government. Therefore, whether or
not Mr Moro failed to be a Christian martyr, he can now enter the official
Pantheon as a communist martyr. 

So it's clear that however strongly the millions of the non-communist world
believe the Red Brigades to be Marxist terrorists, the many more millions of
the faithful in the communist countries have been led to believe that Mr Moro
was kidnapped and murdered by right-wing extremists, by imperialists, by those
vague, but awful, reactionaries, who could not bear the thought of having
communists in the Italian government. 

I doubt it has occurred to many of us that, numerically, most of the world is
likely to cite Mr Moro from now on as the supremely cruel example of what
happens to a Western statesman if he tries to make his peace with the
communists. It's a bleak thing to think about. I mention this obscure, but
crucial, point and pass on. 

If there had been no Moro case, I imagine that the big and contentious issue to
bombard the papers and the television more than it has done would have been Mr
Carter's so-called 'package' arms deal with Israel, Egypt and Saudi Arabia. By
now it's extremely complicated and embarrassing to the administration because
when Mr Carter first announced it, he did so with confidence as a way of
showing his even-handedness, his praiseworthy lack of partisanship in dealing
with the Arabs and the Israelis. I should guess that Mr Carter's motive was a
peacemaking one after the long and tortuous arguments between Mr Sadat and Mr
Begin, about the true basis of a peaceful settlement in the Middle East. As we
all know by now, the heartening initiative of Mr Sadat at Christmas time has
come to nothing. 

Evidently Mr Carter and his aides did not think through the effect on the
country of his package deal, certainly he did not correctly check the pulse of
public feeling. There may have been – there was, for a time – widespread
resentment over the Israeli refusal, in the United Nations jargon, to implement
'242', that's to say, carry out the old UN resolution requiring Israel to
withdraw from all the lands – the resolution says 'lands' – she captured in the
1967 war. But pretty soon, and after the speechmaking tour here of Mr Begin,
people began to see that one hair-raising way of resolving the deadlock between
Egypt and Israel was to give, to sell, Saudi Arabia 60 of the most advanced
warplanes in the American arsenal – the F-15 jet fighter. 

In no time, Congress was up in arms. In the most biting opposition speeches, it
was suggested that Mr Carter was being even-handed only in the sense that on
the one hand he was swearing to uphold the integrity of the state of Israel
and, on the other, giving Saudi Arabia the means to destroy it. The
administration backed away from its Republican critics by saying it was only
continuing or carrying out a policy created by President Ford. However, on
Tuesday, former secretary of state Henry Kissinger came in to a session of the
Senate foreign relations committee to say firmly that the Ford administration
had simply talked to Saudi Arabia about the possibility of warplanes, had had
technical discussions but had never entertained any formal request. 

It may be mischievous, but it's interesting to notice that this excuse of the
Carter administration that it's only following out a policy of the Ford – the
previous Republican – administration is a line that would have heaped derision
on Mr Carter's head and lost him very many votes when he was running for
president. Then, he assured us passionately, he was going to scrutinise,
without mercy, the democratic credentials of any nation wanting arms, he was
going to reduce the military budget by billions – well, it's gone up and the
military customers of the United States make very strange, democratic
bedfellows. 

Anyway, the ball was thrown back to Mr Carter. His original package deal
entailed 15 F-15s for Israel, 60 F-15s for Saudi Arabia, 75 lesser planes for
Israel and 50 for Egypt. He now suggests a compromise. Israel to get, in all,
60 F-15s, bringing its total to that of Saudi Arabia and a promise, or a
provision, that the F-15s sold to Saudi Arabia will not be equipped with
air-to-surface weapons. In other words, they will be able to fight only in the
air. They will, also, he promises, not be based close to Israel. He doesn't say
how this can be guaranteed. 

So now the administration rests and the opposition flourishes. I hope it's not
flippant to end on a very different note, on the note of a songwriter. He's a
very harried songwriter. He's made a commitment for a new show, he's written
the songs but he's scared. 'Once I make a commitment', he says, 'I have to go
through with it. You feel good one day, bad the next and, if you have a bad
night's sleep – and I've been a bad sleeper all my life – then I say to myself,
why the hell did I take this on?' 

Poor fella! Plainly he needs experience. He should work with some old pro who's
learned to sleep well and work calmly, every day. But you have to salute this
tyro, he's just had his 90th birthday. His name is Irving Berlin.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP