Skylab crash lands

I liked the remark of the man at the Houston Space Center who was in charge of
bringing down Skylab. When the first word came in that the crash landing was
over and that most of it had fallen in the ocean and the rest in the Australian
desert, he was asked by a reporter if he was satisfied. He was plainly much
relieved, even by this first report but he said, 'When it's all over and we
hear that the people of Australia had a fine firework display and that nobody
was hurt and nothing was damaged, then I'll be satisfied.'

That's a simple sentence but I offer you as a parlour game this evening a sort
of New Statesman competition. Make up single sentences that might have voiced
the reaction of various public figures if they'd been in charge of rolling
Skylab over and bringing her down. What would Jimmy Carter have said? Mrs
Thatcher? Kojak? Evel Knievel? Mr Whitelaw? John McEnroe? Woody Allen? Groucho
Marx? I'm pretty sure Groucho was watching it from up there and probably
addressing it as it went by, 'How much would you charge to run into an open
manhole?' How about Dan Maskell? 'Oh! I say!!' 

Woody Allen I think would be the most memorable, if not the most practical. He
doesn't think aloud much in public but when he's prodded he can come through
with axioms as wise and lunatic as anything ever said by Mark Twain. 

I remember the time, many of you will remember – it must have been as much as
ten years ago, when there was a big solemn question being bandied between
philosophers, theologians and simple headline writers. Time – the magazine, not
the father – had a whole cover story about it and put the grave question in red
capitals, 'IS GOD DEAD?'. And there was a television panel about it in New York
and they brought in some of the heaviest thinkers of our time, people like
André Malraux and Reinhold Niebuhr and Albert Schweitzer. Albert Schweitzer was
dead by then but you'll get the feel of the symposium if I tell you that he was
there in spirit. 

Well, by some howling error of miscasting, Woody Allen had also been invited,
not to provide light relief, somebody'd simply made a mistake. And he sat on
the edge of the group looking like a displaced person, an owl who'd defected
and was clearly as uncomfortable as the audience seeing him there. He took no
part in the weighty discussion of reincarnation, predestination, immortality,
atheism, the decay of institutional religion and other allied subjects. 

But towards the end, the MC, the Dick Cavett or Robin Day or whoever was in
charge, spotted him there, licking his lips and crossing his legs on the edge
of this profound dialogue and he turned to him with a brave air of including
him in and yet not seeming to condescend. 'Mr Allen,' he said breezily, 'we
haven't heard from you. Would you like to tell us, is God dead?' Woody Allen
uncrossed his legs, touched his spectacles and said, 'Not only is God dead, but
you can't get a dentist at the weekend.' I'm sorry to tell you it was the only
memorable line to come out of a two-hour clash between all those big brains. 

I shall remember the director of the Houston Space Center though because his
reaction was direct, decent and sensible – a note that not one politician in a
hundred can strike spontaneously, not because they mean to be devious, but they
have always in the back of their minds considerations that have nothing to do
with the matter in hand. They have to imagine how what they say will sound
later, or look like in print, what their party leaders will think of it, their
constituents, whether it's the sort of remark that will be remembered later and
quoted in election campaigns as a typical example of a man trying to put a firm
foot forward and stepping into a... into... well, an open manhole. It amazes me
how rarely a smart and pleasant politician trusts his immediate instincts when
he's on a spot. 

The only immortal mayor of New York City, the late Fiorello LaGuardia, had no
trouble whatever with his public statements whether written or off the cuff. He
attributed most of the troubles of New York City – crime, high sales taxes,
housing shortages – not to his office but to the other party, the Democratic
politicians whom he regularly called 'punks and tinhorns.' But when he
committed some howler, he simply said, 'I don't often make mistakes but when I
do make one, it's a beaut!' 

Just think what you would have said, waiting there at Houston, not sure whether
you were going to have to explain tons of metal crashing down on a big city
with hundreds, perhaps thousands of people killed and homes smashed and then
the word comes in 'mostly in the sea and the rest, we think, safely over Perth
and into the desert'. But not yet absolutely sure. So, 'When it's all over and
we hear that the people of Australia had a fine firework display and that
nobody was hurt and nothing was damaged, then I'll be satisfied.' 

It would be nice to say that that was the end of it but I suppose there'd have
been a grouch from the people of any country it landed in. The great hope at
Houston was that they could somehow contrive to bring it down in the sea but I
don't think any of us laymen, in fact I doubt there are more than a few hundred
people alive, who can even imagine the enormous complexity of controlling it.
When I, for instance, an interested layman but I hope no dummy, when I heard
about the ability of Houston to trigger the moment when it should fall out of
orbit, I immediately thought of the control Houston exerted over John Glenn's
first craft and how, in all the subsequent Apollo missions, they were able to
have a destroyer in sight of the actual spot in the Pacific or the Caribbean or
wherever the astronaut would, and did, splash down. But this was as different
as a problem in astrophysics from a sum in simple arithmetic. 

Just think! Skylab made a complete orbit of the earth every 90 minutes, going
at 17,000 miles an hour. It had been whizzing around since 1973. Once it
started its re-entry, its temperature would go up to about 2100 degrees
Fahrenheit. The computers at Houston, fed by tracking stations all around the
world, are capable of pinpointing a movement of this monster going at 17,000
miles an hour within less than a hundredth of a second. But it's not enough if
you take out a map, pick a likely point of impact. Even assuming that Skylab
would fall and whiz at a calculated speed, you can see why, until the last day,
nobody, but nobody, could say for certain whether it would fall on Penzance or
New England or the Indian Ocean or southern Spain. 

They'd refined it by Wednesday morning but even the last guess, any guess, had
to be based on the fundamental fact that, at best, the debris would scatter
over a path about 4,000 miles long. That's about the only statistic which, to
me, anyway, gives a bewildering hint of the speed of an object they were trying
to pinpoint on a map. The marvel is that before it was down they were able to
say it would 'probably' be in the Indian Ocean and over south-western
Australia. 

The first American headline I read on Friday morning was, 'Australians Chiding
the United States Hunt Skylab Debris'. A lady called a Perth newspaper to say,
'I think it stinks that they delayed the descent so it missed them and hit us'
– which is about as wild a misjudgement of the powers of the boys in Houston as
can be imagined. And then, unfortunately, the mischievous words 'alleged' and
'reported' took over. Thus, many Australians were upset over a reported remark
by a space official in Washington that Australia was a good place for the space
station to come down because, quote, 'there are only kangaroos there'. I would
take a whopping bet that no space official, no congressman, no American who was
worth reporting could have dreamed up any such absurdity. 

But NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, had to reply.
Obviously a true, scientific answer would have been incomprehensible to
newspaper readers and writers. All they could say in one weary word was that
they had not, and were not, able to 'aim' the craft at Australia or for that
matter at any other chosen country. 

I can only hope if that lady in Perth and any other indignant citizens are
listening, they'll believe me when I say a one-hour visit to the Space Control
Center in Houston would rid them forever of the Hollywood B-film delusion that
these wizards would pick out any land area, except they did have a better
chance, obviously, with the great extent of the deserts than they had with even
picking the sea close to highly populated countries. The atmosphere in the
Houston Center is one of almost eerie silence, except for the chattering of the
machines and the punctuation of sound impulses. They are totally dedicated to
their concentrated best beyond anything I've seen in, say, the control tower of
an airport. 

Yet the Sydney Daily Mirror is quoted in our papers as finding 'a fatal flaw in
the American technological genius, a determination to push ahead with new
technology whatever the cost'. That, I think, is probably debatable. But the
inquest at the American end contains the rueful admission that the next push
ahead in space technology is to try and do what the Russians have already done
– to be able to boost a space station in a decaying orbit up to a higher and
stable orbit. The Russians have one such station, the only one, now in orbit,
Salyut 6. Its orbit will start to decay some time next month and if the
Russians were no more advanced than the Americans, we'd have another scare on
our hands, our oceans, our deserts, our towns. But it won't happen. It will
simply be pushed into a higher orbit and stay there. 

The Americans have no more Skylabs in orbit and won't have till probably next
year they put to work what is called a re-usable space shuttle. The Americans
know and the Russians know and the Australians may take heart from the
knowledge that the first American space shuttle will be better built, more
responsive, superior in quality to anything that the Russians now have. This,
er... 'I can do anything better than you can' – a game that the two superpowers
have been playing since the late Forties – has been glaringly emphasised by the
Skylab episode. And I'm pretty sure that it will make the Senate take a
shrewder, more sceptical look in the coming debate over ratifying SALT II.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP