Press freedom

This is a very – how shall I put it – delicate weekend to be doing a talk from
the United States that's heard in the first place in the British Isles for the
obvious reason of next Thursday's General Election. I can hardly believe my own
voice when I say that there was a time, and not so long ago either, when a
British General Election gave me the cue to talk about the kind of problems of
government – inflation, social strain and so on – we all have in common, but
this year I hear two warning notes.

The first is an echo from the very long ago but one that sounds loud and clear
at this time of the year, especially in the halls and corridors of the British
embassy in Washington. It's the echo of the awful hullabaloo that rose across
the United States almost a hundred years ago. I talked about it not long ago so
I'll now simply throw in a reminder. It was caused by two letters. The first
from a man in California writing to the British minister in Washington, in the
days when Washington was not important enough to rate an ambassador and the
second was the British minister's innocent reply. 

The Californian pretended to be an Englishman who'd been naturalised as an
American citizen, though he was in fact an American and a Republican. He wrote
to ask for a little guidance and advice about the forthcoming presidential
election. Who did the minister think would be the best man to vote for?
Incredibly – it's still incredible to think back on – the minister promptly
wrote back to say, 'I think Mr Cleveland, the Democratic candidate, is the
man'. Of course, the delighted Republicans published the letter. The Democrats
howled and the minister was given his papers and his marching orders. 

Now the second warning is very recent. It comes to me not as an individual, but
simply as a journalist, it comes from the Supreme Court of the United States.
The court has just ruled that in a libel suit, the person who claims he's been
libelled has the right not only to see the sources that the libeller quoted or
used, but he also has a right to ask him what was going through his mind when
he put together the alleged libel. Now this came out of a suit against the
Columbia Broadcasting System and it's very popular, Sunday evening programme
called 'Sixty Minutes'. Each week it takes three topics and devotes 20 minutes
to each of them. 

I call these items topics rather than issues because they're only rarely about
burning political issues. They are more often than not the results of rather
vigorous digging by four CBS correspondents about some... some racket, some
injustice that most of us know nothing about. They discover, for instance, that
somebody in Florida is doing a roaring business in selling real-estate lots
over the phone, lots that turn out not to exist. They expose a chain of phoney
private medical clinics in Illinois. They examine some odd religion that's
milking its parishioners for millions. 

The topics chosen and the charges of fraud that are either implied, or very
explicitly made, in these television reports are bold and vivid. And I, myself,
often wonder how the CBS quartet of distinguished reporters manages to get such
direct interviews not only with the victims of these various rackets, but also
with the people who perpetrate them. I think 'Sixty Minutes' is probably the
most thoroughly professional and daring programme of muckraking – in the most
honourable sense – now on the American air. And, I hasten to say for people
overseas, that 'Sixty Minutes' bears no resemblance to the sort of juicy, hyped
up, sex story or gossipy pretence of free speech that defile so many European
tabloids. 

What often strikes me about 'Sixty Minutes' is that its reporters must have
done a brutally thorough amount of digging to dare to make such downright
accusations. Well, recently they did a story about a former army colonel who
had reported many atrocities in Vietnam. At this late date, nobody surely
doubts that there were many such but the CBS men picked this story because
they'd looked into the colonel's particular charges and decided that they
wouldn't stand up. The colonel sued for malicious defamation. To support its
case, CBS turned over to the courts volumes of reporters' notes, programme
drafts, the videotapes of interviews it had used on the programme and
interviews it had not used. The colonel wanted to know why this interview was
left out and why that one was used. He wanted to know the substance of the
usual conferences between the producer of the programme and the correspondent
who was in charge of the research and who appeared as the CBS spokesman or
reporter on the air. 

Well, CBS said, 'Steady! That would be tantamount to an exhaustive statement
about our motives in editing the programme, why we cut this, why we put that
in, everything that was going through everybody's mind while the programme was
being created.' This may have sounded sarcastic, but to the astonishment of CBS
and the dismay of most newspapers in this country, the Supreme Court ruled that
the colonel had a right to know these things. In other words and, as a general
rule, the court was saying that when a public figure is suing for libel, he/she
has a constitutional right in trying to prove the malice that the libel
statutes require, has a right to enquire not only into the sources, the
documents, and so on, of the alleged libellers, but also their thoughts and
procedures while they're putting together their story. 

Well, this ruling follows on two other recent judgement of the court which many
people, and I should say a majority of reporters, feel are a blow to freedom of
the press. The first involved a reporter from the New York Times whose private
digging into the circumstances of a murder case brought the defendant to court.
During the trial, the defendant demanded to see the reporter's notebooks and to
know the identity of the people he'd talked to. The reporter refused to
disclose them on the old ground that a reporter has a privileged right to
protect his sources. The Supreme Court said, 'Not so! There is no special right
possessed by a reporter over and above his rights as an ordinary citizen.' 

Well, the reporter went to jail and the New York Times paid out several hundred
thousands of dollars in fines so long as the man was serving his sentence. 

The other case was one in which the court upheld the right, or rather asserted
a right, of the police to raid a newspaper office and search for documents and
notes and reports – in a word, the files – to use as evidence in a criminal
case. This, too, the humblest reporter will tell you was another shocker and
one that makes every reporter think twice about tapping any individual for
confidential information. And certainly makes any human being having
confidential information think twice about giving it to a reporter. 

This ruling made us think back to the Watergate case and wonder if the
president’s men had challenged the right of those two unflagging reporters on
the Washington Post whether there would ever have been an exposure of President
Nixon's involvement. 

Of course, there are lawyers who say that these new protections for anybody who
might be libelled will not harm reporters who can prove that their motives are
pure. Frankly, it seems to me that if a reporter had to watch his step and his
note-taking every time he went out on a story, every time he interviewed
somebody who might or might not be helpful, a great deal of the time his job
would be so hedged around with fears and precautions that his notes wouldn't be
worth the paper he was writing on. He'd be strongly inclined to say, 'The heck
with it! I'll get a job driving a cab in which nobody's going to have a legal
right to challenge me in court to say why I took this fare and not that, and
what was going through my mind when I ducked down this side street to save time
instead of going straight down Piccadilly.' 

Well, I may be growing paranoid but there seems to me ample justification for
not talking about even, say, the similarities and differences between an
American and a British election campaign lest some court begins to enquire why
I mentioned this similarity and left out that. The mere choice of an adjective,
two adjectives, as between Mrs Thatcher and Mr Callaghan might in the mind of
some ingenious lawyer bring me up to explain why this adjective was chosen and
not some blander substitute. 

What a relief it will be next week when it's all over, to know that no words of
mine could possibly affect a voter's vote, that no inflection of my voice will
be taped and played over in a British court as evidence, as testimony anyway,
that led to somebody's losing his or her deposit. I wish you all well. I am
scrupulously neutral. My private thoughts about the British election are
pasteurised to the point of sterility. I have taken no notes, exchanged no
thoughts – swear! – with my buddies, my British friends, my wife. I have
retreated in the past week into only the purest thoughts about old-time jazz,
golf and a bet I have with a lady friend about who played opposite Madeleine
Carroll in 'Secret Agent'. 

In this state of mind, I even hesitate to report on anything at all political
that has happened in the United States lest my choice of subject should be
suspect. Suppose, suppose I were to tell you that Mr Carter is going to have a
rough time in the Senate getting through the almost-completed treaty with the
Russians, the so-called SALT agreement, that's an agreement for the limitation
of strategic arms. Who does not want to limit the piling up of nuclear arms?
All good men and true, and I hasten to say all good women, too, want an end to
the arms race. 

The administration – Mr Carter, if you will – says of course we're all agreed
on the aim. He says that the treaty that's being worked out will do it. His
opponents say that, on the contrary, the treaty binds the United States to
certain limits but will give a new lease on nuclear arms production to the
Soviet Union. The Republican leader in the Senate says he will oppose the
Carter treaty unless there are more foolproof provisions for monitoring or
checking on Soviet nuclear tests. 

So, I say unto you, go to the polls in all purity of heart and vote your
conscience! I don't need to warn you against voting for your purely personal
interests. Nobody in a democracy, surely, would do that!

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP