US v UK elections

Twenty-odd years ago, my editor asked me to go over to England to cover a
British General Election and make such comparisons with an American
presidential campaign as occurred to me along the way.

On the way in from London Airport, I scanned the hoardings for election
posters, for the billboards that would show cosmetic pictures of the two
leaders over some such slogans as Labour is Your Neighbour, or Eden is Leadin'.
I saw none. No hint anywhere on the hustings that there was to be, or had ever
been, a General Election. Come to think of it, there was one which puzzled me
deeply. It said, 'Truman. Courage'. I asked a native in the airport bus what it
could possibly mean. He gave me a lacklustre look of the sort reserved for an
American tourist who asks 'What is the Cup Final?' and he said, stonily, 'It's
a beer.' 

Next day, I took off for the country and in all my travels from Reading to the
West Country, and up through the Midlands, and on to Scotland, and back to the
wind-up in Manchester, I saw no buttons or bows, no surging crowds in football
stadiums, no airplanes skywriting 'Madly with Adlai' or the British equivalent
at $1,000 an hour. There were no motorcades with six cars, three press buses
and eight police outriders sirening into a city square with the candidate and
his spread-eagled arms, acknowledging the roars of 20,000 people, like Hitler
entering Vienna. 

Much more typical was a day spent with Mr Attlee and his wife. They drove alone
in a Mini car through the country lanes, and they came to a church or a
schoolhouse and he stood up before a hundred or a dozen citizens and he made a
sort of scoutmaster's pep talk and then drove off again to a rustle of hand
claps. 

Certainly there were rallies, so-called, such as you might muster in the United
States for a particularly heated parent-teachers meeting, but they were held in
halls, not coliseums, where there was no army of youth for Eden wearing blue
boaters, no flights of Attlee balloons, no vast flock of waving banners to give
the impression that you're present at an indoor battle of Agincourt. There
would be several hundred people listening to what the man had to say. There
would be, to an American, the novelty of people standing up in turn to
challenge the speaker on this point or that. Hecklers went so far as to shout,
'Yah, but 'ow about pensions?' Or 'Not bloody likely, mate!' These intruders
were politely hushed and the man said, 'Thank you one and all!' And that was
it. 

In the United States, 20,000 people pack into Madison Square Garden or Soldiers
Field in Boston and they are all of one party, one mind. They are rallies of
the faithful and any interloper from the other party who got up and heckled
would be hustled out by a couple of shocked cops. 

I came to the conclusion that a British election campaign compared with an
American election campaign was as a prayer meeting to a Roman circus. 

Well, from the television clips we've seen of the recent British election
campaign, I gather there've been some changes made. 'American-style', was what
the British commentators called it and I'm afraid they're right, though Mrs
Thatcher's borrowings seem to have been from early Coolidge to middle Nixon.
Calvin Coolidge wore Indian headdresses and patted melancholy cows for the
edification of three or four news agency photographers. Mrs Thatcher nursed a
calf for a swarm of television cameras. What bothered me most was what I've
called the 'Nixon borrowings', only because he most thoroughly adopted a public
relations technique whereby most of his speeches were vetted for content and
tone by the roving watchdogs of an advertising agency. 

Mr Nixon was, I believe, the first American to be convinced that Richard Nixon
as God created him was not quite right for exposure to the multitude. No later
than his first run for the Senate almost 30 years ago, he delivered himself as
promising raw material to a couple of advertising geniuses and they moulded and
barbered not a man but the image of a man whom their private surveys told them
would be most appealing to most voters. Well, it turned out for him to be a
Faustian bargain, for in the end he came to prefer what was cagey to what was
true. 

Plainly the new British campaign technique has a long way to go towards that
torturous end. The role of the advertising men appeared to have been restricted
to what, figuratively speaking, you might call that of a movie director. A
little more of the working man's downrightness here! A more true blue county
note there! Occasionally you could almost hear the hired television therapists
whispering, 'Just a touch slower!' and 'A chuckle there perhaps!' Still, I'd
like to have seen anybody suggesting to Winston Churchill which convictions he
ought to stress or telling Ernest Bevin when to breathe or what to think! The
British adoption of advertising wizards as political advisers would do well, I
humbly suggest, to stop where it started. 

Americans, who don't like to see Britain going American in anything if only
because of the uncanny British gift for picking up the worst of America instead
of the best, were greatly relieved to hear that nobody has yet thought of
introducing the system whereby a million voters will pull a lever, walk into a
curtained cubicle in turn, tap little levers of their choice, then pull the big
lever to let them out. But that also rattles up the cumulative votes so that, a
couple of hours later, the city count is in. The whole city. And the Irish
Democrats on Third Avenue are already steeped in sorrow or reeling in ecstasy. 

It was good to hear – and was in keeping with our fondness for Old England –
that men and women of matchless honesty and patience would, on the contrary, be
separating out bits of paper by hand, some white, some off-white and making
little piles of votes for councillors and votes for MPs and then dividing them
into other piles and counting them till their lips grew tired in the dawn. 

But, happily for all of us, not least for the sanity of the British nation, one
thing in British elections has not changed. The campaign lasts three or four
weeks at most. It's a painful reminder that an American presidential campaign
begins no later than the first month or two of any president's third year. He
imagines he was elected for four years but once past the halfway mark he sees
the presidential hopefuls of the opposing party, and frequently one or two of
his own, trotting in to the paddock. 

Mr Carter already faces at least four Republicans who are officially entered
for the 1980 race. There must be half a dozen others who look in the shaving
mirror every morning and see a future president. And from his own stable, he
sees a young pretender in Governor Brown of California and half the party has
its stopwatch out on Senator Edward Kennedy. The president is not alone.
Senators and congressmen up for re-election in November 1980 are already
reacquainting themselves with the geography and folk ways of their beloved
native states and making up to fat cats for the wherewithal to finance all
those stadium rallies and television commercials and banners and posters, and
buttons and bows. 

Elections are now big business and the media and the advertising agencies can't
wait for the suspense of the thing itself. They draft it with all the tender
care of the next television crime series. They manufacture the suspense and
stretch it throughout two years. But however soon or late the grizzly process
starts, the effect on the politicians, whether in America or Britain, is much
the same. In the United States where, once the two presidential candidates are
chosen, the actual campaign runs for four or five months and, in Britain, where
this time it ran for four weeks. The debate starts with an elaborate, even a
reasonable, parade of the issues. Then the polls show them running too close
for the comfort of either side. The PR men step in and tell them that one issue
is boring the people while another is inflaming them. So they concentrate on
the combustible material and, whether in the last month of an American campaign
or the last week of a British campaign, the debate begins to deteriorate.
Self-righteousness, the cardinal sin, takes over. Less and less is the
indignation truly felt. It's pumped up. 

Nothing in American public life is more obnoxious than the swollen veins and
the hurt tremolo of a presidential candidate in his last speech on election eve
as he works himself up into a paroxysm of outrage over the sins of the
opposition party and the dreadful prospect they offer of the ruin of the
Republic. 

And, in the end, it seemed to me the British campaign resolved itself into a
hoarse exchange between two barking dogs, so that in the final days, Labourites
were warning us of a return to capitalist greed and a free-for-all and the
Conservatives were frightening us with the threat of a Labour government
hell-bent for Moscow. 

But then, at last, there's a winner. And the new president or prime minister
who, through the fever of the campaign has declared the great aim to be nothing
less than to usher in a new deal or a square deal or the great society or a new
Britain, must get down to the business of governing, which is to say, to decide
whether to put a penny on the price of bread, to give window cleaners a
four-day week, to call out the troops in a garbage strike, to introduce
computers into the Post Office, to ration petrol, to make social security cover
unemployed hairdressers. 

An election is then seen to be only a crisis in the process of government and
not the process itself, like a war, an earthquake, an epidemic, birth, death,
marriage, a revolution even. And since in all the Western democracies there is
no thumping majority for a single ideology since, indeed, their governments
govern with hair's-breadth majorities or none at all, they must, in the
meantime, devote themselves to the long pull of mending and making-do, dealing
with the humdrum, the day-to-day grumbles and chores of life. 

In a democracy, anyway, most government and most of life, I shouldn't wonder,
is conducted 'in the meantime'.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP