Chinese state visit

Last Sunday, in the early evening, I was sitting in a hotel room in San
Francisco watching the day, a brilliant day, fade over the bay into a purple
backdrop against the Berkeley Hills which were beginning to be peppered with
the lights going on in a thousand homes.

A big cruise ship was anchored in the bay and all its lights came on and a
spotlight picked out its yellow, elliptical funnel. Down below me the cable
cars clicked in the slots up the long grade of California Street, the riders
hanging on the steps like a swarm of volunteers on an emergency troop train. A
very ordinary, a very San Francisco scene, always calm and always bright. 

Suddenly, the air erupted with a 'rat a tat tat!!' And that, said a man, is
gunfire, which is not a particularly morbid thought in the city that holds the
record, of all American cities, for random street crime. I threw open the
window and peered, pretty wearily, down into the blobs of trees that enclose
the little park on Nob Hill. There was another louder rattle like a splatter of
machine guns, except that – what I imagine doesn't happen with machine guns –
it was followed by spraying little lights that winked and went out, and then
another barrage and tiny fountains of colour. Of course it wasn't gunfire, it
was fireworks! And, as the night came on, they kept ripping and crackling all
over town. 

That's when I had the second thought. San Francisco has the largest Chinese
population of any city outside Hong Kong. They were simply busy introducing the
New Year, the Year of the Ram, which we are told, and I trust you're as puzzled
as I am, celebrates artistry and pessimism. 

Well, that was the day Mr Deng, the senior deputy premier of communist China –
but, we are assured, after many turns of fate, absolutely top man – the day he
chose to fly to the United States, the first Chinese leader to come here after
30 years of what we might call 'distrust and enmity' and what Mr Deng, after
he'd been greeted by a Marine band, tactfully called 'a period of
unpleasantness.' 

He was standing beside President Carter who was looking as toothsome as a man
who'd just welcomed a brother freed from jail on some unjust charge. And when I
heard Mr Deng make his little speech, I simply didn't know, and I don't know,
how to describe this baffling scene. I imagine Alice, the Alice of Wonderland,
might have a word for it, and another word when, as the evening came on, who
should walk into the White House sleek and smiling in a dinner jacket but
Richard M. Nixon, another fugitive from a period of unpleasantness. 

All the other guests at the state dinner given for Mr Deng on his first evening
in Washington went in by the back door of the White House, but we learned that
of all the magnificos present, the diplomatic corps, the cabinet, the judges of
the Supreme Court, Mr Nixon ranked fourth in line of precedence after the
president. So he went in by the front entrance. 

Mr Carter's speech of welcome was mercifully brief and so was Mr Deng's
response but they managed, in about two minutes, to give such a totally
different account of what Mr Deng was doing there that to any ordinary citizen
trying to understand the purpose of the visit, chaos was come again. Mr Carter
said it was to share the prospect of a fresh flow of commerce, ideas and
people. Mr Deng said that the factors making for war are visibly growing. This
was an uncomfortable note to strike and the administration officials who were
present were relieved when he went on to say that he was here to explore ways
to develop our contacts in the political, economic, scientific, technological
and cultural fields. 

To most Americans there, that meant that China is desperately in need of
tractors, oil drilling equipment, steel, computers and so on, but then Mr Deng
airily allowed that the United States and China would unite to put curbs on the
polar bear, since, he said, we hold a similar view of the threat of the USSR.
Mr Carter must have called on all his reserves of Christian charity and
forbearance to hear this without groaning out loud because he's been at painful
pains to announce that the new recognition of China intends and implies no
threat to the Soviet Union and he appears to get the message to the Russians
almost every other day that the United States will not sell arms to China. Mr
Carter, I think, certainly believes this and the Russians may just possibly
believe it. But France is going to sell China anti-aircraft missiles and
Britain is going to sell her jet fighters and the Soviet press is instructed to
say that they're being put up to it by the United States. 

So while we're all nodding and smiling at the American-Chinese honeymoon –
which perhaps because I'm in San Francisco reminds me of the mutual
congratulations ceremonies that attended the birth of the United Nations here
34 years ago – we ought to give a thought to the men in the Kremlin and what
their response might be to the present Chinese foreign policy, which is
certainly new and vigorous whatever suspicions we may harbour about any drastic
changes in the running of China itself. 

If you look out from Moscow at the Chinese, I'll bet you do not see what Mr
Carter saw in his State of Union address as a new 'foundation of international
cooperation' which excludes no nation. You see China signing first a treaty of
friendship with Japan. Then you see the successor to Chairman Mao, Chairman Hua
himself, paying friendly visits to Romania and Yugoslavia. Then you see the big
man, the little big man, Mr Deng, being given a state dinner at the White
House, you see the United States swearing to build up the backward technology
of China, and arms from America's allies going at last to Peking. 

A famous political scientist in Washington, sensing the way things were going
last summer, five months before Mr Carter dropped his bombshell about
normalising relations with China, wrote an ominous sentence. 'There are
Russians,' he wrote, 'who are not willing to wait until China, perhaps armed
and modernised by the United States, has become a mega superpower.' Now this
will sound naive or too premature a prophecy to people who have recently been
into the Chinese interior and seen the desperate poverty of the masses of the
people and the primitiveness of their technology, which were so artfully hidden
from the foreigner by the iron regime of Chairman Mao. 

In other words, as the Belgian China expert, Simon Leys puts it, 'Deng arranged
for his generals to examine the latest equipment of the European armies but
China is not financially able to do anything rash in this area. Nonetheless,
after it had played with the latest models of Western weaponry, the Chinese
supreme command was convinced that its foot soldiers in sandals were not up to
facing Soviet armoured divisions. The only hope of the Chinese army's ever
acquiring minimum credibility depends on Deng's modernisation programme which
now enjoys the unconditional support of the military.' 

Well, the Russians certainly know as well as we do the history of the power
struggles inside China during the past 20 years and the massive repression and
slaughter that accompanied them but for every Russian that says that China
cannot possibly be a military threat, for a generation at least, there will be
ten old Russians to recall that, as late as 1933 or 4, Nazi Germany was known
to have no air force beyond a division of gliders. In short, the Carter
administration is, I think, going to have to be highly sensitive to Russian
sensitivity and to brace itself for some new, alarming move to counter the
American embrace of China. 

But, as I say, for the moment we have been fascinated and dazed by the
triumphal visit of Mr Deng and more than curious about the sight of Mr Nixon
dining as the third honoured guest in the White House. If you think I jest in
saying that it sounds like a missing scene from Alice in Wonderland, just
consider two men. 

Mr Deng was the son of a wealthy landlord, went to Paris after the First War
and joined the Communist Party, for over ten years was a soldier, fighting
first Chiang Kai-shek, then the Japanese, then Chiang again. He helped to draft
China's communist constitution, moved up the hierarchy to become
secretary-general of the party, was then fired by Mao and demoted to become,
for eight years, a simple factory worker. Then, only five years ago,
resurrected as Chinese ambassador to the United Nations, then in 1976 purged
again – and 'purging' meant seeing his colleagues tortured or murdered and his
daughter permanently crippled. Then it was the purger's turn and Deng was back
with his men and became the big chief and a chief advocate of the drive to
modernise, to industrialise and, now, to restore the businesses of the hated,
so-called 'capitalist' traitors. 

Mr Nixon's history needs, at this late date, no elaboration. Thirty years ago a
leading congressman, then a senator, then vice president, then whipped once for
all as governor of California, then oblivion. And then back! As president, no
less. And president again. And then the first president in history to be warned
of his certain coming impeachment on charges of high crimes and misdemeanours.
And the first to resign in disgrace. 

I should love to have been a fly on the wall at the White House state dinner
and to see Mr Deng and Mr Nixon off in a corner. Perhaps they talked about
modernisation and tractors, perhaps they talked about artistry and pessimism,
perhaps they talked about the weather. I like to think that if they had a
moment to themselves they congratulated each other on possessing the supreme
gift of the politician – the gift of survival.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP