Kingman Brewster

Programme recording incomplete

...spread to England or, so far as I know, to any other country of the
English-speaking world, except, I'm told, Dublin. 

It's the closing ceremony of the college year when the graduates troop on to a
leafy campus or, if it's raining, into an auditorium, and hear the president of
the university call off the roster of graduating students and then, in this
country anyway, bestow honorary degrees on eminent people from various walks of
life. 

It's Speech Day, in English schools. Degree Day at the universities. It may
well be one of those Americanisms like... like 'sidewalk' and 'I guess' which
were old Englishisms that were brought over to this country and retained here
while they faded and vanished in the mother country. For 'Commencement', in its
now exclusively American sense, was first used, first used in print anyway, so
long ago as 1643, over 130 years before there was such a nation as the United
States of America. A book called 'New England First Fruits' is the original
source with a note that says, 'So have the students lately kept two solemn acts
for their commencement.' And, ever since, Americans have talked about where
they'd stay 'for' commencement, who spoke 'at' commencement, and getting things
tied up 'by' commencement. 

Mostly universities and colleges hold their Commencement Day exercises during
the fist week in June but Yale, founded by a Welshman, I ought to mention, held
it this year in mid-May, the idea being, I shouldn't wonder, to enable their
graduates to get to jump on their rivals in the matter of going out and
snapping up a job. 

When the time came for the university president, Mr Kingman Brewster, sometimes
known as 'the king' to award the honorary degrees, everybody turned and looked
at the magnificos sitting side by side who'd been trying and failing to look as
if their normal occupation required them to wear black gowns and mortar boards.
This is always a faintly comic sight. It was more ribald than usual at Yale
since two of the recipients of honorary degrees were B B Young, a black blues
singer, and 'Scotty' James Reston, the eminent political pundit of the New York
Times who, however, is most at home and most inconspicuous anywhere out on the
road since he dresses like an unmade bed and passes without notice in a stew of
politicians, a factory floor, a hoboes camp, or any other place he has in the
past 40 years gone looking for a story. 

The big chief of this ceremony was the former President, Gerald Ford and he
responded to President Brewster's remark that 'he had rescued the dignity of
the country in a bad time' by ducking modestly, taking his scroll and
retreating to his seat as the crowd gave him a heart-warming clap and a sitting
ovation. But after the heart-warming came the heart-rending scene when
Presidenet Brewster called on two Irishwomen, Mairead Corrigan and Betty
Williams. They were, they are, you surely recall, the two brave ladies who
walked out on the streets of a terrified city to beg for the goodwill of all
Irish people in starting a peace movement. Now 15,000 people anywyhere can make
a noisy rustle, if only from shifting feet and programmes and clearing their
throats, but the huge crowd came to its feet and roared a mighty sound that
brought tears to some people's eyes and quick swallows to the throats of
hard-bitten men. There was warm applause, also, for the genial and modest man,
Sir Peter Ramsbotham, who is the retiring British ambassador. And then there
was the surprise, and another impromptu standing ovation. 

Somebody had not told President Brewster about it, for the good reason that he
was to be the surprised beneficiary. It was an honorary degree for him and,
since he's leaving the university which he has presided over for 15 years,
that's a pretty perfunctory, tight-lipped mention of his service for at Yale,
at that time, he has performed two enormously valuable services. One could have
been done by any other man of superior intelligence and organisational ability.
He recongised early on that, in some fields, in some of the sciences notably,
Yale had been slumping on her laurels. So he went out and got money and he
recruited gifted men and women and restored Yale in those fields to the
eminence you would expect of one of the three oldest universities in the
country. 

But his other service required more than intelligence and a sharp eye for
superior talent. It required intestinal stamina and steady courage. In the
black decade, from the 1960s, from the time of John Kennedy's assassination
through to the murder of his brother, and the obscenity of the police gone
berserk at the Democratic Convention in Chicago in 1968, it is no news to any
adult who lived through it, the universities and colleges of this country went
into a stampede of protest and violence. 

The starting gun was, of course, the drafting of men for Vietnam. Many colleges
fell apart, many campuses looked like town squares under martial law, with
soldiers on the patrol. Many of them were about as civilised in their dissent
as trainloads of cattle pouring into one of the old Chicago stockyards. College
presidents were no longer eminent scholars, bowed to on the streets and
applauded by congregations of students. They were men beseiged, sometimes
literally so, sending out SOSs or proclamations or peace offers from the ruined
libraries of bombed-out buildings. 

Yale acquired an unenviable reputation among the Johnson and Nixon
establishments because its president was against the war, stood at the side of
the protesting students and gave them about as much leeway, by way of public
show, as the constitutional amendment about freedom of speech will allow. It
was very tough to stand in the middle of a storm with many of the protestors
carrying their defiance beyond any decent limit and yet defend their civil
rights. 

Kingman Brewster during those years was a hero to some students, a menace to
others and regarded by the White House as a powerful nuisance. And yet in the
end he held the university together. He withstood a blizzard of abuse from the
hawks, including many of his own trustees and faculty. And he came through with
the satisfaction, if ever he cared to look back on the bad times, the
satisfaction of knowing that he had never been arbitrary or pulled rank or
damned the extremists who, as always, threatened the safety of the society they
pretended to be saving. 

It was for the memory of this service that the Yale campus rose at Kingman
Brewster, the students more than anybody, and gave him a full-throated roar and
the chanted salute, 'Long live the king!' It was a splendid and happy farewell
to this bulky, handsome, comfortable bear of a man. And from our point of view,
he's leaving for the happiest reason. He's the new ambassador to Great Britain.
By a pleasant coincidence, one of the... one of the fathers, who, like him, was
watching a son graduate, was Mr Cyrus Vance, the Secretary of State. Since he's
empowered by his office to stand in for the President of the United States and
swear in ambassadors, Mr Vance and Mr Brewster retired to the Brewster house
when all the cheering was over and there Kingman Brewster took the oath, in
that moment ceasing to be President Brewster and becoming Ambassador Brewster. 

There are a couple of things I'd like to say about that post, which is
considered both among career diplomats and politicians as the number one
diplomatic appointment. Too often, from the Roosevelt years through the Nixon
years, it is a post that has been given to men who fulfilled what, for a long
time, seemed the only qualification for representing the world's largest
democracy – the need to be a multi-millionaire. This irony developed out of the
disproportionate power of two men, one in the Senate, one in the house. More to
the point, you could fairly say that able men who lacked a fortune were
debarred from the big embassy posts because of the power of a little-known
house committee, a sub-committee, the house sub-committee on appropriations for
state. 

Now this sub-committee decides how much or how little the United States
government shall pay its ambassadors, consuls and other offices abroad, by way
of expenses, entertainment and the 'front' that the United States puts up. For
many years, the sub-committee was ruled with an iron hand by a congressman from
Brooklyn who called the necessary appropriations 'booze allowance'. 

He and his equally puritantical colleague in the Senate would allow the
American ambassador to Great Britain no more than a few thousand dollars for
his entire annual entertainment, enough for a fruit punch party on Independence
Day. These two acted on the conviction that any adequate expense account would
tempt American ambassadors into sponsoring, on foreign soil, orgies unbecoming
a simple republic. President Kennedy had to beg them, successfully, to yield a
decent sum for two men, neither of whom had any private resources, to go to
France and India. 

Well, both these puritans are dead and gone. The absurdity they spawned has, at
least, withered. There is a young scholar in Rome, there are bright men of
modest means in other high posts. Best of all, there is now Kingman Brewster in
London. When he presents his credentials to the Queen, we may, with all
respect, echo the roar of the Yale sturdents last Monday and cry, 'Long live
the Queen! Love live the King!'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP