Iran sanctions stalled in UN

On one of the evenings just before the Christmas feast, I was sitting with my
wife and daughter in the bar end of a restaurant. Ahead of us, about six yards
ahead, was a long trestle table with a white tablecloth, and on it a score or
more of plates and dishes covering the vast range of things, from sardines to
olives, tuna fish, anchovies, egg salad, pimentos etc, etc, that are thought
necessary to survival as a first course before you start on the meal.

But, at the near end, there was a marvellous novelty. It was a huge Yule log.
Now, I'm not, myself, greatly excited by the original – I mean the tree – but
as a chocolate freak – I don't mean the cubes of candy but the liquid, the
icing, the ice-cream – as a chocolate freak, my breath was caught by the
imagination that had gone into this confection. 

It was a curving galleon of Yule log cake, about three feet long and eighteen
inches high, the body of the cake done in milk chocolate icing with three
encircling bands, like the brass bands on an antique wine cooler, in bitter
chocolate. I gurgled at this marvel and pointed. My daughter said, 'Put your
glasses on!' I did. It was a big, woven basket containing, on closer
inspection, various breads. 

I mention this at the start because this is the time of the year when
commentators, newspaper editorial writers, politicians and pundits, of every
sort, are expected to open the window and look out on the 1980s and tell you
what they see. I want to say that my long-distance vision is penetrating up to
about six feet. After that, everything is the edge of the world. I can see
every dimple on the golf ball as I stand to address it but, after that, it's
gone. Long gone, I hope. So nobody had better expect from me dazzling insights
into 1984 or much illumination beyond next Tuesday. 

Before, however, we come to that, I ought to add a comment to the despairing
report I gave last time on the way food supplies were being kept from the
Cambodian refugees. I mentioned a document that had been delivered into the
hands of the President of the United States and one that had made him furious.
What it said was that the Vietnamese and the Soviet Union were not only
blocking great supplies of food and medicines that could save uncountable
numbers of the Cambodian people, but were getting hold of supplies sent by
foreign relief agencies, taxing them as imports, and either giving them to the
Cambodian guerrillas who, they, the Russians support, or even selling them to
the Vietnamese. And I went on to say that the International Red Cross, Oxfam,
the United Nations Children's Fund and other conscience-stricken groups and
individuals have handed to the Russians a golden opportunity to feed the sturdy
guerrillas who are fighting the guerrillas of the Chinese-backed Pol Pot
troops. 

Well, first the Russians said the document and its information constituted a
slander and an outrage. And then we had protests and denials from several
agencies busy sending food, they said they were getting lively cooperation from
the Russians and if they are getting the Russians to see that food goes not
only to the starving people on their side, the people under their puppet, Heng
Samrin, but also to the starving people living under the rival Pol Pot regime,
then I congratulate them both. 

But, on the heels of these protests and any sensible person's willingness to
air them, comes a reliable report out of Singapore, that, on the initiative of
Oxfam, many relief groups from Belgium, Holland, Denmark, West Germany,
Switzerland, France, Italy, Eire, Canada and the United States, have signed an
agreement – signed it three months ago – with the Heng Samrin government which,
as you know, is backed by Vietnam and the Soviet Union. This agreement required
the relief agencies to sketch out their general plan and have it approved by
Heng Samrin's government and concede that that's the government they were
helping. And, the third condition, to agree that, under this plan, no food or
medicine would go into those parts of the country held by the Pol Pot
guerrillas’ Chinese-backed regime, which, incidentally, President Carter
decided to support, having agonised for an excruciating time over which to
choose between two detestable tyrannies. 

You can say it another way. No food, sanctioned by this agreement, would be
allowed into Cambodia across the border of Thailand, which was where masses of
it had arrived. I put it simply last time by saying that the Russians, and that
means the Vietnamese-backed Heng Samrin regime, weren't willing to let food go
to the refugees or the guerrillas of the Chinese-backed Pol Pot regime, and it
seems to me that this political agreement between a body of relief agencies and
the Heng Samrin government only goes to confirm that statement. And as far as
the United Nations' effort is concerned, a report from Bangkok to the Far
Eastern Economic Review says that a thousand tons a day of rice, delivered by
the UN, is still being held up in ports. 

I would very much like to say that there is great and good news, that the
starving people of Cambodia are not, after all, being treated as political
pawns but plainly they are, as the Singapore agent of Oxfam said on Thursday.
Not, I imagine, in triumph, they signed the agreement with the Heng Samrin
government, quote, 'because it's better to help some people than none at all'.
Meanwhile, we have to suppose that all those starving people dragging along the
Cambodian Thai frontier, and any others in the Pol Pot country, beg for food
and get a stone. 

Before we open a window on the 1980s, let's stay with the prospect of January
1980. The calendar itself will be a daily reminder to Americans that they are
now in a presidential election year and, unfortunately, it's an ever-present
reminder to politicians that anything they think or say will be politically
interpreted, whether they intended it so, or not. Pay particular attention to
American politicians, especially in the Senate, who start speaking out boldly
in a statesmanlike way in the 'public' interest, as distinct from the oil
interests or the farmers' interests or the labour union's interest, or any
other lobby! These men, I think you'll find, are nearly always senators who are
not up for re-election in 1980. They can help the country by being free to
quicken a genuine, popular grievance. They can also hamper and hurt other
politicians, from the president down, who are trying to do their best but who
are also going to be at the mercy of the voters in November. 

This brings up the question which European visitors, Britons especially, are
most fond of asking: 'How is Jimmy Carter doing? Who will be the next
president?' Well, of course, if I knew that I wouldn't tell you, I'd make a
packet on a thousand bets. But, as January comes drifting or shining up on the
horizon according to the climate, we can already see that President Carter has,
and will have from now on, November very much in mind. 

Take, for example, a simple, annual ceremony. The president's economic message
to Congress is traditionally given the day after Congress reassembles in the
first week in January. Mr Carter quietly asked his Democratic leader in the
Senate, Senator Byrd, if he wouldn't mind pushing the date back to the third
week in January. 

Now January 1 is the day of a caucus of Democrats in Iowa and their vote is
looked on as a preliminary showdown between President Carter and Senator
Kennedy. Obviously, the president thought he could focus national attention on
himself on the very eve of the Iowa showdown. What killed it off was Senator
Byrd's curt message to the White House that the president could go ahead and
appear before Congress at the later date but that he, the president's own party
leader in the Senate, would not be present. He had a previous engagement. 

A small point, not much noise to abroad, but it shows that while the president,
with evident sincerity, is giving most of his time to the frustrating problem
of Iran, to the plight of Cambodia, and now to the Russian pressures on
Afghanistan, he simply must listen to those advisers who point out the
political significance of everything he does, the tactics, big and small, by
which he may contrive to stay in the White House. 

The interminable business of the American hostages moved a lumbering step
forward this weekend. Not, by any means, necessarily a step towards a solution
but another step towards the end of the road of peaceful negotiation, which the
president promised he would follow at the beginning. Presidential appeals and
eloquence have been exhausted, third parties, allies, are being consulted for
help every day, the thing went to the International Court at the Hague and it's
voted unanimously to urge Iran to release the hostages, not that the Ayatollah
Khomeini ever had any intention of recognising the court's jurisdiction. 

And now it – 'it' being a proposal to impose collective trade and economic
sanctions – it goes to the Security Council of the United Nations. Just to make
things tougher for Mr Carter, the council revamps its membership every first of
January. There are 15 members of the council and you need nine approving votes
to pass any resolution. Even if the issue is debated and passed on before New
Year's Day, the prospects, as I talk, are for no more than six affirmative
votes. China has quietly promised not to veto an American resolution and the
Soviet Union is the other question mark here. As a permanent member, it could,
of course, veto any resolution into oblivion. And, if the matter waits till the
new council sits, the administration can count only one certain supporter among
the new members. On the whole, the prospects for a positive United Nations'
vote for sanctions seem dim. 

Well, a failure in the UN will, without doubt, further erode the patience of
the American people which is beginning to wear thin. You must all have heard
about the dramatic somersault in the findings of the last Gallup poll. Whereas
in July Kennedy had a two to one lead over the president in his own party, at
the beginning of December Mr Carter led Kennedy by 48 per cent to 40, an
unprecedented switch of public opinion of 63 percentage points. And in the
general poll of voters of all parties, the president beat everybody else
handsomely. But, what was admired as statesmanlike restraint is now beginning
to look like torpor or, at best, simple frustration. Whatever happens to
Kennedy, the president’s popularity, it seems to me, is bound to wane if the
weeks drag on and the Ayatollah Khomeini seems still to be in the rider's
seat. 

I have just opened the window and looked out on the 1980s. I take a dim view of
them but that's only because, as I said at the start, I take a dim view of
everything much beyond six feet or the first week in January. 

Happy New Year!

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP