Mayor Koch snowed under

Well, this week a large part of the country has had a bumper snowfall and the
whole country has just received a bumper budget. Since New York is the news
capital of the country – Washington being the capital of political news – New
York City has made its usual big fuss about the 13 inches of snow that fell
through Thursday night and into Friday of last week.

Admittedly 13 inches is more than some countries get in year – it's more than
London has had in the past eight years together – but it's very much less than
they get routinely throughout the Great Plains and the Midwest and New England
and upstate New York. The mean annual snowfall, for instance, in Rochester New
York is 86 inches, 80 in Burlington, Vermont, 108 in Sault Ste Marie, Michigan.
The American record, incidentally, is 390 inches in one month, January 1911, in
– where do you think? – Tamarack, California. The record for 24 hours is, God
save us, 76 inches in Silver Lake, Colorado in 1921. 

But even Connecticut, 40 minutes away from New York City, had over 20 inches
while New York was screaming about its 13-inch plight. New York, however, apart
from regarding itself as the centre of everything – finance, book publishing,
opera, art, ballet and the cloak and suit business – is understandably
sensitive these days to any natural disaster, maybe I should say 'phenomenon',
that requires a lot of extra money to cope with. New York, as you have surely
heard, is once again teetering over the chasm of bankruptcy and the city
fathers are having a dreadful time trying to convince a committee of the Senate
that it should get any more federal money to bail it out. 

Now it's true that 13 inches is a lot of snow at one swoop since brisk winds
soon pile it up in drifts as high as six or eight feet, enough to turn parked
cars into great, sleeping polar bears and to immobilise trucks and even buses.
Of course 300 years of rough and occasionally Arctic winters long ago required
extraordinary equipment. 

The city has now about a thousand massive motorised snowploughs and they don't
wait for the storm, they were droning away in the early dawn on Friday, shoring
the stuff up into parapets against the sidewalks, the pavements, and the
avenues, which run like spines down Manhattan, were navigable mostly,
throughout the fall. The side streets are another story and would probably
require several more thousand ploughs. In the other four boroughs, the side
streets tend to get forgotten. People are out shovelling their own sidewalks or
chopping the snow from their ground-floor windows, just as one indignant
resident of Queens said, 'Just so we can breathe'. 

Well, it all reminds me of the record snowfall in this city. It was Boxing Day,
1947. Up to that moment, that day, we youngsters – which means anybody younger
than 70 then – were properly respectful when old gaffers told us about the
horrors of the infamous blizzard of 1888 in which over 400 people died. But on
Christmas Day 1947, it began. And through Boxing Day and, at the end of it, we
had over 26 inches. 

I recall it for two things, both of them connected. Everything stopped and
since on the 27th the sun came up in a clear sky, everything was beautiful.
Double-decker buses on Fifth Avenue peeped out of a smooth, rolling ocean of
snow. There was no noise anywhere. And the next day it was more beautiful
still, but frighteningly so – the ice storm. The temperature had gone plunging
down overnight and every long branch of every tree in Central Park was
shimmering, giving off sharp lights, like a sword encrusted with diamonds. I
have never seen anything as beautiful ever. 

But then, as the sun went down and the snow froze, the damage began and, all
through the night, there was this fierce crackling, like a fire getting under
way, and the limbs splitting and falling all over the place. The price of this
silence and this beauty was several million dollars and a fairly ragged-looking
park for some years to come. 

In those days, America was recovering, and at a bound, from the war, but it was
nothing like so prosperous as it is now and yet I don't recall any loud
complaints from the citizens about the slowness of snow removal, no nasty
remarks about the mayor and his incompetence. But by now we've had 40 years or
more of expecting the government of the city, the state, the nation, to get
cracking on our behalf. The more we acquire conveniences, the more we seem to
shout out at any inconvenience at all. Maybe... maybe this is a moral
reflection and if so I apologise, for we all know that today moral reflections
have no place in politics. 

Anyway, after last week's 13 inches, our new mayor, Ed Koch, is a scapegoat.
He, you'd gather, sent the snow. And he, according to the people in the five
boroughs, is heartless or incompetent or worse. The borough president of
Queens, looking over the streets, charged – that's always the word – charged
the mayor with a poor level of performance. The supermarkets had late
deliveries of meat or none at all, causing one, young, literary gent to echo
the immortal line of Allen Ginsberg, 'Who killed the pork chops?' Mayor Koch.
That's who. 

Poor Mayor Koch. The city is not only many more millions in the red than it was
when it was saved by Washington and by the New York state government, it will
have to add a few more millions to pay for this snowfall. And practically
nobody sympathises with the mayor who could truthfully say that by overwhelming
popular demand, as an economy, he got rid of 3500 sanitation employees in the
last two years and was left to get along with a thousand snowploughs compared
with the 1600 that tackled the last big fall in 1969. 

The sad fact is, moral or not, that when New York City was on the verge of
bankruptcy, the people rallied to the last mayor's cry for thrift and
sacrifice. As abstract nouns 'thrift' and 'sacrifice' sound very fine. The snag
sets in when they get translated into action and turn out to mean use public
transport and shovel your own snow. Well, no doubt, we shall survive. But Mayor
Koch, who like all new mayors was given a rousing cheer at his inauguration
four weeks ago, is now just another mayor refusing to take care of everybody at
the city's expense. 

Last Monday, President Carter sent his first budget to Congress and it, also,
follows the perennial tradition. The president, or the presidential candidate,
makes many soaring promises during the campaign to cut down on spending and
balance the budget and when the budget appears, it turns out to be the biggest
budget in history, carrying the biggest deficit. 

George Washington offered a budget during the Revolutionary War, oh, of
something outrageous and unprecedented, $3 million, I think. In 1917 with the
First World War coming this way, Woodrow Wilson proposed a budget of ten
billions, seven billions for the war effort of which three billions were to go
to the allies as loans. Imagine! Ten thousand million dollars! What a famous
historian of the day called 'the largest finance bill in the history of the
world'. 

Well, 40-odd years went by and John F. Kennedy coolly came up with a budget of
80 billions. Nixon's last budget asked for 200 billions. Now President Carter
wants $500 billion. If you can imagine that, you can imagine anything! 

The budget proposal went along with the warning that there are limits to what
the government can do to cure social ills. It's not often that a Democratic
President is so blunt so soon about the limits of federal largesse. And yet, of
this huge pie, the largest chunk is 37 cents in the dollar to go to individuals
under the dispensation of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare. So
President Carter can fairly say that the trend goes on to giving most of the
nation's revenue to helping out individuals, or at least the largest share. 

The next big chunk is 24 cents in the dollar for the national defence. That
amounts to about $125 billion for arms, missiles, defence posts, training,
salaries, maintenance of the forces. There's an interesting point here which is
rarely mentioned, even by the presidents themselves, when they're attacked, as
they frequently are, on the old 'guns and butter' argument. 

In the Eisenhower/Kennedy days, easily the biggest slice of the pie went to
national defence. At one time, it was as high as 63 cents in every budget
dollar. It's now 24 cents. Of course the... the absolute figure, the amount
spent on defence is probably higher than ever. Mr Carter has anticipated
popular criticism by saying, rather nervously, that it may seem a lot, but it's
not as much as you would have had in a President Ford budget. Well, the actual
amount may be higher than ever but in relation to the total budget, it's much
lower. 

The big news then, the big, political come-on is Mr Carter's proposal to cut
taxes by 25 billions. He has soft-pedalled his old line about balancing the
budget by saying that keeping the economy going and putting more people to work
come first. And it must be said that among the Western nations, the United
States has the best record, in the past few years, for inventing millions of
new jobs. The proposed tax cut, the president said, will create one more
million jobs. 

So for purposes of politics and popularity in the polls, the President is
crying up the big tax cut. But neither he, nor anybody else, explains how you
can feed another $25,000 million into the economy without inviting another
hungry visit from that old bogeyman – inflation.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP