American embassy hostages stalemate

One of the two most influential American news magazines came out this week with
a picture on its cover of the American bald eagle, the symbol of American
power, with his feathers dropping off him like autumn leaves and printed boldly
on one wing was the title of the cover story. It said, 'Has America lost its
clout?'

Well, the definition of 'clout' that the Oxford dictionary has recently added
says, 'Noun: colloquial, influence, power of effective action, especially in
politics.' 

So Newsweek puts the resounding question, 'Has America lost its clout?' The
feature piece is an historical survey which laments how, in recent years, the
United States has suffered a series of blows to its power of effective action,
how we've seen Soviet and Cuban forces marching unhindered across large parts
of Africa and staunch, if unsavoury, friends falling from power in places like
Nicaragua and Iran, have watched oil sheiks raising their prices recklessly to
make us realise in pain that, for the first time in American history, the
United States is dependent on foreigners for a vital resource. 

Americans, it goes on, have seen their dollar plummet in value and their
standard of living drop below that of countries as diverse as Sweden and Kuwait
and they have seen their armed forces, which once held a nuclear monopoly,
struggle to maintain something called 'parity'. 

Now, such a piece could have been written at any time in the past year or two
that the magazine's editors were short of a rousing editorial, but I don't
think that it would have appeared now or the question put with quite such
urgency if it had not been for the uniquely frustrating crisis in Iran – the
seizure and holding by the Ayatollah Khomeini of the American embassy hostages
in reprisal for letting the Shah come to New York for medical treatment. 

A recent comment by an American who was, for a long time, an expert in wielding
the power of effective action, takes on a special poignancy as we look at the
paradox of what somebody has called 'the power of the impotent Ayatollah' and
the 'impotence' of the powerful United States. Mr Richard Helms, the former
director of the CIA, has come out with a memoir that challenges its readers to
find an effective substitute for presidential clout once you emasculate the
CIA, the intelligence services, and their power of wielding secret power. 'Once
a nation's intelligence service is denied the use of this power', says Mr
Helms, 'there is nothing between landing the marines and diplomacy.' 

Well, it does seem as if the marines, for the rest of their foreseeable
history, will have to content themselves with battle exercises on the home
ground, short of a declared war. President Eisenhower's dispatch of them into
Lebanon in 1958 to protect an elected government from overthrow by Syrians,
that would appear to be the last of their emergency overseas exploits which
started when they sailed off to protect American shipping from the Barbary
pirates in Jefferson's time. 

I'm pretty sure that many Americans picking up this current issue of Newsweek
at a news stand will instinctively translate the title, 'Has America lost its
clout?' into a growl, which they know is ridiculous, 'Why don't we send in the
marines?' Well, we know it can't be done any more and, in the knowledge, the
presidential candidates, who are now out on the stump, didn't offer a whimper
of criticism against President Carter. 

They might – they did – slam into him for something vague and stirring, a lack
of leadership, but since they, too, couldn't think of anything drastic or
heroic to do with the Iranians, they kept their traps shut. The best they could
do was to show their deep understanding of the issues involved by nodding
sagely and saying the president had done what, indeed, they, themselves, would
have done so far, namely to stop the imports of Iranian oil, to freeze Iranian
dollar assets both at home and abroad, and to echo the president’s ringing
denunciation of the seizure of the American embassy in Tehran as an act of
terrorism totally outside the bounds of international law and diplomatic
tradition. 

Of course he said nothing but the truth. However the lump that sticks in
everybody's gullet is the unpleasant fact that international law and diplomatic
tradition only work for people who respect them. International law and
diplomatic tradition are rendered totally impotent by the most striking
characteristic of terrorism in our time, by what I've called 'the success of
violence'. We're really in the position, the noble but useless position of
Calvin Coolidge when he was governor of Massachusetts and the police of Boston
threatened a strike, something unheard of at the time – the time was 1919.
Coolidge's words rang round the nation. 'How true, how wise,' people said when
he declared, 'There is no right to strike against the public safety by anybody,
anywhere, any time.' 

But all you have to do to defeat this wisdom is to go ahead and strike anyway,
which is what the Boston police did. Coolidge, however, called out the state
guard and the police bowed. Today they would probably stay out till the state
government got tired of trying to police a big city with improvised soldiery. 

So, President Carter. Not only he, but the international court of justice might
declare that the action of the Ayatollah Khomeini is totally outside the bounds
of international law and diplomatic tradition. And the Ayatollah simply says,
in no doubt holy language, 'So forget international law.' What has come out in
the past week is some evidence from documents captured by the students in the
American embassy and from the deep digging of a New York Times reporter which
shows that the whole situation is by no means as simple as we'd thought. Let's
very briefly say what that situation is as most of us had understood it till
this week. 

In October, the United States allowed the exiled Shah to come from his
temporary home in Mexico and enter a New York hospital after an American
doctor, sent to Mexico, had gone into the Shah's history of lymph cancer and
other afflictions and had decided that he needed an expert diagnostic opinion
which he could get only in New York. 

So President Carter, having assured the Iranian government – meaning the
official government – of Prime Minister Bazargan, said that the Shah was not
being granted political asylum, he was coming in for emergency medical
treatment and he would be requested to leave the United States as soon as he
was convalescent. Then on 4 November, without warning, the Ayatollah, or his
student guerrillas – by the way, apart from the Ayatollah and the handful of
advisers, the entire population of Iran seems to be students – the students
marched on the embassy and seized and bound its inmates. 

Well, it now comes out that the president and his secretary of state, Mr Vance,
had spent eight months resisting the appeals of many powerful American friends
of the Shah to let him come in as a permanent exile. And throughout those eight
months, the White House and the State Department were in constant touch with a
Mr Laingen, the acting American ambassador in Tehran. Some of that diplomatic
correspondence was captured by the students and they were in no mood to split
hairs, they probably cannot even honestly distinguish between the authority of
President Carter and the influence, if any, of a Rockefeller who happens to be
a banker. After all, it is standard Marxist and maybe by now Islamic doctrine
that the United States is really run by the Rockefellers. 

Well, apparently Ambassador Laingen – let's call him ambassador – got the idea,
through these months of private appeals to the president (and one of them was
to Dr Kissinger), got the idea that, in time, when the Ayatollah and his regime
cooled down and backed into the shafts that the Shah would come here without a
fuss. There's pretty certain evidence that Mr Carter may have toyed with the
idea but saw long ago that it wouldn't do, in spite of the protests and appeals
of the Rockefellers and their friends and Dr Kissinger's disgusted complaint
that the administration was treating the Shah like a Flying Dutchman. 

Well, by October, the American doctor had made his clinical findings and the
president told Ambassador Laingen that the United States intended to fetch the
Shah to New York for medical treatment only. Ambassador Laingen told the
Bazargan government and they were appalled. They said the Iranian people would
never accept the medical story. They warned, even, that the embassy might be
occupied but they believed they could protect it. Mr Laingen reported back to
Washington. Again, the White House said that the Shah would arrive quietly in
New York. Again, the Bazargan government warned that it wouldn't work. And it
didn't work for the Bazargan government. In fact, it fell, precisely because
the Shah did arrive in the New York hospital. After them, the deluge. The
embassy guard was caught napping or rather it was a light guard, having
accepted the word of Mr Bazargan that there would be no heavy raid. 

In retrospect, it's now clear that the Carter administration hoped to let the
Shah in some time in the future but at the same time it resisted the urgent
appeals of the Rockefellers and the Kissingers and others to let him in now.
The medical reason was not a pretext to rush the invitation. It was a genuine,
compassionate cause and Mr Carter thought it would be seen and respected as
such. 

Even so, Mr Carter was dubious all along. At one staff meeting, at least a
month before we ever heard of the Shah's illness, the president said to one of
his aides, 'And when the Iranians take our people in Tehran hostage, what will
you advise me then?' The silence of the presidential candidates now on the
stump is explained by the fact that, once a candidate, you are made privy to
such presidential secrets. They knew about the pressure to fetch the Shah here.
Some of them were all for it. Now they must wake up at night and shudder at Mr
Carter's forlorn question and go back to sleep thanking the Lord they are not
in the White House they so long to inhabit.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP