Energy bill at risk

The sense of being cut off from the world, which is powerfully reinforced by
the New York newspapers' strike, is not without its blessings, one of which is
that it helps to relax our sense of guilt. If we are prevented from knowing, we
can't be blamed for not caring or not doing anything. And this past week we've
been given moral aid and comfort from the President of the United States.

He took a two weeks' holiday. So, if he can check out of the general confusion,
surely we can be allowed to go fishing? But Mr Carter's right to do the same
did not go unchallenged for long. Of course, it's impossible these days for the
president to get away from it all. Ever since the big thunderclap over
Hiroshima 30 years ago, or rather, ever since the Russians fired their first
nuclear bomb, it's been considered almost criminally irresponsible for the
president to be longer than ten seconds away from a Secret Service man carrying
a little box which contains the code of the day that could order the shift of a
bomber force or launch a missile or – if the worst came to the worst – unlock
the red alert that gives the order for total war. 

The code, I ought to explain, originates with the Strategic Air Command which
is in touch with all the airborne and underwater forces and the missile silos
around the world. Its link with the president is that little box and the code
it contains which arrives wherever the president is and arrives by courier
every day under armed escort. 

This is so much part of the president’s daily routine that I should think very
few Americans think or even know about it. In fact, it has come as an
unpleasant shock before now to newly inaugurated presidents. Eisenhower once
said that the most disturbing sign of presidential power, and one he'd never
thought about, was the fact that every time he went to the bathroom, he was
joined by the man with the code who then sat down outside the door. 

So, not much hope of retreating to the Rockies waving goodbye to everybody
including the press pack and shooting the rapids and off into the beautiful
wilds of Idaho. Just to keep up the pretence that a presidential holiday is a
holiday, we saw him doing that on television – wearing a life jacket, thank
goodness! But even if there was no call for the man with the little box, the
president, like footballers, tennis players and terrorists holding hostages, is
today the victim of the long Zoomar lens. 

So, at every big bend in the river, there was a cameraman whose naked eye
showed him four or five midgets 200 yards away in a bobbing boat but whose
camera lens went zooming in to balloon the midgets into old Jimmy and Rosalynn
and little Amy looking more than ever like a comic-strip character in a ski
suit and one or two – as they say in photographs of the great – unidentified
persons, one of whom you may be sure was that man with the waterproof box. 

However, all this, er... this Star Wars gadgetry apart, you'd say that the
president was well outside questioning distance and far from the nagging claims
of politics. Not so. Even Jimmy Carter, who you'd think was inured by now to
the tendency of somebody to make a political event out of something, even he
sinned, not as he used to say about women in his heart, but in his head. He
wanted, like the rest of us, to go off and take a holiday like a private
citizen, in one of the most spectacularly beautiful stretches of the Rockies.
He would ride in the Grand Tetons. He would go off for a day or two to the
Salmon River in Idaho and enjoy a spell of what they call 'white water'
rafting. 

He arranged to go the big river in the direct and informal way of Jimmy Carter
who, you'll remember got out of his Cadillac during the inauguration parade and
walked hand-in-hand with his family down Pennsylvania Avenue. Good old Jimmy!
Not a prayer! His straightforward decision to dispense with all ceremony,
greeting the governor, shaking hands with citizens, a motorcade and the rest,
this was immediately taken by the papers of Idaho, unfortunately not on strike,
as a studied insult to the people. He was coming to enjoy the wonders of Idaho
and ignoring the citizens. Hasty rearrangements were made. When Air Force One
hit the runway at Boise, Idaho, there was the governor. There was an ecstatic
round of handshaking and the president rode a motorcade into town, waving as
usual. 

There's no record of his conversations with the governor but somewhere along
the route another fear seized him for his aides. Just how long should he hobnob
with the politicians and wave at the people? Not very long they decided.
Otherwise Republicans all across the country would start saying that simple
Jimmy was too cunning by half. He was using what he'd advertised as a personal
holiday, a private jaunt, as a political tour. And that would mean that some
congressman would start an enquiry into the cost of the holiday and how much of
it was being charged to the Carter's private purse and how much to the
long-suffering taxpayers of the United States. 

So, even a by now veteran politician like Jimmy Carter can, on occasion, forget
the most constant bane of the politician's life, 'Damned if you do, damned if
you don't'. 

No wonder we suddenly heard that the president was cutting short his brief
holiday because duty called. It was the front page headline of the Christian
Science Monitor, 'Carter hurries back to crucial fight on Hill.' The hill, I
hasten to explain, was not in Idaho. It is Capitol Hill in Washington. He'd
heard, we were told, that his energy bill which was going to be, when he first
came into the White House, the first big bill of his presidency, his energy
bill is threatened by a belligerent Congress which will get to work, or to war,
next week once the Labor Day recess is over. 

Now what difference would a couple of days of rafting and fishing make to the
passage of a bill which has been stalled anyway for the past 16 months? Well, I
hazard a guess that, apart from the man with the little box, there was another
Huck Finn on the raft who carried a radio telephone or some other instant
communication device, to the Treasury Department and to the Department of
Energy. Somewhere en route the wild waves told the president that the dollar
was taking another beating in Europe and, so far as the Secretary of Energy is
concerned, the dollar is being battered by the floundering energy bill. If I
seem to talk in riddles, let me try and explain what the latest version of the
president's energy bill is about. 

Simply, the president promised the assembled presidents and prime ministers of
Western Europe, when they met in Bonn, that the United States would reduce its
imports of oil by two and a half billion barrels a day by 1985. And if there's
one sentence spoken by a European which Mr Carter has memorised, it's
Chancellor Schmidt's recent remark. It sounds humdrum but it is pregnant with
meaning for Mr Carter. 'These American pledges', said Mr Schmidt, 'are
contributions towards the stabilisation of world monetary relations which I
rate very highly, especially since they will help avoid dangers that might
otherwise arise.' 

Translated into a hurricane alert, this is meant to say if speculators and
fiscal manipulators abroad come to believe that the United States is not going
to reduce its dependence on foreign oil, then they could wreck the dollar and
produce an upheaval in Europe. 

So, Mr Carter is back in Washington and having his fears confirmed, especially
about the natural gas part of his bill. His energy bill has four parts. A
conservation programme, a programme of converting to coal, a programme of
reforming utility rates – what we pay for electricity, gas, power in general –
and the fourth part, which is coming up for debate and passage, or
strangulation, first. And this is a natural gas bill which proposed reducing
imports of foreign oil by one million barrels a day. The president has heard
correctly that he doesn’t have the votes to pass it and, if he doesn’t, bang
goes almost half of his promise to Western Europe. 

Now, it may be unfair, it may be even wrong to attribute foreign confidence, or
lack of it, to the president’s promise to cut down on foreign oil. There are
financial men, economists, certainly there are oil companies here, who dispute
very vigorously this equation, but even they cannot dispute that the
governments of Western Europe believe that the connection between a weak dollar
and America's reliance on foreign oil is demonstrable. 

All technical complications aside, the president believes that the stubborn, or
unwilling, Congress is reflecting public indifference, or public reluctance, to
forego the cornucopia of oil it lives on. And yet, after one more price hike
from the Arabs, there would be no more deluge of oil. 

I talked to one very knowledgeable man about the complications of this problem.
He's against the president. He says that his calculations of how much we'll
save are wrong. The man says, 'Give it to the computers! They'll prove him
wrong.' I must say I am unconvinced. 

The other day, my wife got from the bank a transaction certificate notifying
her that her government bonds had been rolled over for 90 days. She was amazed.
She doesn't have any government bonds. They belong to me. 'Put it down,' the
bank manager crooned, 'to computer error!' 'Put it down,' I roared, 'to my
account!' 

The only good thing I ever heard about a computer happened to the widow of a
small Kansas farmer, several years ago. It was a modest farm and she paid,
let’s say about $4,000 in income tax. One day she got a letter from the
Internal Revenue Service. It said, 'We find that you have overpaid your income
tax by $120,000. Please find cheque enclosed.' 

Marvelling at the mysterious ways of God, she banked it. And then the hassle
started. As I recall, the government's moving finger had writ and all the
computers could not lure it back to cancel half a line. But it did cancel half
the cheque. She kept $60,000.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP