Airlines back Laker

The hotel I stay at in San Francisco overlooks a cathedral which at night
illuminates its oriel window and the effect, when you look out towards the
streets plunging down like switchbacks into the Bay, is that of some distant
planet lit up for Christmas zooming over the sea towards us.

Once when I was wakened by the siren of a police car, I stumbled over to the
window and looked out and there was this circular flower in red and green and
blue coming at me and I thought we'd had it. Any minute now, I figured, it
would land on Nob Hill and disgorge its little army of space men, no doubt in
cassocks and turnaround collars. 

What's even more odd as an American experience is that of being wakened by a
church clock striking seven o'clock – in my case, more likely, ten o'clock. An
Englishman who was staying with me there once staggered into my room and said,
'I just had a dream and thought I was in England. I wonder why?' I told him why
and he was amazed. People, I notice, are always more amazed by what is missing
in a foreign country than by what's there since, I'm afraid, we all assume that
we were born and brought up in the normal place, the only normal place and any
departure from the normal is, at best, bizarre; at worst, wrong. 

'Well,' I said, 'you don't hear striking clocks in America maybe because there
are so few public clocks.' 

Which reminds me that once during the Second War, I had the job of dashing down
to Times Square for the BBC and interviewing a sailor, any sailor, from the
first British ship to berth in New York after crossing the ocean in convoy. I
found one. I was required to get from him his impressions of America. After
all, he'd been here for several hours. He was a dour, unimpressionable
Lancashire man. He thought Times Square with all its garish lights blazing was
'not like Blackpool' and that was, more or less, the tone of the interview. 

'Well,' I said brightly, 'what do you think?' 'Well,' he began, 'the trouble is
(that's a standard British opening)... the trouble is you can't tell the time.
Where are the clocks?' And he looked at me accusingly as if I'd buried all the
clocks with his arrival in mind. 'And another thing,' he said, 'there are no
public lavatories.' Of course, he was right again. 'You know what a man said to
me? I was standing in, is it Broadway they call it, and I was fair busting and
I said to a man, "Ere, where's public lavatory?" And you know what he said? He
said why don't you use an hotel? Well, you'd look daft walking into an hotel
for that, wouldn't you?!' 

Well, daft or not, that's where you go. I'm sure, however, that the sailor's
visit was spoiled for him not by distaste for the new things he saw, but by the
absence of the things he took for granted. Since this interview was one of
innumerable brave wartime demonstrations of the warm feelings between Britons
and Americans, I don't think it was ever put out. 

You can live for years in America without noticing that church bells are a
rarity. It's only when you get back to England and stay, especially in an old
university town, that you wake up and hear 16 church towers taking about five
minutes to clang out the news that it's nine o'clock. And then the effect on an
American – as it was, by the way, on Mark Twain – is in this whole, ingenious
and practical country, there is not a single pocket watch. Every hour the
people line up and wait for the churches to tell them what time it is. 

Well, this past week, last Monday to be exact, things were different. In New
York, at any rate. Just before five-thirty in the evening, it may have been...
it may have been actually five-thirty, whichever churches that had bells rang
them and from the sidewalk where a troop of pickets was carrying placards
outside a struck newspaper building, there was, as the English poet put it, 'an
universal shout'. The news carried on into the supermarkets, people's faces lit
up like firecrackers. And cab drivers with radios leaned on their horns as if
everybody in New York was getting married. And the word went on up to Harlem
and strollers and pushers, collected round drugstores' doors and parked cabs,
and boys carrying transistor radios. It could have been VE Day. 

It was in fact VY Day. The day the Yankees, the glorious city baseball team won
not the World Series, not even their League Championship, but their division of
their league. I realise this sounds a little anticlimactic but let me tell you
the way things work. 

There are two baseball leagues, the National and American. Each of them has a
western division and an eastern division. As they play along from April through
September, they rack up, obviously, so many wins and so many losses. So by the
end of September, there are four teams at the head of their divisions of the
National and American Leagues. And the leaders are usually a few games ahead of
their nearest rivals. The telltale figure is one in the last column of the
league tables. Its heading is GB which means 'Games Behind' the leader. 

Well, in the National League, the Los Angeles Dodgers clinched their leadership
almost a fortnight ago. Obviously if the leaders are five games ahead and they
have only four games left, they are unreachable. So it was in the National
League. Los Angeles clinched it in the western division and Philadelphia in the
east. So then they... they play off the best of five games to decide who shall
meet the champion of the American League in the World Series. 

In the American League, Kansas City clinched the western division but the
eastern division is where the action and the fame and the scandal are. The New
York Yankees were battling for the top spot with the Boston Red Sox. Somebody
took a national poll a month ago and discovered that to most Americans who
don't care much about baseball, there are only two famous teams – the Yankees
and the Red Sox. 

Now, two months ago, the Bostonians were leaning back and chuckling and booking
seats for the World Series. They were 14 games ahead of the Yankees. The Red
Sox, a marvellous fighting team, then had a run of stumbles and losses. And the
Yankees, who are always bickering among themselves and changing managers and
whose fans are often caught between a cheer and a boo, started a winning
streak. They brought the Red Sox lead down to three. Then they went up to
Boston and, in five successive games, thrashed Boston four times. And Boston
was now one game behind. 

In the past fortnight, night after night, the Yankees won and the Red Sox won.
Next to the last game, Boston caught up. And so, for the first time since 1948,
there has to be a play-off. And in the final game of the season, just like
those golf tournaments where everything comes down to the last putt and, to the
ignorant, everything looks fixed, the Yankees won by one run. That was the news
that set off the hullabaloo of bells and cheers through the streets of New
York. Now the Yankees play the best of five against Kansas City and Los Angeles
does the same against Philadelphia and the two winners meet in the climax –
best of seven – in what is modestly called the World Series. In other words,
the American baseball championship. 

So, two weeks from now, I may be at a loss for words on anything but baseball.
For in World Series week, a wise president lies low, usually in an armchair up
against the telly. Whatever’s happening to Britain's wage and price tournament,
no matter what Mr Sadat and Mr Begin may be doing, the whole country seems to
be locked indoors facing a television set or clotted outdoors by booming
loudspeakers. It's a time when baseball ignoramuses do a little guilty
brushing-up and acquire sudden deathless loyalties to one team or the other. 

It's a time when people who really know the game croon and gurgle over the
telly. For no game that I know – not soccer, rugby, cricket, not even golf –
exhibits more of its peculiar tensions and subtleties over television as
baseball does. Well, we have to wait and see and think of other things. 

And the first thing that crosses my mind when I shake my limbs loose from a
nightly four-hour stretch watching baseball, is that America has a new hero and
a very unlikely one at that. His name, Sir Freddie Laker. Now it's no news to
anybody that he's on top of the world, almost literally, or that he's been a
big success or that everybody who once cursed him now praises him – after all,
he was knighted. In America, once he started his Skytrains to New York,
businessmen, knowing men, advertising men, were fascinated by his gall and, I
was going to say 'split' between two opposite opinions, but that suggests an
equal division of opinion. There was no such thing. 

I should reckon that about 10 per cent of smart businessmen, retired usually,
thought he'd started something that would frighten the commercial airlines. The
remaining 90 per cent, airline executives especially, thought he was a maniac
and a dreamer who would wake up to a whopping bankruptcy. The airlines were
peeved that he'd been allowed to break the hard rule of IATA, the International
Air Transport Association, the managers', if you like, trade association that
all transatlantic fares on whatever airline shall be the same. 

When the queues developed and we saw news pictures of shaggy youths and jeans
in granny glasses curled round potato sacks and other luggage at four in the
morning, the doubters knew that we were seeing the end of this wild experiment.
So now what? This week, the chairman of the holy Civil Aeronautics Board, 80
per cent of whose members a couple of years ago I'll bet were of the 'Laker is
a maniac' school, now the chairman of THE presiding aviation body in the United
States, the chairman has told the airline industry that he brought glad
tidings. 

'Sir Freddie,' he said, 'has initiated an era of price-cutting which has
enormously benefited travellers and the whole industry. Services have improved
immeasurably, millions of people have benefited and, marvel of marvels, the
regular airlines, following Sir Freddie's lead, are reported unprecedented high
profits.' 

No wonder the 90 per cent of airline experts have suddenly discovered a hero in
a maniac. No doubt about it, all the world loves a winner!

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP