Carter's austere budget

For some reason I've forgotten now, I had to look up the other day the results
of a Gallup poll taken three years ago at the end of January and taken always
at that time as a useful reminder to the incoming Congress of what is on most
people's minds.

If I'd been asked offhand to recall what was troubling us, I should certainly
have put inflation high up on the list, but it wasn't there at all. The first
anxiety was crime and after that drugs, employment and the financial plight of
the big cities. But this year, with unemployment declining quite remarkably
except, as always, among the young blacks, inflation is first, second and
third. 

I may be wrong but for the first time that I can remember, the president got
out his budget message to Congress before he appeared at the usual joint
session to give his State of the Union address. The pressure on him has been
unflagging in the past few months and never mind his preoccupation with Egypt
and Israel and the Shah and the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks, the pressure
has never let up to have him declare – and the budget message is the place to
do it – what he proposes to do to try, yet again, to stem the rising flood of
inflation. 

Last Monday he came out with it, what he called a 'lean and austere budget'.
After 40 years, the wheel has come full circle from the days when Democratic
presidents told us as gospel that a balanced budget was a superstition of the
'horse and buggy' era (that was Roosevelt's phrase), that the way for the
government to get out of debt was to spend its way out. After all, the
government, the treasury, owns the printing press, doesn't it? The Democrats,
after 40 years of looking on John Maynard Keynes as the economic oracle of the
twentieth century, have come to admit that while the government can print all
the money it wants, it cannot spend more than it earns without getting into
deep trouble. 

I think the... the big turning point, what the Greeks call 'the moment of
recognition', came only in the past year or so when most of us came to realise
that the Vietnam War was the only war in American history that wasn't paid for
in taxes. It cost $270 billion and it all came from the printing press. Nobody
paid a dollar to finance the war. The income tax on earned income, which
ballooned during the First World War and again in the Second, and Korea, stayed
exactly the same – 50 per cent during the long and expensive ordeal of
Vietnam. 

And now it begins to occur to us, economists or not, that the vast amount of
money was in fact handed to the public to spend on goods. And we did it. I
ought to remind you, though, that American inflation has only once in the past
dozen years gone over ten per cent. More than at any time in living memory
foreigners, Europeans in particular, are investing in American industry, and
real estate, and country clubs and hotels, and tourists are reversing the old
flow to Europe by coming here in huge numbers because, as an old American
friend of mine says who de-camped into retirement in France eight years ago and
has now decided to live out his days in southern California, because, he says,
things are so much cheaper over here. 

James Reston, the veteran commentator of the New York Times, wrote a piece from
London a couple of weeks ago and seriously threatened his reputation for truth
by putting down the daily cost of a stay in a London hotel. Starting with
breakfast and going through three nights and days, it was about twice what it
would have been if he’d been staying at a hotel of comparable standing in New
York or Chicago or San Francisco. However, since 99.9 per cent of any nation's
people don't have the opportunity to compare prices at home and abroad,
Americans are not convinced by the report that things are cheaper here. They're
dear enough and getting dearer all the time. And even the Carter administration
has to vent the fear in private that this year America will once again go to an
inflation rate of over ten per cent. 

Now a Briton might well say, 'But how can it be since our inflation rate is
only eight per cent?' Britons, I've noticed, while howling with the rest of us
about the prices of everything, tend to forget that the current eight per cent
comes on top of 15 per cent in 1971, 20 per cent in '72, 22 per cent, 15 and so
on. So that there's no argument that in Britain retail prices have doubled
since 1974. Americans – economists and businessmen and labour leaders and
ordinary citizens – read about Britain, the big strikes and the big wage claims
and tend to say, 'Not there but for the grace of God go we, but there, as sure
as you're born, is the way we're going!' 

Well, if there's one thing this administration has learned in its first two
years, or let's be very judicious and say one thing it's come to believe, is
that unless the country is producing more and more, it cannot go on financing
social services more and more. And that's where Jimmy Carter has finally broken
with 40 years of Democratic doctrine and with the liberal wing of his party and
yet, because it is almost wholly Democratic doctrine, he cannot announce cuts
in welfare, hospitals, social security and so on and then just brazen it out. 

He's had to say, almost in the same breath as announcing a 'lean and austere
budget' he's had to say, 'But... it is a budget that keeps faith with the
obligations of a compassionate society to the poor and the disadvantaged.' He
has allowed an increase of four and a half billions in aid to the poor while
bluntly admitting that it falls so far short of keeping up with inflation that
he's having, for instance, to cut training programmes for nurses and making
children pay for school lunches that up to now have been free. 

He faces, I think, an almost impossible debating opposition which says: 'While
you've made cuts everywhere, there is only big increase and in the one item you
promised over and over during the campaign to trim: the defence budget.' He's
adding almost 11 billions to make a defence budget of 123 billions and that's
where the liberal Democrats – led with a quite new ferocity by Senator Edward
Kennedy – are going for him. 

Of course it's always unfair to say, 'If you only saved money on betting on
horse races, you could afford more housing for the poor.' For instance, we
discover, from the research frills that have gone into figuring the budget,
that Americans spend $20-odd billion a year on beer, hard liquor and soft
drinks. It must be depressing to teetotallers to realise that if everybody in
America stopped drinking everything but water tomorrow, it would still only pay
off one-sixth of the money for defence. 

What sort of defence? The president puts it sharply: 'For strengthening our
NATO forces and maintaining the strategic balance with the Soviet Union.' And
Senator Kennedy sees in this contrast between social service spending and
defence spending an irresistible emotional issue. He laments wasteful increases
in defence spending while the poor, the black, the sick, the young, the cities
and the unemployed must bear a disproportionate share of restraint. 

Now quite apart from Mr Carter's backsliding from the rhetoric of his campaign
speeches, which is always a feature of the difference between what a new
president says he'll do and what he finds he must do, there is, I believe, no
doubt that Mr Carter is a compassionate man and he must have sweated and
groaned to have to cut, for instance, 34 separate health programmes and trim
social security. So why the increase in defence spending? 

The answer must be that Mr Carter, as president, knows things that he did not
know as a presidential candidate, things about the actual power of the Soviet
Union and its navy and its nuclear capability, that – and this is the rub for
any president – he simply cannot tell us. He's clearly convinced that the
'strategic balance' as he calls it, is far more precarious than he thought and
he will have to stay with his judgement and hope to brief the Congress
persuasively and say to us, perhaps, which is nothing but the truth, that
whereas, in 1960, 49 cents in every tax dollar went into national defence, next
year it will be only 24 cents. 

Mr Carter is getting it from all sides. The Republicans, of course, are
party-bound to object. They're saying there should have been a tax cut and many
more drastic cuts in spending on social services. One Republican, who I suspect
will be widely and admiringly quoted in next year's presidential campaign, put
it in this salty way: 'The taxpayer has been sacrificed on the altar of a
cosmetic deficit. Sure it's a lean budget, it's lean like a package of bacon,
you don't see the fat till you open the package.' And from the outside, from
black leaders and social action centres and the like, he will hear another
memorable argument, 'What Carter couldn't do to the three-Martini lunch, he's
doing to the school lunch.' 

Last year, you know, he tried to get the Congress to make business lunches
non-deductible but was overcome by a landslide of protest and a quick, quiet
government study which showed that what the government would gain from taxing
the so-called 'three-Martini lunch', it would lose several times over from
paying out welfare to unemployed waiters, cooks, washers-up and the owners of
bankrupt restaurants. 

The one cheerful sound that breaks through the banshee cries going up over the
budget comes from the Supreme Court which also this week went back to work. 

A few years ago, a couple of cartoonists got out some comic books depicting
Mickey and Minnie Mouse making public love, using very rough language and
taking drugs. The famous couple and other Disney characters were drawn
accurately enough to leave no doubt that they and nobody else had succumbed, in
the most alarming way, to the so-called 'counterculture' which some of us call
'hippydom'. The Supreme Court has ruled that the copyright of the Walt Disney
Production Company had indeed been infringed. 

The honour of Mickey and Minnie Mouse, in their fiftieth year, has been
vindicated.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP