Corporal punishment ruling

I think, I hope, you all know by now that there are in this country four
national television networks, three of them are commercial and the fourth is
called the Public Broadcasting System. It's radio as well as television and
it's supported by a small grant from Congress but mainly by subscriptions sent
in voluntarily by listeners and viewers and by grants from industrial
corporations and philanthropic foundations. Together, they guarantee us all the
blessing of watching first-rate television from dawn to midnight without having
to see any commercials. This is not a small, struggling network. In fact, it
has over 260 stations, attached stations, and is the second largest television
network in America.

Now there's a weekly programme of drama. It runs throughout most of the year.
This last year it had a 52-week series and we play in succession, say, the four
parts of Henry James's 'The Golden Bowl', follow it with one of the Lord Peter
Wimsey detective series and then Hardy's 'Jude the Obscure', then 'Country
Matters' and so on. The programme has been running for six years and, during
that time, I've had the pleasure, more than anything else, of MC-ing it and
this involves, say, at the beginning of 'Jude the Obscure' doing a little talk,
a sort of thumbnail biography of Thomas Hardy and then from week to week
recounting the plot so far and saying, in effect, 'Now, read on! Watch on!' 

Most of the plays are imported from the BBC and they usually fill most of the
hour and leave me two or three minutes to have my say at the beginning or the
end or a shorter say at both ends. But from time to time we pick up something,
a series, from the British commercial channel and thereby face a problem which
is not without its transatlantic ironies. Each programme runs an hour and, as
I've implied, there is little or no problem when the play was manufactured by
the BBC's drama department but the irony sets in when we show a drama series
that was designed for Britain's commercial television system. The episodes
arrive over here and we have to cut out the commercials and this leaves the
whole show usually six or seven minutes short. 

You can imagine that the more intriguing the drama, the less the audience is
going to stand for Cooke waffling away to fill the time. What to do? The
problem became acute and prolonged when we... we took up about a year after
you'd seen it 'Upstairs, Downstairs'. Here were, by our count 55 hour-long
dramas that by the time we were ready to show them ran about 53 minutes each.
So to fill in the space left by the missing commercials, I devised from the
start a series of visual essays placing the joys and griefs of the Bellamy
family against the social background of the time they were living in. 

So what we have, either at the beginning or the end of each episode, is an
essay illustrated with film or/and chosen stills on, let's say the factory
system in England in Edwardian times or the rich Edwardians' mania for food or,
in the First World War series, a running account of whatever was happening
outside Eaton Place at the time, a miniature history of the Dardanelles
campaign, for instance, or what women were doing during the war, or the history
of the Zeppelin, or whatever. 

People who have watched the series here – and that means millions of Americans
in the biggest and the smallest places across the continent – have been good
enough to say that they've been given, down the past four years, a running
social history of Britain from 1904 to 1930 which makes the fictional life of
the Bellamys seem an actual part of English history and that, of course, was
the idea at the start. But the impulse to do it at all was not an original
desire to acquaint Americans with the life of Britain, it was a desperate
expedient to fill in the time taken up in Britain with glamourising various
commercial products. 

So the irony is that in Britain, which most Americans believe has only the
BBC's non commercial system, 'Upstairs Downstairs' was presented with
commercials and 'cold' so to speak, with no explanations or essays, whereas in
America, which most Britons believe has nothing but a visible jungle of
commercials, 'Upstairs Downstairs' has been seen for four years without any
commercials at all. 

There's a further irony, because the avid American audience recognises
'Upstairs Downstairs' as obviously an English import and they are stubbornly
planted in their belief that Britain has no commercial television, they assume,
and I should guess 99 per cent of them, that 'Upstairs Downstairs' is a BBC
product. The compliments come flooding in from coast to coast and, while we
hasten on all public occasions to give credit where credit is due, the BBC
suffers not too painfully from having to bear the weight of all this
congratulation and flattery. Once a preconception takes hold of a nation, such
as that all Italian food is liberally spiced with garlic, that Mexican food is
as hot as a fiery furnace, people have to live in Italy or Mexico for a long
spell before they can be made to realise that it just ain't so. 

Well, a year or two ago, we took from the BBC the rollicking dramatic series
called 'Tom Brown's Schooldays'. It was such a success that a small town in
Ohio, I believe, that bears the name of Thomas Hughes's birthplace made itself
over into a sort of transatlantic show place for 'Tom Brown's Schooldays'. We
had the usual piles of gratifying mail but there came one week when the mail
was heavier than usual and most of it was very un-gratifying indeed. 

The audience had just seen an episode in which Tom Brown was paddled, caned or
birched – according to the idiom you're most used to – and a storm of protest
flared up like a prairie fire. Indignation ran most high among women viewers
who were appalled to see the visible evidence of a school system in which small
boys were physically punished for their misbehaviour. This episode also stirred
another American protest which was against the whole idea of boarding schools
for little boys of nine or ten. I read through whole bags of mail which implied
that not only had I sat there unruffled by the abominable canings but, such is
the abominable magic of television, that I had practically invented the system
myself. 

One lady came to the heart of the American protest when she wrote, 'Don't you
believe that this system of sending small boys away from home at an early age
is the main reason why Englishmen grow up so neurotic?' This was fascinating
news to me and I used my next stint before the camera to say that in my
lifetime I had known, about equally, men who had gone away to a prep school at
nine or so and as many who had never gone to a boarding school at all, and that
all things considered I was unable to attach neuroses to one group more than
another. Well, this may have drawn the sting from the neurotic accusation but
for several weeks, and especially when the detestable Flashman started some of
his ingenious bullying, it didn't stop the waves of shock in mothers who
thought the caning or other physical punishment of children was barbaric, if
not downright criminal and certainly un-American. 

My own close friends came to me and asked me, with the guilty curiosity of
someone enquiring how you were treated in a prisoner of war camp, asked me if I
had ever in my life been caned. I said, 'Of course!' And they went into shock.
None of them, whatever their origin, whatever sort of school they'd been to –
kindergarten, elementary, local high school or boarding school – none of them
had ever felt a flick of that rod which, spared, is supposed to spoil the
child. And I hasten to say that my American contemporaries didn't seem to be
more or less spoiled than the rest of us. 

I don't know when caning went out in the American system but it must have been
at least 50 years ago. But there's no question that it was, for centuries, a
staple of the American system. It may well be that it fell into disuse once
John Dewey and his disciples of permissive, or progressive, education took hold
and spread their gospel of treating a child as a small grown up who must be
persuaded, argued with, reasoned with and led tenderly into the paths of
righteousness. 

Well, maybe the pendulum is about to swing back, for this week we had a
shocker. In a ruling handed down by the United States Supreme Court in what is
sure to be the landmark case of Ingraham versus Wright. Ingraham is the
plaintiff, the punished boy, and Wright, I presume, is the offending teacher. I
should say Ingraham 'was' the boy because the offence he complained about and
eventually brought to court happened in 1971. Since the mills of American
justice grind exceeding slow, it has only now come up after several appeals
were upheld and reversed before the Supreme Court. 

Ingraham took the legal burden on behalf of himself and another boy named
Andrews. Their complaint was that they had both been paddled, one, twenty times
and subsequently developed a haematoma, a blood mass, which took several days
to go down and the other was paddled several times and claims he didn't have
the full use of an arm for a week. The case came to the Supreme Court as any
case must that goes there on a constitutional issue – nothing ever goes to the
Supreme Court that does not claim the violation of the rights of the
individual. And they claimed that the spanking of a child by a teacher violates
the Eighth Amendment to the Constitution which says simply, 'Excessive bail
shall not be required nor excessive fines imposed nor cruel and unusual
punishments inflicted'. 

Now, although New Jersey and Massachusetts have laws specifically forbidding
physical punishment of any kind, 23 states authorise moderate spanking but the
Supreme Court can override state laws and, from now on, the court says that the
teacher has, and I'm quoting, 'a common law privilege to inflict reasonable
corporal punishment'. It did not find the spanking of Ingraham and Andrews was
cruel and unusual. It is, in fact, unusual but cruel it was not. 

So watch out for a whole new round of spanked bottoms. Prepare yourselves,
folks, for a new generation of American neurotics.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP