Mid-term elections

As I more than hinted a week ago, Americans, over this weekend, are going to be
absorbed – politically at least – by the congressional and local elections that
take place as usual on the first Tuesday in November.

The only warning I'd like to add about the congressional elections is that as
soon as they're over, the pundits, the pollsters, the foreign correspondents,
will all start analysing like mad in terms of party politics. That's to say
they ask each other, mainly, did President Carter get a vote of confidence or
did he, on the contrary, receive a blow to the chops? 

To look on the election of a new Congress in this way is irresistible. But it's
worth resisting because that's not what a congressional election is about,
except in a year, once every four years, when a president is also being
elected. It's become crystal clear lately that the so-called 'mid-term'
election of a wholly new House of Representatives and a new one-third of the
Senate is an intensely regional and local election, dealing with regional and
local issues and the personalities, rather than the parties, of the opponents. 

Of course, there are issues that burn the whole country and just now it's
obvious that what burns more states than California is the load of taxes,
especially property taxes – what, in Britain, are called 'rates'. There's also
a national row about abortion and in every state the antagonists square off –
the people who say the control of her own body is the least a woman can ask and
the people who say that a voluntary abortion is a form of legalised murder.
And, of course, there's crime. The present argument is over crimes of violence,
the ease of parole and whether juvenile criminals should be considered
compassionately as special cases or should receive the full adult treatment. 

But it's not safe to say that any one of these national issues is paramount in
any one state or city. In a south-western state, for instance, there's a
hullabaloo about the cost of taxes on water. The availability of a water supply
has always been a Western anxiety. In one New England town, the issue is what
to do with an old factory that's out of date and eating up ground taxes. In
another, they'll vote for anybody who can think up a way of banning
foreign-made shoes and reviving the depressed local shoe industry. In many
parts of Florida, the voters who count are retired people who cannot get by on
small pensions. In other states, all the uproar is about the administration's
decision to open a nuclear testing plant or, in another place, to close an
aerospace factory. 

Now these preoccupations, since they mostly concern how people get their
livelihood or don't, or how they're going to pay the mortgage or how safe they
feel on the streets or even in their own homes, obviously there's no party
line. No politician of any party is going to come out in favour of big taxes or
rape any more than he or she is going to come out against Santa Claus or
Mother. And if you need statistical backing for this conviction, there are
recent surveys – very late in hindsight but all in agreement – which report
that for many years now, Americans have considered party less and less in
mid-term congressional elections. What I'm saying is it will be foolish to
discover any significant national pattern to the results next Tuesday. I don't
doubt that discoveries will be made nonetheless. 

Apart from domestic politics, there are two foreign puzzles that are
fascinating a lot of people just now. One is the award of the Nobel Peace Prize
jointly to Mr Begin and Mr Sadat, unhappily at a time when there appears to be
a nasty backlash to the peace and joy of Camp David. The papers and the
cartoonists, not to mention some old cynics in the United Nations, have not
been slow to notice the irony in the undeniable fact that both the new
prize-winners started their political life as terrorists. One oldster suggested
it was time to amend the stern prohibition enunciated by the late Dean Acheson
when he was opposing, as he did implacably, the admission of Communist China
into the UN. 'No one,' he said, 'ought to be able to shoot his way into the
United Nations.' 

The suggested amendment is a prescription: 'Burn enough buildings, order enough
assassinations and in time you'll have bombed your way into a Nobel Peace
Prize'. Now we must surely believe that no two men, in the Middle East or
outside it, are more sincerely off on the search for a general peace than Mr
Begin and Mr Sadat. But the memory of their route to power is there. And what
it's done – in New York, anyway – is to give new point to the warning of the
Jews that if there is to be an autonomous Palestinian State, in no time it
could be seized and presided over by Mr Arafat. 

The other puzzle is perhaps not so much a puzzle as a very American reflex to a
foreign event that's so complicated and so remote that the only way to make
sense of it is in ideological terms. I'm talking about the appointment of a
Pole as the new pope. The press and television commentators have had a field
day on the basis of Poland's being a communist country. I've noticed in the
past few weeks how people, who had no thoughts at all about the significance of
the election of John Paul I, except to note his simplicity and jolliness, have
a knee-jerk reaction to the election of his successor. 

The most cocksure reaction is, in my observation, among non-Catholics, both
liberals and conservatives. 'One in the eye for Moscow' is the thought. Or,
among the more intellectual, 'At last Rome has redeemed the prolonged and
scandalous silence of old Pacelli, the wartime pope in the face of the Nazi
Holocaust.' Now we're being told the cardinals have thrown down the gauntlet to
communism. There was a shrewd second thought from one of our best cartoonists
who showed Mr Brezhnev in the Kremlin looking anxiously at an adviser who's
saying, 'The question is, have we penetrated the Vatican or have they
penetrated us?'. 

These questions may herald an immense political conflict in the years to come
and the knee-jerk reaction may turn out to be correct but what strikes me, at
the moment, is that nothing the Pope himself has said gives ground for thinking
so. From his enthronement address through all his subsequent remarks, he has
stressed that his kingdom is a spiritual one and that a political conflict is
neither present nor being sought – which, coming from a Pole who openly
resisted the Nazis, is a remarkable statement in itself. 

But what he seems to be saying is that so long as the millions of Catholics in
his own country are not openly persecuted, it is not the mission of the Vatican
to stir opposition to the temporal rulers. I've looked again at his statements
and can see nothing more political, nothing more provocative than the implied
injunction, 'Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's and unto God, the
things that are God's'. 

The Americans who are noticeably jubilant for quite other reasons about the
papal election are the Polish-Americans. For years they have quietly resented
the spate of Polish jokes which attribute to them a special dimension of
stupidity. These people now feel a long overdue sense of pride. I live, through
the summer and fall, among a goodly number of them. Seventy and more years ago,
the Poles came in droves through New York, the city Poles, the Jews especially,
settling in New York or going off to Chicago or Pittsburgh. The farmers were
Catholics and, like all immigrant farmers, smelled out the native soil. They
looked for sand country and found it in the so-called 'sand country' of
Wisconsin and on the North Fork of eastern Long Island and resumed doing what
they'd done at home, namely growing potatoes. 

Within a generation, the Long Island potato began to rival the Idaho potato in
fame, and what's better, in sales. It was the Poles, also, who went to work on
the Long Island duck farms, saved their pennies and in 30 years bought out the
Anglo-Americans, the original English owners who, like most long-established
firms, began to rest on their oars, so to speak. 

The Poles do not take prosperity for granted. I remember, during the war,
visiting a duck farm 18 miles from us. It was already supplying restaurants
around the world as well as every part of this country. They now, quote, 'put
through' – as the saying goes – eight million ducks a year. Yet when I called
on the owner, he was eating in the kitchen with his family and when he went to
get some ice, he opened a huge refrigerator which was stacked with neat piles
of 100-dollar bills. By now, I imagine, his heirs have transferred the loot to
a bank. 

The climax of the Poles new-found joy came the other week in our parts when the
pastor of our local church, Our Lady of Ostrabrama, who'd never been to Europe,
was chosen as one of the six American Polish pastors to go and attend the
enthronement of the new pope. For once the Anglos down our end of the island
felt and acted like second fiddles. But the rest of the time these two strains
live together without strain, the Poles and the original English who've been
here since 1649, some of whose descendants have never been to New York City and
don't intend to. So we have the Tuthills and the Deroskis, the Jewells and the
Stepnowskis, the Zimnoskis and the Hortons, the Klimkoskis and the Richmonds. 

Which reminds me. While we're giving two cheers for the Poles, I'd like to
propose one cheer for the Anglos, Mrs Richmond. Mrs Richmond has been running a
small, local, grocery store at the end of a lane since I can remember, in a
house built in the 1790s that has stayed in her family since. She was always
there in the mornings, stacking the shelves, sorting the newspapers, stirring
the logs in the Franklin stove and shaking her head over what she deplored as
the 'fads and fusses' of the day, especially the latest diet.

'Mercy me!' she used to say, 'I don't know how we ever got along without this
proteins and vitamins and calories and I don't know what or!' She took no
exercise. She walked and bent over, had a lively appetite for potatoes,
bluefish, the local cauliflower and squash, meat and potatoes.There came a day
when she decided she wanted a few years to herself, so she retired at the
sensible age of 93. 

Last week she died, still deploring protein and vitamins, at the age of 100.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP