Royal Jubilee

It may be a sign of the times, it may be no more than a rare coincidence, but
it is a fact that among all the cast of real characters that crowd the
newspapers and the news programmes on television, this week three women took
the spotlight and left all the important men of the world in the dark, and even
dimmed the appearance, or non-appearance, of President Idi Amin.

I should guess, anyway, that most Americans who pay any sort of attention to
the news would say, correctly, that the three big news stories of the week have
been the triumph of the Queen of England, the travels of President Carter's
wife and the sudden rise to national fame of /.../ named Anita Bryant. 

Long before the celebrations got under way, the American television networks
began to lay elaborate plans to cover the Royal Jubilee. Television, as we all
know, tells its message through pictures, that's fairly obvious to the normal
viewer, but it's a truth that many scholars, commentators and other talking
heads prefer to forget. They like to think that their wise words carry at least
half the weight of the message, but time and again it's proved to be not so. 

I remember, some years ago, a public opinion survey made a general study of the
popular memories of President John Kennedy's assassination. People of all sorts
and pretensions were asked to recall the horror and to say what evidence
supported the theory of a single killer, what evidence inclined them to suspect
two killers or a conspiracy, or whatever. The whole study was defeated by the
force of people's visual memory. They remembered, more than all the reams of
testimony in the nine volumes of the presidential commissions report, they
remembered most vividly the blurry, jerky little movie, an 8mm movie taken by a
bystander, of the president slumping over and Mrs Kennedy's frantic climb over
his sagging body. They remembered, next the astonishing scene, which was being
televised routinely the following Sunday morning, of Lee Harvey Oswald being
transferred from one place of detention to another, when a small, chunky man
broke through the onlookers and shot Oswald. They remembered most of all the
figure of the sheriff or guard, in a white suit, rearing back with his mouth
wide open in shock. This is pitifully little to go on as a file of evidence on
an assassination, but there it is in the public memory preserved like a
horrible fly in amber. 

What I'm saying is that American television was not primarily interested in the
institution of monarchy or where it stands today. It was interested, as I
should guess every other country's television system was, in the prospect of a
gorgeous show. If it is the understandable weakness of television to want to
film the flames of a fire and not try to find the motive for starting it, it's
all the more understandable that in a world which has abandoned uniforms – even
the old uniform of a businessman, or a soldier, or a schoolboy – the promise of
a procession and a cathedral service blazing with medieval colour and
Elizabethan costumes with heralds and trumpets and golden coaches and sparkling
jewels and high-stepping cavalry and the rest, was irresistible. 

However, I've noticed in talking to Americans who saw the knightly pageant that
the sight they hold on to is the reverse shot, taken as if from the roof of
Buckingham Palace which showed the enormous packed crowd on Tuesday, waving and
cheering. A crowd that went from the Palace gates, it seemed to us anyway, as
far as Admiralty Arch, if not the far horizon of Trafalgar Square. 

John Chancellor, the NBC anchorman who had gone to London said that no old
Londoner he talked to, none of them, could remember anything quite like it
since the Coronation itself or the Silver Jubilee of George V. Well, I was
there then and I would dare to say that no crowd I have ever seen outside
Buckingham Palace began to match the huge ocean of people last Tuesday. Not
even the roaring mass of people out there on the night of VE Day. 

However, what I think makes this scene unforgettable to the Americans is the
shock of it. They've heard and read with the rest of us, down the past few
years, British complaints about the cost of the upkeep of the Royal Family,
they've assumed that the decline in the old formality, and I find it impossible
to imagine King George V having a cosy television talk with Robin Day, sa. They
have assumed that this fading of the remoteness, almost god-like, of the Royal
Family, implied a fading in the institution itself. 

There is no uniform American attitude to royalty except a 200-year-old
agreement that it's not for them. There's much superficial nonsense talked in
Britain and the reaches of the Commonwealth about THE American passion for
titles. Certainly there are no fewer, but no more, Americans than there are
Britons or Australians or South Africans who, as the saying goes, ’love a
lord’. 

Most Americans, I believe, are at once quietly fascinated by the survival of
the medieval pageantry into modern life but they're also quietly baffled by how
it fits in with a country that is, undoubtedly, democratic. It's a puzzle they
never resolve, just as they are puzzled to know how Britain can have a
constitution when you can't see it, when, unlike the American Constitution, it
is not written down. Most ordinary people don't fret over this but I've noticed
that the higher you go up the American educational scale, you have a harder
time convincing American businessmen, scholars, lawyers that such a thing as
the British Constitution even exists. 

I said that the, what, half a million swaying, cheering people outside the
Palace was the main memory and the main shock. Put very simply, the shock was
the visible and thunderingly audible evidence that this ancient institution,
whose trappings seem almost bizarre and irrelevant in our time, should have
produced a family that aroused such undeniable affection. 

The explanation that Americans give, in however off-hand a way, seems to be
that the family itself, raised above the tides of politics and the squalor of
so much public life, is a reassurance, the assertion through what looks like a
stern and austere institution, the assertion of some old values that American
middle-aged and old people see crumbling around them. Quite simply, duty,
family, country. I think there's no doubt that this impression is what will
remain. At any rate, the reporting of the jubilee in American papers has been
very full, colourful, not starry-eyed or fawning, but it's noticeable also that
they have been practically free from the kind of rearguard, tart criticism of
the monarchy that erupted last week in some British papers. 

Now, to go south instead of east, we've watched the remarkable tour of Mrs
Carter through the Caribbean and South American republics. What was most
remarkable, even unpleasant to some of those republics themselves was the fact
the President Carter chose his wife to undertake the mission. If she'd gone to
Europe it might have seemed unusual but simply a refreshing change, but the
Latin republics normally take a sharp, machismo view of women in politics, or
women anywhere outside the home or the working farm or the boudoir. 

President Carter must have had many warning memoranda from the Latin American
desk of the state department but, whatever else he is, he is not a naive man.
He knew what he was doing and since his wife's mission was to press, ever so
gently, for a new consideration of human rights in those countries that are
seeking American aid, what's more pointed than to send a member of the sex
which in non-Latin nations too has only recently begun to assert its equality
before the law. 

The toughest trip must have been the one to Brazil. President Carter had begged
the West Germans not to ship to Brazil the means to nuclear power. The
Brazilians protested, as the Argentines have done, that human rights in their
own country are their own business. Now the American attitude is quite
courteous but firm. If you are living your own life and want no help from us,
agreed. Civil, human rights and liberties are your own business. But if you
want economic, not to mention military, aid then gross violations of human
rights inside your country are our business too. 

Well, it's much too early to say whether Mrs Carter's mission has been a
success. Obviously she was greeted and treated with impeccable Latin courtesy
whatever misgivings, resentments, doubts there may have been beneath the smiles
and the bows; we'll have to wait for the reports of the embassies back to
Washington. But the very idea of the trip is one of those odd, unexpected
initiatives which make the presence of Jimmy Carter in the White House still a
surprise and refreshment. 

Now, in Dade County, Florida, which is the great populous area around Miami,
they held the other day a referendum to say whether a county law should stand
which forbids legal discrimination against homosexuals in employment, housing
and public accommodations. Dade County is supposedly the most liberal corner of
Florida. 

Well, the people voted by more than two to one to repeal the law and this
thumping majority was due, it seems to be agreed, to the almost evangelical
campaign of an actress named Anita Bryant, who has aroused fears of the
corruption of children and went around quoting the Bible's forthright
denunciations of homosexuality as an abomination. And yet the enormous number
of 90,000 people voted to uphold the law. It will go, I should guess, to a test
case and could go to the United States Supreme Court. And the so-called 'gays'
don't require any amendment, any new amendment, to the constitution. They take
their stand on the century-old 14th Amendment which guarantees the equal
protection of the laws to all citizens. 

Meantime, Miss, Mrs, Bryant promises a national campaign. Whether or not she
can take the country, she took Dade County with a simple, stunning slogan. 'If
God,' she said, 'had intended to condone homosexuality, he would not have put
Adam and Eve in the Garden, he would have put Adam and Bruce.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP