Carter and Taiwan

I wouldn't take anybody's bet on what I'm going to talk about. The obvious
topic is about as inevitable as John Glenn was the week that he circled the
globe.

I've been meaning, in a gingerly way, to talk about China for some time, since
about a year ago the chic tourist trade began to go there and well-heeled
Americans of all political stripes – with the possible exception of Goldwater
conservatives – came back far more delirious in their tributes than the first
generation of Intourist visitors to Russia half a century ago who returned from
the Soviet Union and proudly chanted Lincoln Steffen's famous line, 'I have
seen the future and it works'. 

If Franklin Roosevelt had been president today, you may be sure that the
republic would now be resounding with another of his ringing, homely phrases
like, 'We must become the arsenal of democracy' or 'We have nothing to fear but
fear itself.' But Mr Carter, who with one person opposite in a room can be as
relaxed and perceptive, as direct, simple and engaging as any president in our
time, unfortunately is a vastly different person when he stands up before
Congress or sits in the White House to perform his version of Roosevelt's
fireside talk. To put it most charitably, and perhaps even truthfully,
President Carter suffers from speechwriters of really staggering mediocrity. If
they were German sociologists who'd been in this country less than a year, they
couldn't contrive such an elephantine procession of unspeakable sentences. They
have one knack which cannot be denied them, which is the knack of starting
every sentence with an abstract noun, which is a fatal thing to do in English
since no verb is going to hit anything, nothing's going to happen for quite a
while, and what you do is build up a whole series of cumulus clouds of more
abstractions. If this were not the season of goodwill, I'd say about them what
Winston Churchill said about Ramsay MacDonald, 'He has more than any other man
the gift of compressing the largest possible amount of words into the smallest
possible amount of thought.' 

So, as it was, the president's suddenly called talk to the nation made words
like 'normalisation' and 'unification' thud through the airwaves, after the
president had quietly put the Middle East to simmer on the backburner. But in
spite of the dense layers of cotton wool in which this Christmas present was
buried, the thing itself, complete recognition of mainland China after 30
years, was dazzling enough to impress almost everybody, except some senators
and congressmen who began to ask by what constitutional right can a president
cancel a treaty with a foreign power, that power – or now rather powerless
little nation – being, of course, Taiwan. The United States has had for 23
years a defence treaty with Taiwan but the president said it will lapse after a
year, American troops will be pulled out in a couple of weeks and the United
States will cease to recognise Taiwan as a separate Chinese republic. 

Now you know that the president is forbidden by the constitution to declare war
or to sign a treaty with a foreign power except with the advice and consent of
the Senate, but after the Second World War, in the general fear of communism
that spread around the country, a new willingness to leave the war-waging power
to the president first showed itself, I believe, in 1948, when the Russian
coup, or takeover, in Czechoslovakia – one of America's favourite republics –
shocked American opinion across the whole spectrum of political belief like
nothing since the Nazi-Soviet pact of 1939. And, after that, the fear of
communist eruptions, even in the Mediterranean, even in this hemisphere,
stopped anybody's asking about the consent of the Senate when President
Eisenhower went into the Lebanon and President Kennedy into Cuba. But whenever
the president or the Congress takes on more power than the constitution permits
either of them, sooner or later there's a reaction. 

Now the big, the historic, reaction against excessive presidential power came,
of course, with Vietnam. Once that was over, after a wry New England senator
had said, 'Let's call the boys home and say we won', Congress began to look
back in anger and frustration at the freewheeling powers every president since
Kennedy had assumed. One of the acts passed by the last Congress, one we've
heard very little about, was something called the International Security
Assistance Act passed this year. This act was meant to make sure that from now
on, the president – any president – will not assume war-making powers, will
sign no treaty and will not abrogate or cancel any treaty without, at the very
least, consulting, seeking the advice, of Congress, not just the Senate.
President Carter was reminded of this obscure little act in the telegram he got
the other day from the Republican leader in the Senate, Senator Baker of
Tennessee. The telegram, in fact, scolded the president for not remembering the
provisions of that act. 

Now Senator Baker is not a man whom the president can quietly brush off. In all
arguments over foreign policy, the opposition leader in the Senate is a
dangerous man to have against you and a splendid man to have on your side. It's
doubtful that the United Nations' Charter would have been so effortlessly
ratified by the Senate if President Roosevelt, for a couple of years before the
birth of the United Nations in San Francisco, had not made a mission out of
wooing and winning a Republican senator, Vandenberg, who'd been the most
formidable isolationist in the Senate. President Carter learned a little late
in his new job the importance of not slighting the leader of the opposition and
he has a lot to thank Senator Baker for. It was Baker who swung the doubtful
Senate votes on lifting the embargo on sales of arms to Turkey and, even more
crucial, on getting the Panama Canal treaties passed. 

So if, in the universal shout of joy that has gone up over recognising China, I
seem to be listening to a puppy barking at a battleship, I think I ought to say
that when Congress comes back on 15 January, you're going to hear a good deal
more about Taiwan than we're hearing now. Maybe a month from now even, the
conservatives will be pacified by dramatic evidence that Taiwan will prosper,
become a sort of American Hong Kong and that may dampen the fire of the
opposition whose most lurid sparks are being thrown up just now by old Senator
Barry Goldwater of Arizona who says there has been no such appalling example of
appeasement since Mr Chamberlain went to Munich. 

Senator Goldwater threatens to take the president to court. This, most
knowledgeable people in Washington believe, is unlikely even if the lower
federal courts order a stay in ending the Taiwan treaty, it's improbable in the
extreme that the Supreme Court would agree to consider the case. The Supreme
Court stays out of politics, which may sound like an alarming remark when you
consider the long roster of its judgements that have then fired the most
tremendous political battles, but the Supreme Court intervenes always and only
in what might be the denial of constitutional rights to an individual. Foreign
policy could only come into a Supreme Court case about Taiwan, I imagine, in
some wild, comic opera fantasy of, say, a young American citizen claiming he
had a right to fight for Taiwan but was prevented from doing so because the
President of the United States would not exercise his constitutional power to
declare war on Communist China with the advice and consent of the Senate. 

What I am saying is that the opposition on constitutional grounds to President
Carter's summary ending of the Taiwan defence treaty is much larger than it
sounds in the thunder of the general approval. An informal count of the House
of Representatives last week showed two congressmen in three against it and,
buried away in eight lines in the New York Times one day this week was the
report or admission by the White House that the White House mail was running
4-1 against deserting Taiwan. 

Well, I just about have time for a complete somersault which will land us in a
supermarket in uptown New York. My wife went off the other day to the butcher
to buy some beef kidney suet. I should tell you at once that suet is something
most Americans have never heard of and would not recognise if it were thrown at
them. She tried three butchers and two supermarkets and at last she went into a
supermarket, asked to see the butcher and was shown to a large, jolly man in a
white apron. 

At the mention of the word 'suet' the man went into stupor, she might have been
talking Sanskrit. 'Me,' said the man in a rolling guttural, 'Me new man, me a
little butcher, me Russian, short in this country by 16 months, you want big
butcher!'' He led her to the boss man, the big butcher who was a beanpole about
five feet high. 'What is it lady?' he said. She told him. He was unfazed. 'So,'
he said, 'you're going to make a plum pudding?' 'That's right!' she said. The
Russian was even more baffled but smiling and gesturing away like Mr Fezziwig. 

'You English?' said the big – the little – butcher. 'No,' said my wife, 'but my
husband is.' 'You want,' said the butcher with absolute authority, 'you want
beef kidney suet, right?' 'Right!' she said. 'I know all about this,' he said,
'I was in England during the war.' He brought in a side of beef, plonked it
down on the counter, removed its plastic wrapping and carved off a great,
glistening hunk of suet. 'How's that?' he said. 'That's fine!' she said. 

The Russian, meanwhile, making incomprehensible noises about 'twenty years ago
men laying down all over.' 'What's that?' she asked. 'You, twenty years ago,
very beautiful I think. Men laying down all over.' 'I was in Manchester during
the war,' said the butcher. 'That,' said my wife, 'is where my husband was
born.' 'In that case,' said the big – little – butcher, 'it's yours. No sale.'
He banged up 'no sale' on the cash register, handed it over to her and she went
out chattering thanks and good wishes. The Russian saw her to the door and
flung it open. 'Twenty years ago, men I think laying down all over. Merry
Christmas!' 

'Merry Christmas to you!' she said. And the same to you.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP