Cambodian refugee crisis

Some old folk among you may remember a time when it was usual, almost
compulsory, for me at this time of the year to festoon these talks with the
holly and the ivy, or at least with cheerful or ribald remarks about how
Christmas was being celebrated in various moving or comical ways around the
United States.

There is, I'm afraid, nothing very much to relieve the darker times we live in,
except the habit of a famous lady atheist in Colorado, a habit that's becoming
with her practically a Christmas routine, of suing the state's capital city to
prohibit one or other of the festivals that are traditional in Christian
countries. 

I ought, I suppose, to rush in with the reminder that, quite literally, the
United States of America is not, and never has been, a Christian country. The
men who wrote the constitution demonstrated, it seems to me, extraordinary
high-mindedness considering that all of them were either practising or
pretending Christians, when they wrote and approved, as the very first article
of the Bill of Rights, 'Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment
of religion.' They'd had enough of religious persecution one way or another and
thought it would be best if the nation they were inventing made the point right
away that there'd better be no official national church, that people should be
allowed to worship or not to worship as they felt fit. 

A year or two ago the same article of the Bill of Rights was invoked by that
passionate lady atheist to ban a model scene of the nativity from being
exhibited outside City Hall. The constitutional question then came up: was the
model constructed at the city's expense – that is, at the expense of the
taxpayers, among whom were such devout atheists as the aforementioned lady. She
had her way and the scene was dismembered. 

Now, there've been several protests, and you may be sure that the American
Civil Liberties' Union is usually on hand to help, against the singing of
Christmas carols in the public schools. May I remind anybody who needs the
reminder that, in America, a public school is a school for the general public
supported by public funds, not a private school. A few years ago, the public
schools were compelled to abandon, in any community that was challenged, the
recitation of prayers. Now, carols are going since our unrepentant lady and her
like find such things nauseating to people who don't recognise Jesus Christ or
God or, I suppose, the legend that there was a Good King Wenceslas and his
revoltingly upper-class notion that he could command a mere page to 'Come stand
by me'. I've forgotten the rest of the words of that carol but some of you may
want to go over them and see if there's any mention of God or Odin, or any
other deity. If not, it might make an interesting test case. If not, I
shouldn't be surprised if some town council didn't prohibit all Christmas
carols except Good King Wenceslas. 

Well, apart from that diversion, there are not many places to go for a chuckle
or a merry toast. Incidentally, I'm pleased to say that Americans still wish
each other a merry Christmas and a happy New Year. The... the latter-day
English usage of a 'happy' Christmas has not yet come in. 

In so far as there is such a thing as the American mind, there are two things
that weigh on the American mind. One, of course, is the interminable problem of
the American hostages in Iran, who must, by now, even without the application
of thumbscrews or gags, be brainwashed, in the sense of wishing to be out at
all costs, even at the cost, which some of them have paid, of assuring us all
in statements abounding with strangely un-American idioms, that they've been
wonderfully well treated, are happy and would like to see the Shah return for a
trial – some trial – by their captors. 

The other preoccupation, however, is one that has not been much talked or
written about abroad, maybe because it has hideously fulfilled a gruesome
property made long ago by such now discredited characters as Mr Nixon and Dr
Kissinger. Does anyone remember what seemed like a pretty spurious defence of
the American dive into Cambodia to root out the North Vietnamese in their
so-called sanctuaries? It was that if the North Vietnamese and the Vietcong
were allowed to establish themselves in Cambodia, let alone if South Vietnam
fell to them, then either South Vietnam or Cambodia would suffer a bloodbath. 

I remember myself, at the time, running over in my mind several historical
forerunners of this sort of warning. Many nations on the rampage, not to
mention warring Indian tribes, have made a habit of invading some harmless or
neutral neighbour, on the ground that if they didn't the poor neighbour would
suffer a bloodbath from the invasion of the other side, the wicked enemy. And
I'm sorry to say that I discounted the Nixon-Kissinger warning at the time as a
familiar brand of bluster. 

Well, a surprisingly few people seem to have noticed that Cambodia has
suffered, in the past three or four years, an act of genocide that makes Hitler
look like an amateur. When the detested Pol Pot regime was overthrown in
Cambodia, you might, as a naive Westerner expect the victors to order the
capital city and the provincial capitals to be decorated with flags and bunting
before the triumphal entry, just like the first scene of 'Julius Caesar'.
Instead the order went out to burn the cities, slaughter the able-bodied and
chase hundreds of thousands of the inhabitants into the countryside to live off
whatever roots they could find. This was intended as a downright lesson to show
who was boss and to deprive Pol Pot, in his rural retreat, from getting food or
weapons. 

Well, what we have now is a civil war between the old and the new regimes, Heng
Samrin, the puppet of Vietnam backed by the Soviet Union, and Pol Pot and his
guerrilla forces backed by the Chinese. Now it is the borderlands of Thailand
which are being used as a sanctuary for the Pol Pot refugees and as an escape
route for thousands and thousands of starving refugees with their skeleton
babies and adults dropping in their tracks. You'll remember that the ghastly
television pictures of these living corpses and barely breathing vegetables
stirred the conscience of good people, in many lands, to mobilise rescue teams
and food supplies from several sources, most notably, Oxfam, the International
Red Cross, the United Nations Children's Fund. 

So the food, lashings of it was assembled and despatched. Then its delivery to
the people who desperately needed it got stuck. Why? The easy, technical answer
is that one regime or one of the two equally detestable puppets wouldn't deal
with this international agency while willing to deal with another. The whole
supply problem got tangled beyond comprehension. But the truer answer is that
the Chinese would not let food destined for the starving, anywhere, go to those
parts of the country under the rule of the new Soviet-backed regime. And the
Russians weren't willing to let food go to the refugees or the guerrillas of
the Chinese-backed Pol Pot regime. 

This question was brought up recently in Moscow by a friend of mine, a powerful
American journalist, before one or two top Soviet foreign ministry officials.
They blandly told him it was not a human problem at all. It had nothing to do
with human beings. It was, they solemnly pronounced, a 'geo-political' problem.
In other words, people starving in Chinese-backed territory must move back into
Soviet-backed territory if they would care to live. 

Well the plot now thickens, or curdles sickeningly, I should say. A week or
more ago, the President of the United States received a document which outraged
him about which he was able to do nothing, having the ratification of the SALT
treaty in mind. A copy of this same document came into the hands of this friend
of mine. What it showed, and you'll have to take my word for it that it's a
document beyond suspicion, was that not only is the Soviet Union blocking huge
supplies of food and medicines that could save uncountable numbers of the
Cambodian people, but is getting hold of supplies sent by the foreign relief
agencies, taxing them as imports, and either giving them to their Cambodian
guerrillas that they back or selling them to the Vietnamese. 

Now there's no suggestion that the Russians have any of their own troops in
Cambodia or for that matter their own supplies of food; they don't need them.
The International Red Cross, Oxfam, the UN Children's Fund and countless
conscience-stricken groups and individuals have handed to the Russians a golden
opportunity to feed the sturdy guerrillas who are fighting the guerrillas of
the Pol Pot troops, while the people, the trudging and dropping legions of the
starving, do without. 

Meanwhile, on the question of arms for Cambodia for the puppet Heng Samrin,
over 120 Soviet cargo ships and 70 tankers have, since the spring, arrived in
Vietnamese ports. To put it crudely, if you happen to live or are trudging
through Pol Pot country, since your homes back in Heng Samrin country were
burned to the ground, then you deserve to die. If you're lucky enough to find
yourself in the country of Heng Samrin, our boy, you can get, or buy, food plus
the Russian-imposed tariff generously supplied by the brave agents of Oxfam,
the Red Cross, the UN Children's Fund, or the kindly people round the corner in
Illinois or Texas or Shropshire or Melbourne or wherever, who thought of the
coming Christmas feast and saved a little from the cost of it to feed a
shrivelled baby. 

The two charitable gentlemen who approached Ebenezer Scrooge for an offering
told him that many who might get to the poorhouse would rather die than go
there. And Scrooge suggested that they had better do it. 

Hundreds of thousands of Cambodians cannot get back to their poor, ruined
shacks in the country of the new regime, but don't weep too copiously for them!
At this festive season of the year remember the wise words of the Russian
foreign ministry: 'This has nothing to do with human beings. It is a
geo-political problem.' 

Merry Christmas. If possible.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP