Soviet troops in Cuba

Bob Hope used to have a joke – in fact he still has it – which stands him in
good stead every time a new man announces for the presidency or drops a strong
hint that he's after it. In its present version, with the names changed for
topicality, it goes: 'Teddy Kennedy has his eye on the presidential seat but
look what Carter's got!'

When the sitting president was Franklin Roosevelt, this sally packed a neat bit
of folk wisdom because it reminded people how hard it is to unseat a powerful
president who is skilled at using his vast resources of presidential patronage,
not to mention Roosevelt's incomparable gift of creating whole bureaus of
quangos. But today the old joke is almost a joke on Mr Carter because only one
American in four thinks he has any gift for power and people are much more
suspicious than they used to be about presidential appointments, especially
when they look like investments in political insurance. 

Well, at the beginning of the week, something happened that must have made
President Carter all the more eager to flourish his presidential power while at
the same time trying hard not to look as if he were doing it for political
purposes. Senator Edward Kennedy said, years ago, that his great responsibility
to the fatherless children of his two murdered brothers ruled him out as a
candidate for the presidency. A lot of Americans would have added, too, that
the nasty memory of the girl drowned in his car on that island off the coast of
Massachusetts would rule him out even more. 

But a few months ago, a reliable poll of the whole country showed that, at the
very least, 75 per cent of Americans no longer hold the Chappaquiddick tragedy
against him and last week Senator Kennedy let it be known that his mother, his
wife, the rest of his family, had dropped their long-standing objections to his
running for the president. He's been saying, for a year or more, that he is not
a candidate and that he intends to support the re-nomination of President
Carter. But there was no need for Senator Kennedy to make a public announcement
of his family's new attitude unless he wished to signal a new intention to
run. 

For months on end the polls have been showing that in a presidential election
held today, while Mr Carter would run neck and neck with the most prominent
Republican hopefuls – neck and neck at best, such as Reagan and former
President Ford – Senator Kennedy would swamp any Republican in sight. The
senator said the other night that he wasn't announcing yet, but he would make
up his mind in the next two or three months. It would depend most of all, he
said, on whether or not President Carter was able to revive the sagging
American economy. 

Now all this is plainly treading water before taking the big plunge. That, at
any rate, was the effect of it on the country. 'Kennedy for President' groups
and 'Draft Teddy' groups have been champing at the bit for many months. The
senator's statement affected them like a battle order. They're organising from
Alaska to Florida and even prominent Democrats in Congress who might have been
expected to 'button their mouths' if only so as not to embarrass Mr Carter, are
making public statements devoid of tact. 

The Speaker of the House, who is only, incidentally, its presiding chairman but
is mainly the Democrats leader in the House, quite blithely said, talking of
the Democratic convention next summer, 'I don't think Senator Kennedy can be
denied the Democratic nomination if he runs.' This is an astounding thing to be
said by President Carter's chief spokesman in the House of Representatives and
represents, I think, an act of pulling the rug out from under an incumbent,
which the incumbent's congressional leaders do not usually perform. 

This turn of events was greeted, understandably, by a sniff from the
president's chief aides in the White House and they retorted, as they were
bound to do, that the president is more concerned with great issues that affect
the country and not with presidential politics. He wants above all, he said, to
try and get through this session of Congress an energy bill and the passage of
the second Strategic Arms Limitation Bill. Well, he's had the worst trouble
getting any sort of energy bill to come up for a vote for over 18 months, but
now a new snag has appeared in the way of the Strategic Arms Limitation, the
SALT bill. 

It's this plaguey matter of the appearance in Cuba of 3,000 Russian troops,
plainly, according to American intelligence and photographic records, organised
as a combat brigade. The Russians say they are not combat troops, just part of
the Soviet team of technicians and military advisers who've been training
Cubans in the use of Soviet weapons. This is not, of course, anything like the
thundering shock that hit us in 1962 when American reconnaissance planes
discovered the Russians had nuclear missiles and launching pads already
installed in Cuba. 

That discovery, and the subsequent Soviet denials of any such installations,
and their final agreement to remove the non-existent weapons and facilities in
the face of a massive mobilisation of American naval and air power in the
Caribbean, that whole episode gave us the most nervous weekend since the Second
World War. But the brazenness of this new Russian move and the conviction, even
of senators friendly to Cuba, that the troops are, indeed, fully-equipped
Russian combat troops, this has been snapped up by senatorial hawks and doves
alike as a gauntlet. 

Maybe the Russians meant it to be a gauntlet or at least a provocation – see
how Washington reacts and then, after an almighty row in the Senate say, 'Very
well, we still assure you that these troops are no different from any others
who've been there for years, but we will be magnanimous, we will bow to your
hysteria and we'll take the troops out if you'll pass the SALT Treaty.' 

If this was the motive it seems, at the moment, to be working for although
President Kennedy* [see note below] says the troop issue has nothing to do with
SALT and we shouldn't be trapped into making them a quid pro quo deal, a rising
opposition in the Senate thinks differently. And even Senator Church, the
leading proponent of the SALT II bill and the chairman of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee that's been taking reams of testimony for and against the
bill, he said, 'I see no likelihood that the Senate will ratify the SALT II
treaty as long as any Soviet combat troops remained stationed in Cuba.' 

What complicates a straightforward pro and con debate is the well-reported
attitude of those senators who've been urging ratification of SALT. They've
been saying that the treaty essentially protects the American nuclear power
whatever the Russians do with conventional arms. So why should 3,000 Russians
in Cuba throw everybody into panic? The Russians, of course, say, 'How about
your hundreds of thousands of American and NATO troops in Europe?' The debate
is at the moment bogged down in the emotions of a vendetta, mainly, I suspect,
because of a slogan that developed great emotional force during the missile
crisis of 1962. The cry was then that the Russians were installing nuclear
weapons 'only 90 miles from Florida' – and that phrase has been waved again
like a red rag in the Senate. Very few people take out a map and measure the
mileage between American troops in Europe and the borders of the Soviet Union.
Maybe the Germans do. 

Anyway, by the time you hear these words, the Soviet ambassador in Washington
and Mr Vance, the Secretary of State, may have achieved what Mr Vance has been
hoping for and talking about ever since the troops were spotted – a diplomatic
solution. Whatever it is, it will have to be one that satisfies the Senate and
however it comes out, the Russians move has undoubtedly sharpened the
suspicions and perhaps the resolve of the opponents of the SALT treaty in the
Senate. 

Much, er... much play was made here of the announcement last Monday that a
British concern had paid out $630 million in cash to buy out the Howard Johnson
chain which has over a thousand restaurants and 500 motels in 40 of the states
and Canada. At first glance it may seem odd that this item should have hit not
only the front pages but the nightly television news. After all, British
companies in the past year or two have bought out at least two of New York's
most famous department stores, a national grocery chain and at least two
department store supermarket chains. But I think if you asked any New Yorker,
certainly, who owns Saks, Fifth Avenue or the famous Gimbels, they would fish
around in their minds for names, American names, and would be startled to hear
that they are British owned. 

But Howard Johnson’s – why should that alarm the country? The answer came on
the NBC nightly news, posed, I hasten to say with a wry chuckle, as a question.
'Will the British be able to guarantee us walnut twirl and strawberry sprinkle?
' Not to mention the other 26 flavours of ice cream which have been the boast
of Howard Johnson's service for two, maybe three, generations. The nicest
comment appeared under headlines in the New York Times, headlines that at first
looked as if they might have been written by S. J. Perelman, the best, the most
lunatic of America's humorists. But surprise, surprise, the piece was written
by a United States senator and a Republican, a combination not usually famous
for humour. 

The headline read, 'Fiendish plot. Texan denounces Britain's deal for Howard
Johnson's as threat to cherry vanilla! Hands off the Lone Star state's pecans!
Seizure of Bermuda hinted as reprisal.' 

The piece was written by Senator John Tower of Texas. It began: 'Notice of the
fall of yet another venerable American institution to blatant foreign economic
adventurism is always demoralising, but the latest news really gets me. The
thought of hundreds of Howard Johnson's restaurants along our interstate
highways flying the Union Jack is more than any ice-cream loving red-blooded
American can take. How would the House of Commons feel if the flag of Texas
were hoisted over Fortnum & Masons? Is this the way for an old and honoured
ally to act? 

'It was with great exaltation that conservatives everywhere greeted the new
government in Britain but all along, its free enterprise policy flourished
under the pervasive cover of socialist economic doctrine to the extent of
having $630 million in cash with which to spread neo-imperialist tentacles.
This latest affront is a major step towards the re-colonisation of America.
Wake up America! Colonel Sanders, Pizza Hut and Texas Taco Bell may be next!'

[*NOTE: Cooke did say 'President Kennedy' but this is obviously a slip of the
tongue. However, whether he meant to say Senator Kennedy or President Carter is
unclear.]

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP