Death of Elvis - 19 August 1977

The one thing there's surely no need to say much about is the death of Elvis
Presley. For the past 20 years or so, it was not possible to be mildly
interested in him, any more than it's possible to be a teensy weensy bit
pregnant. He was a cult, like one of those terrifying freak religions that are
grown in Southern California. People who were at all interested came close, at
one time or another, to obsession. I think it's a dubious reflection on the
world's press, or the press of the English-speaking world anyway, that it seems
to have assumed we were all as interested in him, his life, his origins, his
money, his drug taking, as we might be assumed to be interested in the late
John Kennedy or Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. So, if ever an appetite was glutted by
the newspapers, this was one.

Even the New York Times, which never mentioned the death, or for that matter
the life, of Leon Bix Beiderbecke, a considerable musical artist who died in
1931, had a large picture and two separate column stories about Presley on its
front page. And the New York Post, which under new management has been, in my
opinion, declining from its 200-year tradition as a serious evening paper into
a scandal tabloid, had pages and pages, and pictures and pictures, and reams of
information about Mr Presley, both trivial and shocking. In other words,
interested people could wallow in an orgy of prurience and then save their
self-respect by a quick reference to short leaders gravely commenting on the
danger of drugs and the terror of popular success. 

This sort of treatment reminds me of the days, of the heyday, of one of
America's most successful newspaper chains, now almost shrunk beyond
recognition, which used to print big and horribly detailed centrefold
photographs of the victim of a rape or a murder, and then hasten to take the
curse off its primary interest with long and shocked editorials about the
wickedness of rape and murder. 

A matter which I hope is more likely to interest listeners to these talks is
the matter of Jimmy Carter. What he's up to and where he thinks he's going.
He's been in office now for the better part of a year and it's quite common to
run into intelligent and well-informed people who say, 'I still don't know what
he's all about'. The legend of Mr. Carter's non identity is beginning to take
on Dickensian proportions, so in the end it may well be that, as with Dickens's
father, the living reality will be blurred or obliterated forever by the
brilliant myth which is Mr Micawber. Last time I gave a little rundown on Mr
Carter's well-filled day and his exhaustive working habits and the small
punctuations of meditation and music he allows himself. The one thing we do
know about him is that however far he's come by way of ideology or political
bias, his character is sufficiently rooted in the ways of the
nineteenth-century southern Baptists that he retains one striking
characteristic of the Victorians: a strong belief in personal industry, the
wish and the capacity to make the most of 24 hours of every day. 

About what he's up to and where he's going, most people, I find, have fairly
firm opinions. Conservatives, especially Republican conservatives... No, let me
begin again because that phrase alone may have produced more than a few
puckered brows. Let me say as a working proposition that for any foreign
audience certainly it makes much more sense to talk about the division of
political bias in this country as one between conservatives and liberals than
it does to talk about Republicans and Democrats as if they were separate
parties, which they are, committed to essentially different ideologies, which
they are not. 

For at least, oh, 30 years, the art of getting elected president in this
country has been the art of attracting as many voters as possible from the
party to which you do not belong. There is a general bias of the Democrats
toward liberal policies and Republicans toward conservative policies, but in
neither party is the bias strong enough to carry a Republican into the White
House on conservative policies alone, or a Democrat on the promise of producing
a liberal Utopia. The need to be very much aware of the strong minority opinion
in each party is what seems to make all presidential candidates slightly
blurred when they turn into a presidential profile. By the time any one of them
ceases to be a candidate and becomes a president, he finds, if he's a
Republican, that he simply cannot get bills passed or policies carried out
unless he pays considerable respect to the liberals in his own party. And if
he's a Democrat, he may guess that the country is taking a liberal turn, and
during the campaign he may promise total equality to the races, a three-day
week and swimming pools for everybody over 30, but when he gets in the White
House, he finds that his own party leaders in the Senate and the House are a
good deal more conservative than he is, and consequently he's going to have to
settle for equality between the races, only in so far as there is equal skill
or competence, a five-day week, only if it maintains the country's rate of
productivity, and swimming pools, only for those people who are prepared and
can afford to buy them, filter them, and, out West, conserve water by keeping
them empty three months of the year. So, I hope we can now see why the knight
in shining armour who runs for president so often turns into a man who is
unrecognisable, mainly because he's had to dispense with his armour. It turns
out to be too expensive to maintain. Armour polish is in short supply and,
anyway, there are powerful men in his party who pretty soon point out to him
that a coat of mail is the wrong uniform in which to attack the advocates of
strip mining, a balanced budget and an all-American Panama Canal. 

So, now let's go back and begin again with the sentence I abandoned. About
where he's going and what he's up to, most people, I find, have fairly firm
opinions. Conservatives find little fault with him, what we call Fiscal
Conservatives, especially. He has appointed to the treasury, to commerce, to
agriculture, moderate men sceptical of sweeping reforms, either of the
currency, or of a splurge of free trade, or of unlimited subsidies to hard-hit
crops. People who feared another, and more dramatic, new deal on these fronts
are happily reassured by Mr Carter's cagey ways with a dollar. The doubts about
him, not yet swelling into a vocal opposition, have come from his own party
liberals and from Republican liberals. The criticism you hear of him is almost
wholly liberal criticism. But Mr Carter, even when he was running, must have
known in his bones what liberals in full frenzy did not know, that the mood of
the country was swinging back to conservatism. Not, by any means, I may add, to
the right. There is, so far as I can see, no sign in this country of a general
disgust with both parties and an itch for the totalitarianism of the right or
the left. But the feeling which is general, that, for instance, since the last
three administrations have made an unholy and hideously expensive mess of
welfare, to begin all over again and try and create an alert, fair and workable
system that compensates people who cannot work and still allows rewards for
people who can and will.

Now this sort of job, the revamping of failed crusades, the restoration of a
crumbling building is, of course, very undramatic. And that's why Mr Carter has
been a disappointment to his old liberal supporters. Nevertheless, he has cut
through the endless debate about the B-1 bomber and cancelled it. He has, for
better or worse, agreed to Vietnam's coming into the United Nations. He's got a
bill passed which finally controls strip mining. He's put through an energy
bill. He's started to overhaul welfare and written a treaty with Panama which
may not be approved by the Senate this year, but once its careful provisions
for American military security are understood, it will surely be passed next
year. 

Where he is vulnerable is on his policies, if any, towards what one famous
black liberal called this week 'the powerless and the poor'. Julian Bond of
Georgia, who is one of the certainly three or four most effective spokesmen for
the blacks and a year ago an ardent Carter supporter, said this week that the
president had reneged on his campaign promises. In a stream of bitter
sentences, Mr Bond said, 'He captured the attention of the black masses who
never realised that a candidate may know the words to our hymns but not the
numbers on our pay checks. He promised no rise in social security taxes but he
says now they must go up. He promised parity for blacks but the record shows
few dark faces in Washington's high places. He promised to cut the defence
budget by $15 billion. He has cut it by $2.8 billion. He said that if winning
jobs conflicted with fighting inflation, then inflation would have to continue.
But now we hear that a balanced budget comes first. He promised to let us know
when the CIA and the FBI abused our trust but he tried to stop the American
press from telling the story of CIA pay-offs to foreign heads of state. While
New York smoulders and burns, he visits Yazoo city, Mississippi. In short, he's
not evil but he is president, not candidate and like all those who preceded him
in the Oval office, he is giving the squeaky wheel the most grease.' 

Well, the criticisms of so powerful and attractive a black as Julian Bond could
be an omen. If there's one belief growing out of the last election, it is that
Mr Carter owed his election to the blacks. In fact, this is quite untrue. A
little-noticed Harris survey showed that just as many blacks, no more, voted
for Mr Carter as voted for Richard Nixon in 1972. But the myth is powerfully
established, most of all amongst the blacks themselves. And if they come to
believe what Mr Bond believes, it could be the end of the long and comforting
calm of the blacks. 

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP