Inflation fears

It appears both from the public opinion polls, and from the general noise of
one's neighbours, that inflation is the main anxiety of most Americans. Now
this might not sound like a spellbinding bit of news but it is the first time
in several years that it has risen out of a cluster of other concerns –
unemployment, poverty, crime, abortion – and been declared by a hefty majority
of Americans to be the most nagging of the country's problems.

Of course it's impossible for anybody, for the secretary of the treasury or the
corner delicatessen owner, impossible to say what triggered this new wave of
anxiety. Everybody’s an economist these days, whereas a generation or more ago
most of us left the businessmen and the treasury to talk in a jargon that was
incomprehensible to most people. 

I remember, when I was starting in here as a foreign correspondent, the fun,
but also the fright, of this trade is that unlike a sports writer or a
parliamentary reporter or a gardening correspondent, you're expected to cover
everything. Well, I soon graduated from train accidents, obituaries of famous
Americans and run-of-the-mill general news, to picking up Washington politics
and became at home with court trials and even baseball. But the thing I dreaded
was the thought that one day I might have to cover a business story or an
economic report. 

I once heard, in my earliest days, two businessmen sitting over lunch and one
of them said glumly to the other, 'Freight loadings are down'. I hadn't the
foggiest notion what it meant but when I checked with my boss, the New York
correspondent of the London Times, THE Times, he said gravely, 'Well, after
all, freight loadings are THE economic indicator.' 

This was about as helpful to me as the dialogue between a famous vaudeville
team consisting of wizened little man named Willy Howard and his straight man,
a gabby character who spouted nothing but double talk. He would come bustling
on the stage and run into the pensive Willie Howard, the man would look over
both shoulders to indicate he was about to communicate some state secret or
devilish bit of gossip and he would say, 'The trend of the martin is trestling
the Velten Island, what's more, flugal's ravelling the portisfrigis.' And
Willie Howard would look aghast and say, 'You mean every weekend?' 

Well the day, the night, came my boss, a large, craggy, gentle old American,
incredibly well-preserved for his age – he must've been all of 55 – he always
wrote on Sunday morning a weekly survey of Wall Street and business news for
the Monday morning paper. One weekend he was down with the flu and he phoned me
and he asked me to do it. I was petrified. If somebody'd said, 'Write a piece
on the prospects of the Swedish skiing team in the Winter Olympics', I couldn't
have been more completely thrown. 

I called old Louis Hinrichs and begged for help and at the other end of the
phone he croaked, 'I don't know any more about economics than you do, but if
you'll go through the financial writers of the New York Times and the Sun and
the Journal American, cut out their columns and weave them together and then
add a pinch of caution to show you're not taken in by the alarmists or
comforted by the complacent.' I did this and received one of the rare, the very
rare, cables of congratulation that came from London in those days. 

Well today maybe people are more knowledgeable or maybe they've just learned to
'weave together' the more plausible bits of jargon and make the weave sound
sensible. Like Americans and medical jargon. I used to think Americans were
much more informed than the English about sickness and health but discovered
rather late in the day that because they used words like mononucleosis or
thrombosis, they knew more than we did. It took a little time to realise that
when an American says,’ He’s suffering from a lesion on the tibia' all he's
saying is somebody's kicked Fred in the shins. 

But there is one economic indicator, or if you like bad news for the
pocketbook, which is always reported once a month when the figures are out, in
the nightly half-hour of news that all the networks put on. This is the latest
reading on wholesale food prices. Usually, or very often, the change is minute.
'Wholesale food prices,' the man will say, 'were up this past month by point
one per cent.' But the other night, he/they said that wholesale food prices had
gone up in the previous week by 3.2 per cent, the biggest jump in several
years. Of course this always means that the wholesaler will pass it on to the
distributor, to the retailer, to you. 

It is an alarming figure and I sometimes wonder if the regular publication of
the figures doesn't provide a panic it's meant to prevent. People tend to hear
this and they rush off and buy five cans of peaches or six frozen spinach
soufflés, or whatever, instead of the usual one or two. Anyway, that figure,
which used to be tucked away at the bottom of page 67 of the daily paper, but
is now tossed like a little bomb into the homes of 30 or 40 million people.
That figure was serious enough to invite a comment – several comments – from a
farmer in Ohio, a meat packer in Chicago, a spokesman for the Department of
Commerce. 

The question was why, after a humdrum run of point one and point two per cents,
it should suddenly go up to over three per cent in one week? The general
opinion was that the spring was coming in and the farmers were getting out and
counting the cost of an Arctic winter. What the snows and the big freeze didn't
kill off, spring floods are drowning out. 

Well, the little feature ended with the safe prediction that meat was going to
go up by about 10 per cent at the butcher's counter. Bread, too and a lot of
other edibles. And since the perishing weather had arrested the supply of oil
across the Midwest and shut off electricity in many industries, production was
way behind. Many thousands, working people, had been laid off and, inevitably,
you and I would be competing for fewer goods. So automobiles are going to cost
more and electricity and the telephone bills and so on. 

Put all this together, as the government has been doing for the past month or
so, and they see a nasty trend ahead. The United States, as much as any country
of the Western world, has been proud, in the past few years, of keeping
inflation down to 5,6 per cent, while we read about 12, 16, 20 per cent in
Europe and preposterous rates, like 50, 100 per cent a year in some of the
countries of South America. But now it suddenly appears we are in for a big,
new surge of inflation and it's rousing the housewife and maddening the
taxpayer who this week has been racing against a deadline and thrashing over
the incredibly complicated and verbose form 10-40, the federal income tax
form. 

So, Mr Carter decided to make one of his rare – rare, these days – crusading or
missionary speeches. He made it before the annual meeting of the American
Society of Newspaper Editors, an audience usually responsive to brave news and
pungent opinions, but this time an audience that sat on its hands throughout
and didn’t raise so much as a clap, a response which the New York Times's
leading pundit, James Reston, takes to be a reflection of the popular
misgivings about Mr Carter's capacity for leadership. 

Well, Mr Carter put in a plea for no wage or price increases higher than the
average of the past two years. He announced a limit of 5.5 per cent for
increases in the pay of federal employees. He threatened to veto any bills –
and they're in the works – that would increase the government's subsidy to
farmers or would give a tax credit to parents putting children through college.
He deplored America's continuing appetite for foreign oil. He appealed to
labour and industry to sacrifice for the common good. And a few hours before
his speech, 3,000 miles away in London, Mr Denis Healey, the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, was presenting his budget and saying, 'I do not in this budget make
any call for sacrifice'. 

Now these two contrasting sentences are likely to be picked up here and quoted
as a sign of two conflicting approaches to the same problem. It's a pity that,
by accident, they were spoken on the same day. But though Britain and America,
and many other countries, share many of the same problems, the central problems
are not the same. Roughly, at the moment, you could say Britain is trying to
'ginger up' productivity and stimulate the economy with tax cuts. The United
States is suddenly more alarmed by a new wave of inflation. Canada, which
receives a new budget on the same day, is baffled by persistent inflation by
stagnant business and by a staggering, nearly 10 per cent, unemployment rate
which is the worst rate they've had since the Great Depression. 

Now I must have given the impression – was bound to – that because the British
government believes it has inflation under control and the American government
fears it is breaking out of control, you might naturally gather that prices are
higher and things getting worse here. Not so. No Briton needs to be told that
if inflation goes down to, say, seven per cent a year, it's still another seven
per cent piled on last year's 11 per cent and the 16 per cent, 20, and so on,
of the previous years. In 1970, the end of 1970, my favourite – expensive, I
admit – restaurant in London offered a succulent three-course dinner for £3.50.
I used to tell Americans it was the best food bargain in Europe. At the going
rate, that was about $9. Over here, young couples went on reconnaissance around
town to find some hole-in-the-wall offering a $9 dinner. 

Well, in the intervening eight years that £3.50 dinner has gone to £14.50.
Nothing like that has happened here in that time. In fact, an old American
friend of mine, who sold his business seven years ago and retired to Europe,
has been back here for a holiday. 'What', I asked him, 'is the main difference
or, if you like, the main surprise?'

'That's easy!' he said, 'I'm staggered! Everything in America is so cheap!'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP