Small earthquake in 'Frisco

I don't know if it made the stir outside the United States that it made here,
but last Monday night the big headline in the evening papers and on the telly
was one that the poor fellow who write headlines must've felt awfully grateful
for because most of our problems today it seems are so complicated, so devoid
of good guys and bad guys that any conscientious headline writer, who's not out
simply to grab circulation, must despair as he settles to his daily trade.

Look at the New York Times for last Tuesday morning, for instance. 'Muzorewa
Affirms Positive Elements of Rhodesian Plan – President Pledges to Maintain
Course on Economic Policy – New York Petition for Recall Provision Rejected –
Bond Rally Facing Test.' 

These don't quite stir the blood like 'Lindbergh Flies Atlantic' or 'Harry for
England' or 'Hurricane Devastates New England' but even the New York Times on
Tuesday couldn't resist following the lead of Monday night's television
shocker. It came out with, 'San Franciscans Stunned as Quake worst in 68 Years
Strikes City'. The television lead was 'San Francisco Rocked by Earthquake'.
And the first sentence in the New York Times report read, 'The earth rolled,
buildings swayed and, for a long moment, San Francisco held its breath today as
it waited out the strongest earthquake in more than 68 years.' 

Now that would take us back, if I can count, to 1911. Not the big one, not the
historic upheaval – that was in 1906. Still, in a city which rumbles and
dithers slightly at least once a year, the worst in 68 years must have been
something. 

I have many good friends out there and naturally I was concerned for them. I
turned on Monday night's news with some anxiety. How many dead? Had the Golden
Gate Bridge split and foundered? How many skyscrapers had toppled into the bay?
I recalled, with dread, how vividly and I was told at the time – the
mid-Thirties – by an old gaffer, who'd been alive and kicking in 1906, how
vividly and truly MGM represented the beginnings of that awful tremor. Some of
you may remember Clark Gable dancing with Jeanette MacDonald, everybody very
festive and petticoats foaming and jewels glistening, and then the camera
panned up to the ceiling of this Nob Hill mansion and a chandelier started very
slowly to shiver and swing. And, in no time, there were screams and lurching
rooms and the sidewalks splitting open into miniature Grand Canyons. And then
back to the main message of that dreadful day which was, whatever had happened
to Jeanette MacDonald and would Gable, staggering heroically all over town,
ever find her? 

Well, the television news coverage of the last one was reassuring, certainly
after a headline like 'Quake Rocks City'. The man said no buildings had
actually been damaged, no stones fell, nobody was hurt. The worst place was a
hundred miles or so south of San Francisco, in Salinas, and it was there that
the cameras rushed to show the damage. And what we saw was the aisle of a
supermarket and a welter of merchandise on the floor and, in the background, a
young woman in glasses was kneeling and looking things over in a philosophical
way. So, the worst earthquake in 68 years had thrown soup tins and packets of
detergent off the shelves. That was it. 

Next morning I put in a couple of calls to San Francisco. The first was my
regular golf partner out there. 'Well,' he said, 'I was on the fifth tee and
for a moment there I thought my swing was on the blink. But it's always on the
blink so I didn't give it another thought till I got back home and turned on
the news and the man said, sure enough, "San Francisco Rocked by Quake". I'm
still looking for somebody who was rocked.' 

I then called a couple I know who live on a peninsula that juts into the bay
and looks across the city. They chuckled indulgently at my alarm rather the way
people in Britain used to respond in the late 1940s when 'kindly' Americans
read 'Britain Pinched for Food' and they'd put in transatlantic calls and asked
what sort of emergency packages they should send. I told the wife of this
couple about the picture we'd seen on television of the woman in the
supermarket at Salinas. I felt better, I told her, when the same, still picture
appeared next morning in the New York Times. And she said, 'You mean Lydia
Tocal? Old Lydia Tocal?' 'That's the lady,' I said. 'Same here!' she said, 'The
same picture's in the San Francisco Chronicle.' We chortled together and moved
on to real things like, how are the gas station queues? 'There aren't any,' she
said. 'Same here,' I said. 

That photograph took me back many years to a time when the government under
Franklin Roosevelt was trying to dramatise the plight of the so-called Okies,
the farmers of Oklahoma and West Texas who'd been driven from their homes by
fearful dust storms following on a long drought that turned their land into a
whirling desert. The Department of Agriculture put out a photograph, a
beautiful, terrifying photograph. It showed a wasteland of rolling sand dunes
on what had only recently been a fertile farm and in the left-hand corner of
the photograph was the skull of a steer, all that was left of a once-healthy
animal. It was a very moving picture. 

A few months later, the same picture was circulated and widely printed again –
or not quite the same. The same rolling banks of sand, almost the same but,
this time, a steer's skull was in the right-hand corner. An alert and gamey
newspaper man, a waspish critic of the administration, ruined everything by
noticing this discrepancy and immortalising the steer's skull by calling it
'the administration's portable prop'. Well, Lydia Tocal, the kneeling lady in
the Salinas supermarket, looked like the news agencies' immoveable prop – their
one blessed proof of disaster. The picture, I hear, was printed all over the
country. 

Still, the scientific fact is that last Monday's earthquake registered 5.9 on
the Richter scale. The scale came to be named after Charles Francis Richter
who's retired and lives cheerfully enough in – where do you think? –
California. Five point nine was the highest register since 1911. The 1906
monster registered 8.3 and ruined the city. Now the difference between 5.9 and
8.3, for simplicity's sake let's say the difference between 6 and 8, is a good
deal more and worse than 33 per cent. The scale measures the motion of the
ground from one to ten on a seismograph. Each unit, one number, represents not
just as much motion again, in other words, two doesn't mean twice as much as
one, it means a ten-fold increase. It would give us a more accurate idea of the
progressive hazard if they numbered the units, one, ten, one hundred, one
thousand, ten thousand and so on. 

Anything over five can cause a lot of damage and today the seismologists are
marvelling that nothing much happened apart from some broken water pipes,
cracked ceilings and shorts in power lines. A register of six means a motion
ten times as severe as a five. So the 1906 earthquake produced a ground motion
roughly a thousand times as bad as the one that 'rocked the city' on Monday and
tumbled the soup tins off the shelves of Salinas. 

So the doom watchers are going to have to wait for that blockbuster which
evangelists and other gurus have been predicting is going to flatten some city
along the notorious San Andreas Fault one of these days. 

The seismologists say that it's impossible to predict when the next earthquake
is going to come and how severe it's going to be, though the Chinese are doing
a lot of research on the behaviour of animals hours, and even days, before an
earthquake happens. 

Well, all facetiousness aside, I must say that many hundreds of people who'd
not been in an earthquake before were terrified for a minute or so. It's a... a
very creepy and absolutely helpless feeling. There was one, I remember, during
the organising conference of the United Nations in 1945. There we all were, the
delegates of the founding 50 nations and thousands of newspaper and radio
reporters and thousands of hangers on, all tucked up in our hotel beds. And
suddenly you wake up and next thing I knew I was on the bedroom floor. 'That's
all right,' you say, 'A nightmare, I simply fell out of bed.' But then, the bed
lamp shivered and I had the weird sensation that the floor was a sort of very
gentle wave. Then a door banged and it was all over. 

Everybody got dressed like mad and boasted about their earthquake experience,
the way people talked about their famous bad night during the London Blitz. One
chief delegate from a Central European country didn't take time to boast. He
booked a fast plane and was on his way home. 'Very nervous type', we thought,
till it came out that the earthquake had shaken not only him out of bed, but
alongside him the chambermaid. His aide or deputy delegate came running in from
next door and the man, frantic that the word would soon be on the wire to
Budapest or Athens or wherever it was, took no chances. He beat it back to the
wife of his bosom. 

Well, by contrast with the rocketing headlines about the earthquake, there were
no headlines, practically no story even and even in the New York Times, about
Governor Carey's grave announcement that he was calling a summit of British and
Northern Ireland delegates to see if he couldn't, as he solemnly put it on
television, find some solution to a problem that has been going on for 700
years. This beautiful gesture was announced casually, without comment, on the
evening news of one New York local station not, so far as I know, on any
national network. After all, somewhere across this country, some governor,
senator, mayor or other magnifico is announcing a plan to solve the energy
problem, inflation, the nuclear arms race or night baseball. 

The thing was so plainly preposterous, the notion of a governor about to summon
a conference without checking with the White House, with Mrs Thatcher, with the
Prime Minister of Ireland, with the pope, that it drew no attention whatsoever.
Until on Wednesday morning, the New York Times was surprised to report that the
governor's move had riled London. No need to get riled, I should think.
Governor Carey would like to be re-elected. He has, like Senator Kennedy, like
Speaker O'Neill, a huge Catholic constituency. He was simply doing, however
fatuous, what comes naturally.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP