Carter at the opera

Last Thursday, the newspapers and the tube paid their annual respects, or
regrets, to the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941, a day,
President Roosevelt said at the time, 'a day that will live in infamy'.

However, two days before that, if I may fall back on my mental arithmetic in
lieu of a computer – on which I notice shop assistants now solemnly punch up
the problem of adding three cents to 97 cents – two days before December 7 was
December 5 1978, a night which will surely live in American history, for
veteran opera-goers taking their seats at the Metropolitan Opera were astounded
by an event which has never before taken place in the history of the Republic:
a sitting President of the United States took his seat at the Metropolitan
Opera. Nothing should be made of the fact that the opera was Aïda, an opera on
an Egyptian subject commissioned by Isma'il Pasha and first performed in Cairo,
though I'm afraid that something may be made of it by ill-meaning journalists
in and out of Israel. In which case, the president could handily make amends by
commissioning a performance of Handel's 'Israel in Egypt'. 

The fact is, quite simply, that President Carter is something of a freak among
the long line of American presidents. He is a music lover. I don't mean that he
has his favourite tunes, as haven't we all? President Eisenhower, I believe,
let it be known that he had a pack of favourites which he liked to have piped
in on social occasions so that he could hum to them. As George V, on a
memorable occasion, his fifth visit to his favourite opera 'Rose-Marie', sat in
the Royal box and having conquered his favourite song in the whole of music,
confidently accompanied the chorus singing 'To tum tum tum, to tum tum
tum...'. 

I mean that President Carter is the phenomenon of an intensely hard-working
president who yet finds time, every morning, every dawning I ought to say, to
listen to a half hour or so of Mozart. It's hard to think of a better
prescription for rinsing out the mind before the growing cacophonies of the
day. It's fascinating, though perhaps not very instructive, to wonder why
politicians who regularly acquire some strange bedmates should so rarely relax
with the muse of music. With classical music, that is. Lovers of Harry Truman
will be bound to protest that he actually played the piano, chopped his way
through slices of Chopin and, at all times, was ready to give a soulful
performance of the 'Missouri Waltz'. But having heard him and followed his
tastes, I must say that his range was that of the excerpts we staggered through
on the piano when I was a boy, a series of what were called 'The Five Star
Folio’ which incorporated the most swinging bits from the 'Poet and Peasant
Overture', 'Zampa', the 'Four Indian Love Lyrics' and what were conveniently
known as 'middlebrow classics'. And I'm sure that out of Texas will come the
reminder that whenever at a barbecue or other local festival, Lyndon Johnson
heard 'The Eyes of Texas', the tears cascaded freely down the clefts of his
face. 

President Nixon, too, was almost as eager to get to any piano in sight, as
George Gershwin was, about whom a close but clear-eyed friend said, 'An evening
with Gershwin is a Gershwin evening'. Nobody thumped away with away with more
genuine zest and pleasure than President Nixon, and I imagine he treasures as
one of the precious mementos of his presidency the moment when, in full view of
an ebullient audience, the late Duke Ellington kissed him on both cheeks, the
last time, I believe, Mr Nixon was kissed in public except by a next of kin. 

Now, in case an overseas listener is beginning to preen himself on the superior
cultivation of his own politicians, as distinct from the rude, American kind, I
beg him or her to take thought. Name offhand, or even after much boning up, any
politician of the first chop who is or was a known lover of classical music,
apart, that is, from the dazzling exception of Mr Edward Heath. Mr Gladstone,
my father told me, was properly reverent when called to Buckingham Palace to
listen to performances of so-called 'sacred' music commissioned by Queen
Victoria. He would have been a brave prime minister who refused the royal
command to listen to any musical performance, however sacred, however
stupefyingly dull, that was commissioned by the Queen. But I don't remember
from the memoirs – though doubtless I shall receive a barrage of indignant
letters from old relations and fans – I don't remember that Balfour, Lloyd
George, Asquith, Bonar Law or any of their generation had the slightest
interest in music. In the many volumes of the works of Winston Churchill, I can
find no reference to any of the top-flight or even third-flight composers,
though Mr Churchill, also, was known to weep whenever the 'Battle Hymn of the
Republic' was played. 

As for the succeeding generations of British politicians, and I hope I do them
no insult, I cannot find either that Anthony Eden was an accomplished cellist
or that Mr Callaghan devotes his spare hours to reading the scores of the Bach
fugues. I do recall, and was actually present once, when the astonishing thing
happened that the 1st Lord Birkenhead was tone deaf and had to be nudged to
stand up whenever the band went into the national anthem. 

Now going back for a minute or two to the startling event that produced all
this speculation, I must say it seemed extremely unlikely that some president
at some time or other did not find it expedient, let alone pleasurable, to
attend the opera. A friend of mine, who knows not only all the obscure operas
of the great composers but also all the mediocre operas of the obscure
composers, did a little digging and came up with the nugget that in 1918
President Wilson did indeed appear at the Metropolitan Opera House, but it
turned out that he was there, as usual, not to listen but to perform. Not, so
help us, to sing, but to make a speech before a rally called to stir up support
for the League of Nations. 

And, there's an unauthenticated rumour that, at another time, President Wilson
dropped a hint to the New York authorities that he might come up to the city to
attend the opera, but when he discovered that the opera was to be performed on
the Sabbath, he was shocked into withdrawing his request. 

Further painstaking research reveals that there is one other president who not
only had the wild impulse to go to the Met but yielded to it. Not, however, in
New York. The Metropolitan Company was on tour in the winter of 1905/6 and when
it appeared in Philadelphia, President Roosevelt, enjoying what was till then
the biggest popular majority any president had ever received from the voters,
took himself off to see and hear – who else? – Enrico Caruso. He must have
slipped into the house, if any figure so mountainous can ever be said to have
slipped in anywhere, or at least not tipped off the management because when the
performance was over he went backstage to greet the great man, the other great
man, and Caruso, we are told, believed for an awkward time that he was meeting
an impostor. But when he realised that he was, indeed, being visited by the
incomparable T. R., or Teddy, he threw his arms around the president and,
anticipating Duke Ellington, smacked a kiss on each cheek. 

There was a photographer present, a small fact I mention because the following
April Caruso was performing in San Francisco and, early in the morning of the
18th, he was asleep in his lavish suite in the Palace Hotel when the bed
started to shake and the chandelier to swing and, in a word, the hell of the
famous earthquake was let loose all around him. He dashed out, like many
another human, in a nightgown and bathrobe into the courtyard of the hotel and
begged for transportation to the ferry that would take him to the railroad and
save him from disaster. What must have been an agony of conflict between safety
and egotism he tried to think of some single possession he could not bear to
lose. He dashed back and rescued the photograph of himself and Teddy
Roosevelt. 

By the way, he arrived days later at Grand Central Station in New York, still
in his dressing gown and when a crowd of reporters asked him what it was like
he said, 'It was worse than Vesuvius'. 

I was pondering this unexplained puzzle, why politics apparently work through
the nervous system to produce an allergy to first-rate music, when one of our
television networks went into a kind of visual essay which it does regularly on
the nightly news. It was done, this one, I imagine, as an oblique commentary on
the news of the 20-year treaty of friendship which the Soviet Union has just
signed with Afghanistan. It was about the Mongols and the Thais who live in
different regions of the borders of communist China. To keep them friendly, we
were told, the Chinese allow them to live, and I quote, 'independent lives
according to their own customs within the political framework of Chinese
communism'. I must say, this sounded to me like saying that the Jews were
allowed to live independent lives according to their own customs within the
political framework of the Third Reich. 

Anyway, what we saw mostly was young people dancing to charming music. The
Mongol tots danced with rifles, the Thais with rifles and fixed bayonets.
Evidently there are some cultures in which the rulers have learned how to blur
the brutality of their politics by marrying them to music, for export purposes
only. 

Well, the fact remains that Jimmy Carter is the only president who has ever
attended a performance at the Metropolitan Opera House, but it turns out that
last Tuesday night's opera was a fundraising event, twenty-five hundred dollars
for two tickets, to help the former Mayor Beame pay off over a quarter-million
dollar debt to his campaign backers, who backed him and lost. Present at the
opera was every big-time Democratic politician in and around New York and a
dozen labour leaders. 

Even if he didn't love Verdi so much, I suspect that President Carter would
have gone to the opera. The music, like the music that accompanied the drilling
youngsters of Northern China, helped to soften his grim determination to do
anything to secure the New York vote in 1980.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP