Petrol shortage in US

This has been one of those weeks in which the life that the headlines are about
– the SALT treaty, Rhodesia – seems far removed from the life that you and I
lead. Except in one thing: petrol, and the apparent lack of it, which I talked
about last time.

But there are a couple of things to add about that. One is the curious fact,
it's startling to me, anyway, in view of the three-mile queues of cars in
California, the fact that the available petrol throughout the country is 92 per
cent of what it was at this time last year. In other words, there's only eight
per cent less. From all the panicked cries you'd think we were reeling from the
sort of blow the Arabs delivered five years ago. Surely it should not be
difficult for people to get along with over 90 per cent of the petrol they've
been used to? Surely the president could come up with some simple measure that
would effectively save eight per cent of the supply without having petrol
stations closed for the weekends and, as is happening, making people offer car
salesmen a $2,000 bonus for new Japanese cars that get more mileage. 

Well, the president has rocked on his heels, back and forth, with so many plans
suggested and plans dumped, that he finally came up with the bright idea of
asking people to put their car up for one day of the week to think of the good
of the country, to walk once in a while. In other words, he asked us to be
'good'. 

Now in any crisis – worse still, in any imagined crisis – this never works. And
in a supreme crisis, that’s to say in a war, even then, people, however
patriotic, are forcibly rationed and punished for violations. But with November
1980 gibbering on the horizon, that appears to be the last thing that President
Carter would like to be remembered by. It may seem odd to anyone who pays close
to $2 (£1) a gallon, to hear Americans screaming over the prospect this summer
of paying 50p a gallon but, after all, it's what you're used to. 

The other point I'd like to make goes to one of the raging complaints of a
large part of the American population, the argument that there is no real
energy crisis, that the whole thing is a cunning and shameful invention of the
oil companies. I'm indebted here to a correspondent, a man who is apparently a
financial analyst or perhaps financial hobbyist, anyway, somebody who knows his
way around the annual reports of business firms. He just looked over the 1978
report of one of the giant American oil companies. I won't read you his entire
finding but I'll digest most of it and quote the rest. It's enlightening, even
funny to me and so it may be to you. 

He starts out by noticing that the 1978 profit of this company was at a record
high of $1.1 billion – that's one thousand one hundred million dollars – and he
remarks, quite rightly, that most Americans who suspect the oil companies as
the villains believe this kind of figure to be very large, even, as some people
have said, obscene. He also notices, however, that to conduct its business, the
company had to make an investment of nine billions and take the additional risk
of borrowing so much more money that the total capital employed was 23 billions
and, for this investment, the owners of the business got a return, which was
also a record high, of 10.4 per cent. 

Now the company's total business was 37 billions, which means that its profits
represented three per cent of the price of the products it sells. He points
out, in a wry aside, that if only the company were sufficiently socially minded
to conduct its business with no profits whatsoever, it's apparent that the
price of its products could be brought way down to 97 per cent of its current
price. 

Of course if the company did this it might have a tough time inducing investors
to put up 23 billions (its total capital) for no return whatsoever. However, he
says, investors might be comforted by the knowledge that their investment,
whether producing a profit or not, enables the company to pay to its own
government and foreign governments a total of $8.7 billion in taxes. And he
ends up with this Benchley-like comment: 'It looks to me as if this giant oil
company is in the wrong business since by making a huge investment (23
billions), it gets in profit only 1.1 billions, whereas governments putting up
no money get 8.7 billions. If the company management were truly greedy, they
would get out of the oil business and into the government business, thereby
substantially increasing their take. As for those greedy investors, they might
consider how foolish they are to risk their capital for 10.4 per cent return
instead of lending it to the government, at no risk whatsoever, and getting, at
the going rate of government bonds, 9.5 per cent return. 

Well, in spite of this exposition, my correspondent ends on a woeful note. 'I
still expect,' he writes, 'to go on hearing about the obscene profits and
rip-offs of the oil companies.' 

I imagine that the holes in this exposition can be spotted at once by Mr
Carter, and Mr Callaghan, not to mention the Workers Revolutionary Party, but
it's at least comforting to timid people like me to know that by just avoiding
all risk and buying government bonds you get over nine per cent interest
instead of going into a $23 billion business and getting, if the company
remains on Easy Street, only ten per cent. 

Well, the ding-dong battle goes on between the oil companies and the injured
public, the petrol station owners and their infuriated clients, most of all the
never-ending battle between the presidency and the Congress. This is the really
disheartening news. No news, surely by now. Those of us who were close to
Washington toward the end of the Kennedy days used to say, after the
assassination – used to whisper, rather, in the obvious interests of good taste
– that Kennedy's reputation had been sealed with a halo because only a few
weeks before he died I well remember at one of his press conferences how a
reporter, a famous reporter and a sympathetic one, asked him, 'What has
happened to the momentum of your presidency?' 

By that time, Kennedy, just about at the stage of his presidency that Mr Carter
is now, Kennedy was hopelessly stalled in his relations with Congress. He was
bitter towards them and they distrusted him. Something I think over, oh, more
than a hundred, bills were pending or already on the shelf and he had little
hope of getting any of them through both Houses. As I've said before, the third
year of any president is a very rough time. By then he discovers, to his
chagrin, and the people discover, to their disillusion or disgust, that he has
nothing remotely like the power that the rhetoric of his campaign has promised.
He's not like a prime minister with a working majority, he can not put through
everything he wants. He can put through nothing unless he has as much of the
opposition party with him and also most of his own party in Congress. 

Now if that sounds puzzling, let me remind you of one fundamental difference
between a federal system and a parliamentary system. Party discipline in the
Congress is nothing like as firm as it is in a House of Commons. No party whip
scurries around to pry you out of hospital or even out of lunch to get into the
chamber and vote to the party. In the House of Representatives, the members
think first of the interests or prejudices of their constituents – after all,
they're only in the House for two years, their main driving force is the urge
to get back. And in the Senate, the 'give and take' between two senators of
opposing parties is much more dependable than the loyalty of any one senator to
the man of the same party, who happens to be in the White House. 

So, on highly controversial matters, the whips hardly count at all. The
president, himself, has to start lifting the telephone and begging his own
party men, one at a time, to realise that they have more to gain by voting with
him than by trading a vote with some opponent who has a bill coming up which
appeals to the constituents of both of them. 

I remember a time when Harry Truman was president. He'd put up to the Congress
the first so-called Fair Employment bill, it was the opening wedge of racial
integration. In those days, the opposition to him on this bill was made up of
just as many Southern Democrats, men of his own party, as Republicans. So he
had to round up the votes of every Northern Democrat he could reach. One, a
great admirer of Harry Truman, a senator from Wisconsin, was called one day by
the president. Here was one man who could be counted on. Well, he couldn't.
Wisconsin is a dairy state. Somebody had introduced a bill in the Senate to
allow the colouring of margarine, so that visibly it would be indistinguishable
from butter. The Wisconsin senator didn't want that. He had a Southern friend,
a senator, a Democrat too, who was dead against the fair employment, the
anti-segregation bill and the friend said to the Wisconsin senator, 'If you
vote for this bill, I'll vote for coloured margarine. If not, not!' 

'Mr President,' Harry Truman's loyal senator said, 'I can't do it! Where I come
from, yellow margarine is more of a threat to labour than a black worker.' 

So, Mr Carter must be running up an enormous telephone bill these days, calling
and pleading endlessly with senators, mainly of his own party, who are against
the present SALT treaty and the senators who are for recognising the new
Rhodesian government. The sad thing is that, I'm sure most Americans outside
Washington are no more aware of the power play involved in getting bills
through Congress than a foreigner is. They thought, when they voted in 1976,
they were voting for a leader who could drive the Congress like a veteran
shepherd. This illusion can be kept up when the man in the White House is a
hypnotic orator like Franklin Roosevelt, or a sergeant-major who gets mad like
Harry Truman, or a great, good general on a white horse like Eisenhower. 

Jimmy Carter is none of these things. So he has no mask of temper or oratory,
no cloak of heroism to hide behind. He's a decent, intelligent, hard-working
man who admits inexperience, does not claim to be a messiah. He's you or me.
This is a horrifying revelation to you and me, the citizens of a confusing
world. Accordingly, the people have just given him 26 per cent for competence.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP