Billy Martin leaves Yankees

Anybody who has ever sat in on Question Time in the British House of Commons
knows that the fun of it, for the outsider, if I may use a rather cold-blooded
word, the fun of it is the way questions of earth-shattering importance, like
'Is it true that Uganda is going to get a nuclear bomb?' alternate with
questions like 'Should members of Parliament be required, in the interests of
the taxpayer, to bring their own napkins for meals in the House?'

The last time I was there, some angry man got up to ask if the Treasury, or
perhaps the chief cashier of the Bank of England, would explain why ten
shilling notes got dirtier in the pocket than pound notes and what was he going
to do about it? This was immediately followed by a question to the Prime
Minister about some rumoured mutiny on a ship of the Mediterranean fleet. And
after that, a North countryman directed the attention of the Home Secretary to
an outrageous violation of human civil liberties in a village in Yorkshire. 

It seems that a policeman, out for information about some petty thief, had
knocked on the door of a law-abiding citizen at the unearthly hour of 9 p.m.
when all good Yorkshire families, as we know, are asleep and snoring. The Home
Secretary promised to look into it. 

Well, the question before the House is whether to give priority to the question
of test-tube babies or the equally world-shattering news that Billy Martin, the
manager of the New York Yankees baseball team has been fired. On the whole, I
think we'll postpone the test tube and stay this time with Billy Martin since
'he'll no come back again' and his dismissal illustrates a principle of
American life which it took Charles Darwin 40 years to discover, whereas it has
taken only about 20 years to fertilise a human egg outside the womb and legions
of women everywhere are now madly assuming that the thing is an accomplished
fact and that, from now on, test-tube babies can be ordered up like frozen
peas. 

All right! Mr Billy Martin is/was the manager of the Yankees and last year the
Yankees won the national championship which, by a pardonable extension of
patriotism is known as the World Series, just as to Britons, the British Open
Golf Championship is known always, and only, as THE Open. 

For a couple of years now, Mr Martin has been having a running feud with the
owner of the Yankees, one George Steinbrenner. He's also had another running
feud with one of the Yankees' star players, Reggie Jackson. Well, to put it
roughly, the owner had noticed for some time, along with about three million
Yankee fans, that off the field, the personal relations between the Yankee
players were about as harmonious as those between monkeys locked in a barrel
and the relation between Mr Martin and the star, Reggie Jackson, bore a
striking resemblance to the relation between a cobra and a mongoose. 

To put it mildly, Mr Martin and Reggie Jackson hadn't spoken to each other for
a year or more and this, as any high school captain knows, does not lead to a
happy team. But more important, it doesn't lead to a winning team. Early in
this season, the Yankees took a terrible beating in game after game, from their
hated rivals, the Boston Red Sox. The Yankees and the Red Sox have something of
the traditional affection for each other that exists in cricket between
Lancashire and Yorkshire. 

Well the principle I mentioned earlier is no more or less than that of the
survival of the fittest. The American amendment to Darwin is that the fittest
must not only survive but go on beating the daylights out of everybody in
sight. So that when the Yankees lost all but one of their games against the Red
Sox, it seemed that Mr Martin was not long for his job. But then the Yankees
met another healthy enemy, Chicago, and beat them five times in a row. At an
airport on the way home from this triumph, Mr Martin might have been expected
to be in a glow of pride. He was in a glow of rage. It seems that in one of the
games, Reggie Jackson had flouted Mr Martin's instructions. And here, let me as
simply as possible, say how. 

Both American football and baseball do not yield their secrets to the
uninstructed onlooker. As well tell a baby he loved watching a chess match.
What makes American football an incomprehensible bit of rough-housing to a
stranger is his assumption that what's going on is an instinctive riot. On the
contrary, American football is outdoor chess with shoulder pads. Everything
that happens – a pass, a feint, a tackle, a fake throw – has been memorised,
rehearsed, chalked up on blackboards, and drawn from precedents as old as the
Ruy Lopez opening the Indian Defence or Plessy versus Ferguson. 

Baseball is kinder to the casual spectator. He knows at least that the idea is
to hit a ball between the fielders – better, over their heads and out to the
stadium clock – and run round three bases and come home to score a run. But one
of the great pleasures of watching baseball and now, especially, on television,
is watching the manager down in a dugout, off the field and then watching a
close-up of the pitcher and noticing the little gestures of his partner, the
catcher, or wicket keeper if we must. 

Unlike bowlers in cricket, pitchers don't deliver any ball that comes into
their heads. They are under close instruction from the manager. He tells them
what sort of ball to deliver, when to send four wides in a row and make the
batter walk to first base. Television now allows you to see the manager sniff
or turn his head to one side in the dugout. This is a signal. You then see the
pitcher massage the ball or tug at the peak of his cap or rub his thigh or, in
some other way, signal back to the manager that he's understood, also, to
forewarn the catcher which of a half-dozen types of balls are coming up. And
there are similar, sly, long-distance, silent instructions to the batter. 

I won't go into the technicalities of Reggie Jackson's act of civil
disobedience but, at that airport on the way home from Chicago, Mr Martin
revealed that in one game he had signalled to Jackson to hit away and Jackson
ignored the order and bunted. This was the last straw. Mr Martin, who doesn’t
like the owner, said about him and Jackson, 'they deserve each other'. The
owner fired him, or rather Mr Martin resigned in floods of tears in the middle
of the season. 

Now I introduced the sad figure of Mr Billy Martin as a prime example of the
American belief in many more fields than sport – that if your team starts
losing, the manager is out. There is, as many of you know, an American magazine
devoted to the structure and life of big business called Fortune and, from time
to time, there are profiles of coming men, particularly of young men who've
risen fast and have just been made the president of some mighty corporation in
steel, automobile, textiles, foods, whatever, and they're shown in all the sap
of their success – firm-jawed, piercing-eyed, vibrant, manly, smiling
slightly. 

Very rarely are they men who worked their way up the ladder a step at a time.
They usually have bounded at a leap from district sales manager to national
sales manager and then – boom! – the president of the corporation is fired and
the new man is at the helm. Great things are expected of him because he's just
done great things. He proposed a new model of a motorcar which has sold like
hotcakes. He invented a revolutionary method of packaging frozen food, he
invented, say, containerisation. 

I always feel sad when I see such pictures and read such pieces. They make me
think of the old American maxim, 'from shirtsleeves, to shirtsleeves in three
generations' and remind myself that in our time it has been amended to 'from
shirtsleeves to shirtsleeves in one generation'. Such men are thought of by
everybody, by journalists, by businessmen, by gossip columnists, by Marxists,
as the enviable, or loathsome, heroes of the capitalist system. We assume that
they will drive a Rolls, hunt or shoot on a country estate, take holidays in
Acapulco, occasionally rent a private jet. What very few people seem to stop
and consider is that the pinnacle of their success is very shaky, that the
pinnacle is actually created to be shaky. 

In other words, the system handsomely rewards the profit maker but the new
man's survival is tied to the colour of the ink on the bottom line. So long as
it's black, he may keep his Rolls, his estate, his exotic holidays, but let it
appear in red and in America, at least, all these baubles are in jeopardy.
Private enterprise is often made out to be an anti-social system of giving
profits to the top guys willy-nilly. But no profits, out goes the top guy! This
is the American rule. 

Dr Milton Friedman, the Nobel Prize winner, goes further. He calls it 'the
universal truth of business. A private business,' he says, 'that undertakes an
unsuccessful experiment has no choice. It recognises its mistake or goes
bankrupt unless it can get government to subsidise it. That is why the loss
component of the profit and loss system is far more important than the profit
component.' 

In other words, if you can't take the heat, a losing streak for the Yankees,
the failure of some new gadget or marketing device, stay out of the kitchen,
and get employment with a government or other bureaucracy. For it's the great
comfort of being part of a bureaucracy that, like a subsidised college boy,
you're not paid by results. Or as Dr Friedman puts it, 'Government bureaucrats
may be just as perceptive as private entrepreneurs, just as wise, just as
original in deciding what projects to undertake. But there is no mechanism for
ending unsuccessful experiments. Instead, they tend to be expanded to bury
small failures in a large failure.' And they stay on. Maybe not as the big bug
but as deputy bug. 

So spare a tear for Billy Martin who didn't aim at becoming a drone in the
office of the baseball commissioner but aimed at running a winning team for
ever. And, when it lost, he was to blame. So, he had to go.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP