Obscenity laws

The other evening we were talking about what happens to the eyeballs as you get
older. I mean, how something gradually, inevitably, something the eye doctors
may know about but /.../ how your view, literally your visual view of age,
changes and changes and never goes back.

It came up because I said I was amazed these days, in airports mostly, at
seeing so many young women of about 12 years of age with two children on their
laps. I said that, in my day, the age of consent was much higher and a rather
dense girl, woman, said she didn't get it. So I put it another way. I
remembered, I said, the time, now in the mid Thirties, when I was doing a
series of radio programmes for the BBC, a series which pretended to be taking a
big swing round the whole of America, which was a good deal easier and, in some
ways, more vivid than doing it on television, since you don't do it with
cameras and pictures, you call on the richer picture book of people's
imaginations. 

Anyway, the first programme was about New York City and included the feel of
going to a theatre here. One of the points I wanted to make was that, in this
country, theatre programmes, which even then were fat magazines, were free and
still are but, for good measure, we threw in a whole performance, or at least
the rousing feel, of a first night and a first-rate musical comedy with a
first-rate star. The show was called 'Anything Goes' and the star was Ethel
Merman. Her hit song was something called 'You're the top.' It was the latest
hit on Broadway. So, you'd say, all we had to do was tap the marvellous BBC
gramophone library, which even then was a sort of British museum of recorded
music. Not so! 'Anything Goes' had not yet got to England, though the
inimitable C. B. Cochran had plans to fetch it over. Therefore, there was an
absolute ban on playing the music of 'Anything Goes' in Britain. 

Well, I was brassier in those days than I am now. All that seemed necessary was
to get Mr Cochran's permission and then find from somebody a bootlegged copy of
the disc, I mean some socialite with American connections had certainly had one
sent over. Well, I went to Mr Cochran and he hummed and hawed but in the end,
I'm sure, he saw we were giving him a marvellous bit of promotion for the
London opening. I then found an American friend who told me he knew just the
lady who always had the latest bit of chic from the States. He sent me off to
an address, Bryanston something, and I went up in one of those creaking lifts
with bars that make you feel you're in a moving prison cell, and I rang a bell
and a lady appeared, a firm-jawed, elegant, brown-eyed, old lady with hair
severely parted in the middle. She took me in and kindly lent me the record. I
say she was old because she must have been all of, well I should say she was
crowding 40 – is that ungallant? Gallantry has nothing to do with what the eyes
see. I was, what, 25? And ladies of 40, however handsome, were old ladies. It
appals me, it shames me, to realise that she's still alive today. Anyway,
that's how I met for the first, and last, time Mrs Simpson. THE Mrs Simpson. 

So, a few years later, it was no surprise to me to hear the novelist and
playwright Somerset Maugham describe himself in his sixties as 'a very old
party', though the old rogue lived for about another 30 years. One thing he
said in a book he wrote then, a book with the title 'The Summing Up' – since he
thought it was late enough to begin reviewing his life – was that every day,
the first thing he did when he got his newspaper, was to turn to the obituary
page and see who'd had it. This struck me as cruel and morbid. I'm sorry to
tell you I now think it is one of the intriguing and irresistible amenities of
breakfast time. 

I did this yesterday and couldn't believe my eyes. It says 'Joseph March dies'.
That headline was, itself, a giveaway that the typesetter, or the writer, or
whoever dreamed up the headline, didn't know who he was writing about. This man
was never known as Joseph March. He was always, and only, Joseph Moncure March.
It was as if you'd seen a headline 'George Shaw dies' and from the accompanying
fine print discovered that they were talking about George Bernard Shaw. I was
shocked, not that Joseph Moncure March had died, but that he was still alive at
the age of 120. But he wasn't 120, he was only 78, and that's what slew me. 

I met him in my first winter here, met him with fright and trembling on my part
because he was, in those days, considered a big shot, the most daring of
contemporary fiction writers. He was, to be truthful, not a very good writer,
but he'd written a book, written in a florid, telegraphee's kind of doggerel,
called 'The Wild Party'. It was certainly the most shocking book of its time.
It was exactly what it said, it fulfilled all the worst fears, or maybe the
secret hopes, of the suburbs and the bourgeoisie about life in Greenwich
Village and the bohemian East Side of New York, or how writers, painters, their
doxies and hangers-on disported themselves after midnight in the Prohibition
Age. 

In this truly awful book, it was as if Robert W. Service were describing the
seventh circle of hell, all that was described was a welter of seductions,
fights, music, booze, cocaine, people entwined, irrespective of gender. It was
thought, at the time, to be the most far out, daring poem about, what they
called, 'Flaming Youth' but had better have called 'Sodden Youth'. I now
appreciate that its author, a rather grave, courteous man in late middle-age,
was then 33. 

Well, 'The Wild Party' seems not decades, but eons, ago. Today, it would be
either taken for granted and illustrated in glossy porno magazines as an
expression of liberation, something you may have heard of called 'raised
consciousness'. I don't know if March had trouble marketing his stuff. I think
not. Somehow he was artful enough in his language; he conveyed an air of
deploring the whole sorry show, his characters were clearly going to come to a
bad end, if they were not already there. I don't remember that you had to buy
it under the counter, which in retrospect is odd because there was a fierce,
and as it turned out, historic case going on the courts about a book that had
been banned in the United States and could only be procured furtively in
paperback in France and brought over here, if you were lucky, packed between a
shirt and a sweater in the incoming suitcase. 

The book was James Joyce's 'Ulysses'. It came up as a test case of obscenity.
Until then, the American courts had closely followed English law on obscenity,
going back to a firm starting point in a British Act of, I think 1857, which
authorised the seizure on the premises or in the mails of, and I quote,
'obscene matter whether it be in writing or by pictures, effigy or otherwise'.
Well then, and more sharply later, the definition of obscenity was focused on
the author's intention. 'The intention', the law said, 'of corrupting morals'
and, later on, both in Britain and the United States, the courts refined the
definition to mean, quote, 'anything tending to the corruption of minors'.
Later still, and down to that fateful year of 1933, the criterion became
'anything that would offend or corrupt the average sensual man'. Women, in the
law, were, I guess, not meant to be either sensual or corruptible. 

The average sensual man was the moral equivalent of the 'reasonable' man in the
law of torts and then came the lightning flash of Joyce's 'Ulysses' which the
most double-domed critics authors said anybody could recognise as a masterpiece
of literature, if you could only get hold of it. 

Well, one Judge John M. Woolsey, in the famous Southern District Court of New
York, delivered himself on 6 December 1933 of a judgement lifting the ban on
'Ulysses' and opening up a quite new view of obscenity. The total effect of any
work, he said, is what matters and the total effect of 'Ulysses', quote, 'is
somewhat emetic. Nowhere does it tend to be aphrodisiac'. And he added the
waggish touch, 'Furthermore it must always be remembered that Joyce's locale is
Celtic and his season is spring.' 

So now it was the literary quality of a work that was controlling. Judge
Woolsey's ruling stood for a quarter of a century and permitted, on the same
grounds, the publication in Britain and America of D. H. Lawrence's 'Lady
Chatterley's Lover'. Thereupon the publishers grew bolder both in print and in
pictures and, in the 1960s, the United States Supreme Court convicted a man not
for printing an erotic magazine but for the prurient advertising that promoted
it. Well now we were going into a twilight of reason and language and once the
Swedes erupted in a riot of frank photographic sex, the definition of obscenity
became so clouded in the western courts that anything could gallivant under the
cloud. 

Two years ago, the present Supreme Court ruled that there was, in effect, no
federal, national definition of obscenity but under the Freedom of Speech
clause of the constitution, the states, or any community, could fairly ban what
their community would consider obscene. That's where the law stands now and a
very rocky stance it is. For, suddenly, a court in Cincinnati has banned a
picture magazine of the sort you see both in Britain and the United States that
is, frankly, about as clinically nude as you can get. It is sold freely here,
yet its publisher has been convicted in one city and faces a whacking jail
term. 

It will go, of course, to the Supreme Court and, maybe, after years of
stumbling in the dark through the writhing bodies of filmed and staged and
photographed parties – far wilder than Joseph Moncure March conceived – we
shall take another crack at the excruciatingly tricky problem of how to
maintain free speech and yet rid ourselves of the clutter of filth that is
marketed for lucre in the name of liberty.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP