Long Island life

As you may have heard, all the New York City newspapers, all three of them, are
on strike. How, then, am I going to acquaint you with what is being reported
and thought about all – the great issues of the day in the news capital of
America I am not.

It may be cold-blooded to say so but this seems to me to offer a golden
opportunity to disclaim all responsibility for being well-informed or even
informed at all. I could spoil it for you, and me, by saying that the
television networks are doubling their daily coverage of news and of the
controversies that spring from it, so that it's possible to sit down at 6 p.m.
and emerge four hours later, choked and dizzy, with news of the world, and also
slightly confused. 

In the middle of a hot and sticky August, this seems to be to be a mistake. Far
better, I hope you'll agree, if I retreat to where I belong and tell you
something about life as it's lived at the end of Long Island. To get a picture
of the island, imagine a fish, a very long fish, with its snout on the left and
its tail on the right. Its mouth is hooked to Manhattan. Its body reaches into
the Atlantic in a direction more easterly than anything, for about 120 miles.
Its tail is divided into two flukes which enclose a large bay about 30 miles
long, five to six miles wide. This is called Peconic Bay – the Peconics were a
tribe of Indians, fishermen, which the refugees from Suffolk came on in the
seventeenth century. 

You know there are certain places of the earth that I would rather be than
anywhere at certain picked times of the year, either because of the climate or
the local food. In the fall, there is nowhere I would rather be than Vermont
for the breathtaking beauty of its scarlet and gold landscape, or Long Island
for its shining days and its miraculous draft of fishes. In fact, there is
nowhere I know, not the Mediterranean or the Crimea, certainly not California,
New Zealand perhaps, where between May and November there is such a succulent
haul of so many kinds of splendid eating fish as we have on Long Island. We're
just at the point where the northern cold-water fish nibble down at our shores
and where the warm water fish abound. 

First, for the gourmet, is the noble striped bass and the bluefish and the
swordfish and the flounder and the lemon sole. But there're also other very
tasty species which city people either don't know about or despise out of
genteel ignorance. In the summer months, for instance, the flat, fat porgy –
he's always mooching along the bed of the bay. It's a paranoid species that
feels it's being chased by submarines and so swims along on a zigzag course as
if in convoy during wartime. I simply have no idea why the porgy never appears
on the menu of restaurants. And more remarkable still is the non-acceptance of
another fine fish, the weakfish. I have caught it and eaten it for 40 years.
It's so called because it has a weak, papery mouth which it cheerfully, I
presume, rips in order to dislodge the hook. It then swims off and grows the
mouth together again. 

But you can't expect the fashionable types who live across the bay on the South
Shore, the kind of people whose relations never die but pass on, to go out and
buy a fish known as a weakfish. Some years ago, a droll Italian who owned a
fish market on the South Shore took to laying out weakfish on a tray and
marking them with a sign saying 'Sea Trout'. He is usually out of stock within
an hour of piling up the weaks. 

Now the island, like all other bits of geography, has its own local lingo for
its different districts which will not be found on maps or atlases. Thus of the
two flukes at the end of the island, the northern one is known as the North
Fork, the southern fluke is known however as the South Shore. There is a north
shore of Long Island but that's about 80 miles nearer New York. The southern
fluke, the South Shore, used to be the exclusive monopoly of early Dutch and
English landowners and farmer – one English landowner, William Floyd, was a
signer of the Declaration of Independence and achieved a very late badge of
immortality by having a motorway named after him. 

The early founding fathers were a little miffed, at the end of the nineteenth
century, when some of the robber barons and their heirs moved in. One of them,
name of Vanderbilt, on a visit to Scotland, saw the natives playing the
peculiar game known locally as 'the gowfe'. He accordingly imported some clubs,
hired a landscape man (or golf architect) and commissioned the laying-out of
the first 12-hole links course in the United States. 

Until the Second World War, the fashionable resorts of the South Shore – South
Hampton, Bridgehampton, East Hampton – were pretty choosy places but, following
the immemorial custom of all Western societies, the latest batch of new rich
moved as close to the old rich as possible in the hope of having some of their
effortless poise brush off on them. 

So in the past 20 or 30 years, these once fussy compounds have been invaded by
brokers, interior decorators, cosmetics manufacturers, bankers, chic painters,
actors and actresses, television producers, rock producers and the Shore is
infested by ten percenters of all kinds. If you detect a note of reverse
snobbery in this account, your instinct is correct. I have spent spring and
I've summered and autumned, fall-ened on the North Fork for 44 years. We stand
out on our 100-foot high cliff, or bluff, and look across the five or six miles
of the quarantine waters that separate us from the chic, the bad and the
beautiful. The North Fork is not chic, it is not rich – I doubt there are more
than half a dozen residents whose combined securities could match the portfolio
of any one of hundreds of the denizens of East Hampton and South Hampton. 

The North Fork was for two and a half centuries the province of English
settlers from Suffolk and you can follow the families' succession through
platoons of tombstones, the victims of seventeenth-century epidemics and all
the wars since the revolution, in the local graveyards or what in my village is
known as 'the burying ground'. I know old people, and not so old, who once in
their lifetime made the 100-mile trip to New York. They didn't like what they
saw and went no more. 

Shortly after the robber barons invaded the South Shore, the North Fork was
invaded by immigrant Poles (Catholics, farmers). Like all immigrants, they had
a nostril tuned to the smell of their native soil. The Poles smelled sandy
soil, which is potato soil. And the North Fork today, much as it was 40 years
ago, planted as far as the eye can see with potatoes and cauliflower and maize,
and interrupted only by wooden churches with blunt spires, could be used today
with great accuracy as the location of a film in Central Poland. 

The Poles were also industrious and very thrifty and soon took over the big
duck farms which had been run in a comfortable way by the Anglos. So now our
fork is populated by third-generation Poles. In the manner of long settled,
rural communities, the North Forkers tend to take a dim view of the South
Shore, or as they prefer to say, of 'South side'. 

But then the South Shore takes no view at all of the North Fork. In fact,
friends of ours, on the South Shore – we are tolerant types – have lived and
died there without having the faintest idea where the North Fork was or how to
find our point. They were always asking us to dinner but regularly refused our
invitations on the ground that from them to us was such a long trip. From us to
them is somehow different. 

And I still have friends, New Yorkers mostly, who ask us every summer, 'How are
things at your place in South Hampton?' which is like asking a proud
Lancastrian, 'How are things in Bradford and Leeds?' Our point is called Nassau
Point. After the English occupation it was rechristened Hog's Neck but it
reverted once for all to Nassau since, under the Dutch, it had been designated
as a sliver of crown property by King William – Prince, you will recall, of
Orange and Nassau. And since then, the point has managed to remain unmentioned
in the history books or even in the newspapers. 

In fact we're so obscure that when Nassau Point achieved the fame of a new
comet, nobody noticed it. The Point, I should explain, is a slim peninsula that
drops down like a finger, two miles long, from the North Fork into the bay.
Less than a mile down our narrow road there lived one Dr Moore and during the
Second World War he used to rent his cottage for the summers to an old man, an
old immigrant, a man interested mainly in music and fishing and of a retiring
disposition that made Nassau Point just right for him. 

On a boiling hot day in August 1939, two other immigrants, refugee scientists,
drove down the island to see this old man. They sat down and together composed
and then typed out a letter, a reproduction of which you can see on the last
page of Life magazine's 'History of the Second War'. It's datelined Nassau
Point, Long Island, August 2,1939. 

The two men who dictated it were Edward Teller and Leo Szilard and the
dictatee, if that's the word, sitting there on Dr Moore's porch, and not liking
very much having to sign his name to it, was the old man – Albert Einstein. 

It warned the President of the United States that the Germans had discovered a
method of splitting something that almost nobody, certainly not President
Roosevelt, had ever heard of – uranium-238. I don't know where that letter is
now. It's surely the most fateful letter of modern history for it alerted our
side to the need to mobilise, at whatever expense, the best physicists we had.
It guaranteed VJ Day.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP