Falling standards of literacy

When I first got into television – which I'm shocked to realise was 25 years
ago – I was signed up to be the MC on the first series of 90-minute weekly
programmes on American television. It seemed madness then. There was a 'Theatre
of the Air', or some such title, which ran an hour but that was considered the
limit of human endurance. After all, the great, though egotistical, architect
Frank Lloyd Wright called television 'chewing-gum for the eyes' and, I suppose,
the assumption was that if you went on for more than an hour, you'd get some
form of visual lockjaw or a perpetual stammer of the eyelids.

Anyway, in those days, nothing was pre-recorded. There was no videotape, you
did everything on camera at the time it was happening and if a slab of scenery
fell over you had to put it down to an act of God and go on talking. However
dead the material, it was always live. 

Our programme was what we liked to think of as an intelligent, middle-brow
variety show, that's to say, inside the 90 minutes there'd be a 20-minute play
specially written by somebody like William Saroyan or Maxwell Anderson or
William Inge. There'd be, say, a ten-minute ballet filmed in France or, I
recall, José Limon’s now classic version of 'Othello' danced by two men and two
women. And then, say, an interview with a man who'd just gone to the top of
Mount Everest, the first of four 20-minute pieces on the history of trial by
jury, capped maybe by a potted version of Gilbert and Sullivan's curtain-raiser
of the same name. 

We always had four or five solid items in there, an orchestra playing the first
movement of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony in the first version he put down in his
notebooks and then the finished version we all know. We did everything, from
the birth of the American Constitution to the birth of a bee. However carefully
we plotted the main segments of each show, there were always nasty little gaps
of one, two, three minutes, with nothing in them. One time we rammed in a
30-second – 30-second! – film of two women, two heads talking over a garden
fence. We were told at the time that that's all there was of the film. If it
had been longer, it would have been dangerous for the talking heads because the
film was an X-ray film, motion picture X-ray, and it's gruesomely vivid to me
to this day. One of the women, I remember, was chewing on an apple and once
you've seen bits of apple dropping slowly past the uvula and down into the
oesophagus of a skeleton, it's something you don't forget, I can tell you. 

Well, what I meant to say was that we had a producer who was what you might
call a hectic optimist. He was hectic because we always had these bothersome
two, three, four minute bits to fill, he was an optimist because he was always
sure we could fill them, that I could fill them on 30 seconds notice with a
thumbnail or a tip-of-the-tongue history of the income tax or the Crown Jewels
or the way the brain works. I should explain that while we often had time to
dream up these little inserts while we were rehearsing the main features, more
often than not we had no notice at all. In other words, the play on the
programme, say, ran short in the playing because the actors rushed it or
somebody skipped four pages of dialogue and when it was all over they'd make
signs or put up a little card saying, 'Four minutes to fill'. 

Once the crisis came on us with only 30 seconds notice and the only thing I saw
at hand was a dog-eared book of quotations. So I picked it up, went on camera
and instead of just reading improving bits, I made the mistake of deliberately
misreading, in other words, saying, 'What's wrong with this quotation?
Tomorrow, to fresh fields and pastures new.' Well, since fields are pastures of
a sort, something must be wrong and is. Milton wrote, 'Tomorrow, to fresh woods
and pastures new.' And then I thought of misquotations from famous movies. Did
you know that Maureen O'Sullivan, or whoever, never said, 'You Tarzan, me
Jane'? And Bogart never said, 'Play it again, Sam!'? 

Well, the incoming mail was furious. People didn’t want to know the correct
quotation. They wanted to stay with the legend. Correcting them was a mistake.
Well, now I see from a recent survey of college entrance examinations that this
feeling of pride in one's ignorance is now a universal thing. There was a time
when children who failed examinations sighed and decided to work a little
harder or cursed and went off to what used to be called 'a crammer.' No longer,
it seems. 

There is an actual protest movement among failed high school students and
applicants who failed to get into college. They feel, and they say so, that
they're being discriminated against on account of their ignorance. They want
automatic high marks, otherwise, they say, it's not fair, it's not democratic.
Everybody should go to college if he or she wants to. Requiring you to qualify
is a form of snobbishness. 

Well, the latest national survey of how graduating high school students stand
scholastically – scholastically? I'm thinking of the ability to handle a simple
English sentence to say what they mean when they mean something in a
straightforward and articulate way – the standard is dropping disastrously. In
more and more colleges, first-year students are not taking a literature course
that used to be called 'Freshman English', they're actually taking a course in
remedial English. They're trying to learn to read, to write in a manner that
30, 40 years ago would have been normal for an average 11-year-old and, may I
hasten to say to anybody who's shaking a head over the decay of literacy in
America, that this is happening to an alarming extent also in Britain. The
Americans simply take more surveys, grit their teeth and add yet another to
their pile of social problems. 

I can't help it if I'm accused of being a fuddy-duddy in feeling that this is
not a sign of health or human progress. I still get what, for want of a better
category, we'll have to call fan mail from listeners who begin by apologising
for having had only an elementary school education and then go on to write
perfectly articulate, simple, even eloquent and often charming letters.
Whatever their trade – a farmer, a clerk, a carpenter, a grocer – their age is
the giveaway. They're always in the fifties, sixties or seventies. And I also
get mail from not only recent college graduates, but from doctors of philosophy
who stagger through a jungle of jargon with their elbows. They can't write,
they can't think except in clumps of ill-digested long words. I don't mention
spelling because spelling is a trick, a form, as the late Archbishop Temple put
it, 'of low cunning'. Either you have it or you don't have it. 

Well, if my response to this horror is that of a fuddy-duddy, I'm happy to tell
you that the United States is developing more and more legions of fuddy-duddies
in the shape of parents outraged to find that while their children are
graduating in such courses as Ethnic Conditioning, Nude Photography and
Interpersonal Familial Relationships, they can't read or write. I know a
charming young man, 18 and now in college, who wrote me a letter that in all
its grotesque illiteracy could just as well have been signed Tarzan or King
Kong and when I next saw him, I put this to him as delicately as possible and
he said, 'I'm not interested in literature, my interest is in the visual arts'.
He is a good photographer and he watches between eight and ten hours'
television a day. 

It takes me back to a shuddering memory and I'd be awfully grateful to anyone
who can discover the where, when and what of this quotation. Years ago, I read
about a certain pope. It was at the time, the beginning I suppose, of the Dark
Ages. He wrote a letter to, I think it was the Bishop of Winchester, and a fair
translation of it would begin, 'My dear bishop, greetings, brother! What I mean
is these words is coming to you from a man which is sorry for what I write on
account of I don't know no better since the language ain't taught no more the
way it used to.' 

All right, exaggerated I have no doubt, but it was an apology from the pope for
having been brought up in an age when ordinary Latin was crumbling all around
him. He knew no better and there seems to be a lot of evidence that we are
going down the same slope. 

But, not to end on this melancholy note, I ought to mention the sudden rush, or
heartening eruption, of some astonishingly bright children who've come into the
news in the past week or two. I don't know whether or not to include in this
rousing little list of whiz kids the 19-year-old Princeton student who has made
a nuclear bomb though all the top physicists say it couldn't be done without
access to absolutely top secret material. But there's the 12-year-old New York
boy who took an Advanced Maths test and then told the Board of Education that
they had the answers all wrong. He was right. 

And the other night we saw on television the angelic face of a boy who looked
about ten, was actually 16. His name is Steve Cauthen. He's a jockey. He's been
riding ten months and he's won 355 races, which would be a preposterous
lifetime record for another jockey. Steve was on a horse at aged one, was
showing and breaking horses at four, and to placate your natural fear that such
a boy wonder might be in all other respects a moron, let me quote his own,
amazingly mature explanation, 'I knew I was going into a man's world and I
worked at it for a long time so that when I got there, I was able to cope with
it.' 

And as for the brutalising of tender minds by television, listen to this letter
to Newsweek, the magazine, from one Kate [Spivak] of Port Washington, New York,
'I'm nine years old and I don't think you should criticise us about how much TV
we watch if the average adult watches much more TV than the average child. We
aren't imbeciles, we understand that most of the commercials are not true and
our parents are smart, too. They don't let us eat that junk and if they did, we
wouldn't touch it.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP