US foreign policy unclear

In Texas once, during the war, THE war, I had the mixed pleasure of sitting in
on a press conference held by the then British ambassador to the United States,
Lord Halifax.

I ought to say that Lord Halifax, like all his generation, was not a dab hand
at press conferences for the simple reason that, except in America, they were
not a normal custom of political bigwigs or little wigs, let alone financiers,
rock stars and footballers. 

Well, Lord Halifax settled into this Texas press conference. It was in 1942 and
it was, as I recall, in Austin, the capital, and he settled in with great good
humour. The press was the local press, which means that his questioners were
confined to Austin and from other cities, Dallas, Houston, El Paso – people who
lived, as they say in Texas, four or five hundred miles 'up the road.' Only one
incident in that conference has stayed with me, apart from the general ease and
banter of the occasion, but it's vivid still. 

A young reporter who had never before looked a famous statesman in the eye and
who, therefore, didn't know enough to defer to him, said at one point, 'Sir,
when the war's over, will you give India her freedom?' Now today this may sound
like a reasonable question but we didn't, in those days, drop such epoch-making
policy questions in the lap of statesmen. The group of Texans was quite
un-startled. It was a question on everybody's mind just then and Americans,
anyway, did not assume the question had been answered once for all by Mr
Churchill’s stinging remark that he had not assumed the highest office in the
land in order to preside over the liquidation of the British Empire. 

In short, Lord Halifax, as the old novelists used to say, was taken aback. He
was not in the least embarassed. It seemed to him to be a question of
preposterous but almost charming naiveté. He smiled. 'Well,' he said
indulgently, but without... without condescension, 'I'm afraid that is an
extremely complicated issue and is not likely to be solved so simply.' 'But
sir,' said the young man, 'don't complicated issues have to be solved in the
end?' There was a relieving shower of laughter in which Lord Halifax was
relieved from answering. 

This little incident came back to me this week when a distinguished British
correspondent arrived in Washington and went into the White House to find out
what American foreign policy is all about. At a distance of 36 years, we have
gone into reverse. Mr Louis Heren was now behaving like the young Texan. For
the domestic, the American, reporters are so 'stuffed' by the administration
with all the complicated details and the backing and filling and the strategy
of the Carter policy, that they're almost – not brainwashed, but as the golfers
say about people who do too much reading and cerebrating 'victims of paralysis
by analysis'. 

So there was something very refreshing about the gall of Mr Heren in arriving
in Washington and marching off to the White House and saying, 'Now, please tell
me, what is your foreign policy?' What he got was Lord Halifax's answer. 'Oh my
goodness, boy,' the White House advisers seemed to say, 'it's enormously
complicated and hardly to be understood by a visiting fireman.' But since a
visiting fireman is precisely the most likely to become a beneficiary – or
victim – of foreign policy, Mr Heren persisted. Needless to say, he didn't get
the answers. 

But his mission was very much worthwhile because we got a very sharp picture if
not of American foreign policy, of the administration's rationalisations about
it. This rationale, which was very cool indeed, started from an assertion which
was given in response to Mr Heren's bold, opening move, a suggestion that Mr
Carter had failed to exercise leadership in foreign policy. On the contrary,
they said, President Carter is, if anything, attempting too much leadership
over a vast range of problems and issues that previous presidents have skirted
or ignored. 

They went so far to say that President Carter had learned from the mistakes of
his predecessors who tended to begin with a grand design, a resounding slogan,
and then apply it well or badly all around the world. But not Jimmy Carter. Not
for him the lullaby of ‘Ich bin ein Berliner.’ Not for him the grand, sappy
promise of the new society. You understand, by the way, they don't quite talk
this way – they use diplomatic gobbledegook – I'm translating. It loses
something in translation. 

The assertion the White House boys made which saved them from justifying the
game, move by move, was exactly Lord Halifax's assertion: it is a very complex
world. And Mr Carter has dared to see it as such and try to deal with one
complexity after another, not try to make a package deal labelled 'the grand
design'. Mr Carter has his eye, they said, on many ailments for which you
cannot prescribe a single remedy. 

He's not ignoring the build-up of Soviet military power in Europe. He wants a
Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty because it's better than both sides going off
and building new weapons. Yet the Senate might baulk if it felt that the United
States was being pushed around in Africa. The United States had a stake in a
peaceful Africa, her policy was no longer linked just to Western Europe and
Japan. That's why he went to Nigeria, Iran and Saudi Arabia. That's why he
wanted to be sure the Cubans would not frustrate America's attempts to
influence political and economic development in Africa. 

Also, the United States was now hoping to have relations with China good enough
to pave the way for regular, diplomatic relations. At the same time, the United
States wants to be careful not to aggravate Chinese-Russian tensions. This, by
the way, is a shocker. After Mr Brzezinski, the president's national security
adviser, visited China, there were pieces from several reliable Washington
correspondents saying that the Brzezinski mission was practically a courtship,
that America had thrown in her lot with China as something very close to an
ally against the military threat of the Soviet Union. 

So, once again, we're back in a pit of confusion about whether we're making up
to the Chinese or in love with them or not or staying out of the whole
Russian-Chinese conflict or avoiding another Molotov-Ribbentrop alliance by
opting solidly for help to the Chinese. 

What came out of Mr Heren's Genghis Khan safari, was the remarkable admission
from the White House itself – in the White House even the walls have voices –
that the president is failing to articulate his policies but both his White
House advisers and the people in the state department believe he's moving in
the right direction. Or should I say directions? 

My own comment must be limited to this. It could be that Mr Carter is more
aware than his predecessors of complexity and willing to accept the fact –
which is dangerous for a politician – that there are no rousing answers. A man
I know who has followed Mr Carter since he was in the Georgia legislature says
what you must understand about this man is that he's essentially a technician.
He loved the navy's nuclear work. He gets a mass of details and makes a
careful, un-dramatic decision which is probably beyond the layman's
understanding. Well, it's certainly beyond his admiration and if this is so,
it's going to be more and more of a problem for a president, as we can see from
the bleak figure that Mr Carter's national popularity, or his judged
effectiveness as a president, is now almost as low as Mr Nixon's was in the
week of his abdication. 

I wish I could get by without a word about the latest boo-boo of Mr Andrew
Young, the United States ambassador to the United Nations, but it was a clanger
which will resound around the world. As always, he said one startling thing and
later said he meant another. He meant to say that while America condemns the
Soviet Union quite rightly for its political trials, the United States has not
always been Simon Pure about persecuting people for unpopular opinions. 

But what he said, in his Paris press interview, was, 'after all, in our
prisons, too, there are hundreds, perhaps thousands, of people whom I would
describe as political prisoners.' The interviewer did not have the wit to say,
'Name one!' Mr Young's remark will cause only disgust or exasperation among
Europeans and Americans, everybody who knows, as well as he does, that nowhere
in the United States is anyone in jail because they listen to Radio Moscow or
issued a pamphlet urging a factory boycott or voted to strike or wrote an
anti-Carter column. Or paraded in any town or city with slogans making fun of
the White House or wrote an anti-administration novel. 

If Mr Young had dared to say this in any country, if he'd been a citizen of it
– Russia, China, Albania, Argentina, the Philippines – where there are hundreds
or thousands of political prisoners, he would not be with us today. His
trouble, it seems to me, is that of the people who use the language of
totalitarianism as a racy or fashionable form of rhetoric, people who call
somebody way on the right, or somebody they simply don't like, a 'fascist'.
They're always people who have never known – they should thank God – in the
flesh what it is like to live in a fascist society. 

I don't think anything at all can be done about such people in Western Europe
or America who toss these terms around – fascism, gauleiter, ghetto, political
prisoner – but think what a joy it will be to the newspaper and radio editors
of Russia and Albania and Romania and Poland and Hungary to be able to trumpet
to their people that the United States ambassador to the United Nations, no
less, has at last admitted that there are thousands of political prisoners in
the United States, just like us, except they won't say 'just like us'. 

Mr Young gives great hope to much of black Africa. He is the symbol to American
blacks of how far they can rise, which presents Mr Carter with an acute problem
and if I used language as irresponsibly as Mr Young, I'd be tempted to say that
if there is, or was, one political prisoner in the United States, he is Mr
Young's prisoner and his name is Jimmy Carter.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP