Commencement

There was a character in an old American musical comedy – I'm thinking aloud
far from the books, but I think it was 'Anything Goes', the Cole Porter/Ethel
Merman triumph of the mid Thirties. This character was an Englishman travelling
on a transatlantic ship and, conforming to the cliché of the day, he a
silly-ass, upper-crust Englishman bubbling with benevolence and asininity, I
should guess.

Now, the younger members of the class may have to reach back in their minds to
picture such a character who was created certainly as long ago as 1865. He was
the focus of amusement in a play called 'Our English Cousin' which was the play
Abraham Lincoln was chuckling over several seconds before he was fatally shot. 

In our time, the actor who turned this character into gold was Terry Thomas,
but he's by no means the last of the breed. Essentially, he's the character
played by Robert Morley in the television advertisements he does over here to
coax Americans into going to Britain. You'd think by now that Americans would
have long ago replaced this stereotype with some more modern and familiar and
real type. How about Mr Callaghan or George Best or David Niven or Jack Jones? 

Well the sad truth is that, in times of confusion especially people like to
cling to stereotypes, the simpler, the more unchanging, the better. And of
those four modern types I've mentioned, I'll bet that David Niven – whose
public personality is a kind of shrewd parody of the old-time, typical
Englishman – David Niven is the only one most Americans would know. People are
always very hazy about types that don't fit their preconceptions. 

Well, the character I first thought of, the Wodehouse character in the 1930s
musical comedy, caused a lot of dependable laughter in American audiences by
his habit of carrying a little notebook and putting down in it American
expressions he heard that were second nature to Americans but, to him, were
very pungent and original and quaint. This habit is by no means dead, though
the notebook may be a mental notebook. Only a year or two ago, my wife, talking
with an old Englishman about some common acquaintance, said, 'Well, I must say
he comes on rather strong.' The Englishman went into ecstasy. 'Comes on rather
strong!' he crooned. 'What a smashing expression!' 

And to be entirely truthful, I must confess that 40-odd years ago, when I
arrived in this strange land, my notebook was not mental. It was six inches by
three and I never lost an opportunity of scribbling down these curious idioms –
but only when I was back in my own rooms. I came across this browned-off little
notebook the other day and the first thing that struck me was how many of the
quaint Americanisms I noted have passed so noiselessly into regular English
that at least two generations of English people would hotly deny that they're
Americanisms at all. This, by the way, has been the history of Americanisms
that passed over, since the early 17th century. You may be itching for
examples. 

All right! How about this note. Americans say, 'I don't have any' where we
would say, 'I haven't got any'. Also, Americans ask for beef 'rare' instead of
'underdone'. They call a skittle alley a bowling alley. A tin is a can, as in
canned fruit. And so on. I also put down then expressions that didn't exist in
England, in British English, because we didn't have – sorry! – we hadn't got
the things they described. For instance, I put down with an exclamation mark,
'Parking meter!' And with another exclamation mark, I noticed such barbarous
oddities as 'paper towels', 'paper napkins', and later on, I suppose, I would
have fastened on the weird expression 'supermarket'. Such a horror as a pizza
parlour was way in the future. 

But I noticed one or two words that were in every day use 40 years ago that
seem to have expired. This always applies to the simple, slang terms of praise
and abuse. Robert Benchley wrote a piece at about that time lamenting the sad
state, as he saw it, of American dramatic criticism. 'It's gotten so,' he
wrote, 'that any new play is one of two things, it's either swell or lousy.'
Well, both these words are long dead here but they crossed the Atlantic and
linger on among tottering Englishmen who enjoy picking up the latest
Americanisms in the flush of their youth. 

And since I'm nursing a slight cold at the moment, I remember how, in the early
1930s, no American ever seemed to have a cold or the flu. He had the gripe and
when he had it he felt logy. Both these words have vanished without trace.
Americans now mutter something about having a virus, though they'd probably be
alarmed to know that a virus is by no means a bacterium, but a smaller organism
mainly of nucleic acid in protein coat existing only in living cells. There! I
presume that the English still catch colds and when they have troubles with
their sinuses, complain about catarrh which, in my time, covered everything
from a deviated septum to double pneumonia or a brain tumour. 

As my first winter went along, I notice now that the entries grew fewer. I came
to accept the vernacular I heard all around me and, I suppose, adopted much of
it without knowing it. But when the spring came, I find one entry which does
not seem to justify three exclamation marks. It's the simple word
'commencement'. Under the elms of the Yale campus, all the talk was of, 'What
are you doing at commencement? Are your parents coming up for commencement? We
intend to go on a big bender the night after commencement.' By the way,
whatever happened to 'bender?' I think my revulsion against this simple word
was due to my having been brought up as a student of English literature by the
late, and I still insist, great, Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch. Well, 'Q' was murder
on any student who used Latinisms where he could use English. If you wanted to
show off by saying that some writer was circumlocutory, he would cross it out
and put 'roundabout'. He abominated 'commence'. You wrote 'start' or 'begin'.
Hence my pedantic horror at hearing the word 'commencement'. 

It's used everywhere in America – there's no other word – for the graduating
exercises of a college. It is, or it was, in England called 'Degree Day' though
I'm told that 'commencement' is creeping in on the craven principle that an
Americanism is somehow more chic than the usual word. Hence, I regret to say
'old folks' even in Britain have turned into 'senior citizens' and when the
time comes for me to shuffle off to the old folks' home, the people who run
such things, usually hair-styled young men in crested blazers, they try to
soften the humiliation by welcoming you to the Sun City or the Whispering Pines
– wait for it! – senior citizens' retirement community. 

Well, at commencement, as we say, the graduating class, as we say, troops
through the leafy campus and will receive scrolls attesting their excellence in
scholarship or today the fact that they can spell or know just about the
difference between a noun and a verb. At the head of the procession will be the
president of the university or college, several other pedagogues like the deans
of various faculties and they'll be walking severally, side by side, with a few
greybeards or ageing bluestockings, distinguished men and women, who are about
to receive honorary degrees. 

This week there must be a couple of thousand universities and colleges in this
country that have invited and will receive magnificos as various as a Cabinet
officer, an abstract painter, a retired soldier, a packaged bread tycoon or the
inventor of a strapless bra. I, myself, was dazzled a year or two ago, to get
several invitations of this sort but I made some excuse and declined because,
long ago, when I asked my guru, Mr H. L. Mencken, 'Why this abundance of
honorary degrees?' He said, 'No man worth his salt will ever take a degree he
didn't work for. Honorary degrees are fit only for chiropractors, real estate
agents and Presidents of the United States.' 

Well, old H. L. was wrong. Not wrong, perhaps, just exercising one of his
favourite impulses which was to be funny and downright at the expense of actual
accuracy. 

The fact is that among all the droning speeches that will produce a great
moaning sound over American campuses this week, there are always two or three
that will not only be wildly quoted but could signal to the world outside
America a stirring change in American policy. Presidents especially take their
pick from a swarm of invitations and decide to use their chore as commencement
speaker at one particular place to deliver what they always call a 'major'
speech on foreign or domestic affairs. I still wait hopefully for the president
who'll announce that at some commencement or other he's going to deliver a
'minor' speech. 

It was at a little known college in the Deep South, 31 years ago, that the then
under-secretary of state, Dean Acheson, made a commencement speech in which he
floated a trial balloon that was to affect the future of Europe profoundly. He
proposed a giant American effort to bring American money and material aid to
help, as he put it, 'restore the fabric of European life after its devastation
in the Second War'. Since nobody shot down this trial balloon, secretary of
state George Marshall expanded the proposals and put them into a commencement
speech at Harvard a week or so later. On the Harvard campus in June 1947, the
Marshall Plan was born. 

Well, last week we heard two speeches that could come to affect the lives of
all of us. One was a warning to the Russians given by President Carter on
commencement day at his old college, the United States Naval Academy at
Annapolis. And the other was a skinning denunciation of Western civilisation
and America, in particular, delivered at the Harvard commencement by Aleksandr
Solzhenitsyn. 

In the manner of Captain Poldark, I shall leave you holding on to the cliff
with your fingernails. Next week, to the rescue!

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP