Modern weddings

This ought to be, as the Bible put it, the time when the singing of birds is
come and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land.

I don't know what the youngsters of today would make of that sentence,
Americans especially, since the teaching of the Bible in the schools would
clearly go against the constitutional ban on establishing a state religion. And
it's pretty safe to say that the teaching of the Bible as literature is
practically non-existent. Indeed, except among Orthodox Jews and Catholics, I
find that in talking with young people it's better to skirt even the most
homely references – the patience of Job, Samson in the temple – because they
haven't the slightest idea what you're talking about. 

A local board of education gave a group of 16-year-olds such a test with
frightening, and sometimes hilarious, results. Cain and Abel were identified as
a local law firm. Ruth amid the alien corn was a complete puzzle to most people
though it was suggested by one that Ruth had left her native state of Iowa and
was looking with contempt on the inferior crop of some eastern state. And
that's fair enough, it's even intelligent if you remember that 'corn' in
America is everywhere and always 'maize'. Corn, anyway, is what the linguists
call a 'counter' word which is given to the staple crop in Australia, oats in
Scotland, barley, they tell me, certainly in England, wheat. 

These biblical meditations came to me after attending a ceremony last Saturday
night that was, at once, original and, to me, very reassuring. We’d been
invited to the wedding of a girl we'd known since she was a toddler and, on the
way, there, I said to my wife, 'I wonder what the service will be like.' 'I
think,' she said, 'they've written their own.' I groaned a blasphemy. The last
roll-your-own service I attended was in the hills of northern California –
also, the wedding of a youngish man, about 30, whom we'd also known from birth.
We were told to dress as we pleased and we were asked simply to follow a
certain footpath through some woods and appear on the crest of Old Baldy, or
whatever the hill was called, at two in the afternoon. 

Well, the footpath was invisible except to an Indian scout, and we staggered
through broom and briar and scratched our way up to a clearing which had to be
it because the scene bore all the marks of a traditional country wedding. I
mean there was a youth with matted locks piping on a flute and another bare, to
the waistband of his jeans, twanging a guitar and a half-dozen young men and
women, sex indistinguishable till you got up close, were hefting a case of beer
and another case of Fright, Scram, Fickle or some such soft drink for the
teetotallers. 

There was also a middle-aged couple in grotesque uniforms. He was wearing a
business suit, a shirt and tie and she was in a summer dress, or frock. They
looked about as comfortable as an archbishop and his wife at a rock concert.
They turned out to be the parents of the bride, a comely girl in some sort of
Tibetan peasant's smock with beads down to her ankles. Those were the days when
girls wore their hair down to their knees by the bow and to their coccyx
astern. And throughout the proceedings, which didn't so much get under way as
just lurch into a service, the bride kept parting these tidal waves of hair
with the palms of her hands in order to see what was going on and also to
respond without choking. 

The... I was going to say 'parson', but of course he wasn't a parson... in my
time, he would have been a particularly sincere type of amateur actor playing
John the Baptist in a school play. He had bare feet, worn jeans, a sort of
smock, possibly the vestment of his mysterious order, but he also had a book.
It was a book of poems by, of all true believers, W. H. Auden. Now this was
encouraging. Perhaps they'd tried to write a service and given up and sensibly
fallen back on some fine stretch of Auden. But the book was simply a crutch to
the non-parson's memory. He opened it, looked through his beer-bottled glasses
at everybody, just as solemn as any ageing priest, and he said, 'Well, like,
shall we get going?'. 

He read about four lines of Auden and that was it. And then he took out from
under the folds of his mysterious garment a sheet of paper and read what had
indeed been written by the equally knavy, grindingly solemn couple. It did not
repeat any of the well-worn and – in this setting, I gathered – highly suspect
phrases of the usual marriage service. What he did was to read a sort of
elephantine parody of them by somebody who seemed to have much the same ideas
as St Paul but was determined not to show it. 

This couple, we were told, was about to enter a meaningful relationship, they
were identified by their first names, they would live in achieved integrity
(his prose, not mine), they promised nothing, there was no question of honour,
love, certainly not obedience. They had chosen, he said, to finalise the
concept of oneness. In fact, they were getting married. He declared them to be,
not man and wife – a loathsome phrase – but two persons equal in marriage. 

That was it. The flute player piped away and the brooding guitar player, bent
double over his guitar and mumbled something about touching your hand and the
four or five adults present were enormously relieved. And we stood around
talking to smocks and sandals and waves of hair being buddies, saying things
like, 'You into sociology?' And, 'Sure, sure!' Then we unzipped the beer cans
and somebody brought on an organic cake and we nibbled and said, 'Mm, mm!!' And
thank God it was all over. 

Well, you can imagine my feelings when I pulled up at an awning in the mid 50s
in Manhattan, an awning which looked like what we used to call 'a respectable
apartment house' – block of flats, if we must translate – but turned out to be
a Midtown club, mainly for tennis players. Well, that was square enough and
maybe the service would be squarer. We saw arrows pointing to the wedding and
went through subterranean passageways and up stairs and down corridors, and up
again, and finally came out on a penthouse apartment with trellis work and
chairs in rows leading to a lectern. And, out on the terrace, leafy decorations
and (aha!) a bar. We were on time. 

I'm not, myself, a particularly punctual person but at airports and weddings
I'm the first man there. My wife believes that you should pack your bags, sit
down, take out a book and wait until the absolutely minimum time it takes to
get to Kennedy or Heathrow or wherever. Then you whisk off in a cab, arrive,
dash through the ticket counter and the body check, go aboard, they slam the
doors and you're off! I, after 32 years, keep saying, 'But why not pack, get to
the airport, then sit down and read a book?' It does no good. 

As for weddings, nothing to me is more uncomfortable than tiptoeing in and
seeming to steal the limelight as the congregation swivels its collective head
and hisses when the parson is already launched on 'Dearly beloved' or 'Well,
like, shall we get going?' This time I won. The wedding was to be at 7.30 and
we arrived in the penthouse suite at 7.20. There were three other people there.
One man, a splendid cynic that we've known for years said, 'What are you doing
here at this time? Sit down and snooze! Didn't you know this was a Jewish
wedding?' The other two were a young man and an old man. They looked at their
watches and looked at us with mild scorn as if we were at the wrong party. We
sat down. And then I noticed that the lectern was draped in white silk bed
sheets, or curtains, and I guessed that the marrying couple had not written
their own service. 

The faithful must excuse me if I don't know the proper names for the objects
and articles of the service, but soon a brass quartet started up, piping some
charming Elizabethan music from Purcell and maybe Henry VIII – he was an
accomplished musician and, after all, he is to the heathen practically the
patron saint of wedding services. Then two men and two women came in bearing
standards in their hands. When they got to the lectern, they stood at the four
corners and a great, flapping blanket of cloth was suddenly extended into a
canopy. The young rabbi came in, then the families, then the bridegroom, about
6 foot 4inches with a black yarmulke, and the tiny and exquisite bride. 

I couldn't pretend to call off the sequence of the ceremonies with any sort of
authenticity. I could do it in accurate detail for another Gentile, or goy. I
will simply say that in its insistence on doing things according to the
traditions and wisdom of the Jewish people, it had great dignity. It was half
in Hebrew and, in translation, I suppose, half in English and the shy couple
repeated after the rabbi the vital phrases. 

Two things out of this fascinating ritual struck me. One was the new to me, and
heartening, stress – in fact the rabbi said that it was the main thing, the
sheet anchor of marriage – the stress on friendship. It struck me as being
whole light years of wisdom beyond St Paul. 

The other was a sad, grim note and it was not the note of the rabbi or what he
said, but what went on in my mind. And I hope I don't seem patronising in
saying it. He made the slightest, glancing mention of the troubles of life and
the trials of the Jewish people and, while this shy couple stood there, he
looking like a giant trying not to hurt the pearl he was handling, I thought of
a television programme that has just been shown around this country. 

It's called, 'Holocaust'. And no doubt, I hope, you will see it. It's a long
and ghastly reminder of the six million Jews sacrificed by Hitler like pigs on
a spit. There's been a furious correspondence going on in the papers about how
this is too mild and that is too fictional and bitter protests, rightly, about
the hideous taste of the intrusive commercials. But it did acquaint many
millions, who never knew it, with the towering obscenity of our time. West
Germany, I'm relieved to say, is going to show it. 

As I sat there watching this grave and traditional ceremony, I, quite
uncomfortable occasionally, feeling very much amid the alien corn, I was glad
that the young rabbi had mentioned the troubles of life and the trials of his
people. I was happy that the young couple had not written their own service.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP