Frost/Nixon interview cut

I was going to say may I hasten to make a small apology, but 'haste' is hardly
the word to use about a correction that comes limping in a month late. Some of
you may remember that after Mr David Frost's first interview with Mr Nixon, I
pointed out an omission from the television version heard in Britain and
America that was not sinister but certainly seemed odd. I now discover that
this interesting passage was not heard in any televised version, at least it
was not heard in the United States also.

You'll remember that the first interview was actually the last one to be
recorded but because it was about Watergate, the producers put it on first –
shrewdly and correctly guessing that it would quicken public interest in a
series which almost, till it went on the air, had produced an alarming amount
of public apathy. 

The passage which nobody saw televised had Mr Frost trying to pin Mr Nixon down
to an admission that he had indeed obstructed justice. Mr Nixon said he knew
very well what he was doing but he'd done it from motives of policy. At which
point, Mr Frost asked him if he knew the text of the statute that has to do
with obstruction of justice as an impeachable offence. And Mr Nixon said that
he hadn't looked at it since he was in law school. Whereupon Mr Frost read it
out aloud and pointed out that the statute was not interested in motives,
however noble. It found an obstruction if the 'intent' to obstruct was there. 

Well, if none of you heard this coming from your television set, how come I
heard it? I didn't. I heard the British transmission and compared what I'd
heard with the text of a big cover story published before the interview went on
the air in one of the two American national weekly news magazines. A couple of
weeks before the interviews came on, Time and Newsweek had assumed, as the rest
of the American press had, that public interest in the series was so
lackadaisical that Mr Frost and his staff might well have backed a loser. 

At any rate, the producers were sufficiently alarmed to decide to release to
the press some snatches of the famous, or infamous, Watergate tapes that not
even Mr Nixon had heard. The New York Times printed them verbatim and this
stirred up such foam of interest that the two news magazines suddenly decided
to tell and print all they knew. And they knew a great deal of what was going
to be put on the air because at least one staff member had sat in on the taping
of the first television interview. 

Either the Time man sat in, or he had access to the full transcript of what Mr
Frost and Mr Nixon had said to each other. Because I could not see the American
televised version, I compared the British with the text printed in the news
magazines and there, sure enough, was the passage about the statute governing
obstruction of justice, which seemed to me interesting, at the very least. But
since no American newspaper that I saw commented on it, I assumed that the
passage must have been taken from the American broadcast. In other words, the
news magazines, one or both, published before the broadcast an exchange of
dialogue between Mr Frost and Mr Nixon that was edited out of the version seen
and heard in both the British and the American broadcasts. 

This is one of the consequences of the invention of television tape. In the old
days, all television shows, whether news or drama or whatever, everything but
films of any kind were done live. You saw them as they were being done. But
around, I think, 1960, tape came in, television tape and practically everything
but spot news was done ahead of time, on tape, not only for convenience but
also in the interests of a smooth performance. 

However, this invention generated its own problems, particularly in news
programmes because, as with Mr Nixon's own sound tapes – I mean the recordings
he made secretly in the White House – it's now possible for a producer or a
network official to see a programme before it goes on the air and edit out
something that seems dull or offensive or libellous or whatever. And this, of
course, gives a new lease on life to a censor, or what the American television
networks call, with a marvellous straight face, 'continuity acceptance'. Most,
probably all television networks have an actual department, even if it's only
one gimlet-eyed lady or gentleman, called continuity acceptance. So nowadays
you never really know that what you're seeing is all that happened at the
time. 

I've had my own slight but palpable brushes with continuity acceptance in the
filming of my history of the United States. There was a scene in the episode on
the Spanish heritage in America which went into the origins of branding cattle.
We took this from what I called 'the heraldry' of ranching, the brand signs,
down to the actual branding of a roped calf. It was not allowed to be shown in
America on the grounds that the actual contact of a red hot brand and the hide
of a calf, followed by the quick yelp of the beast was more than American
sensibilities could stand. 

Well, considering the orgies of blood and violence provoked by almost all the
television police dramas which infest the networks from afternoon to midnight,
such a scruple might seem a little over-tidy at this late date. And again, in
the final episode of America which compared the values of the
seventeenth-century colonists with the values of today, there was a passage
about Las Vegas. I wanted to sharpen, as vividly as possible, a contrast
between the thrift and austerity of the Puritans and the luxury, the barbarity
if you like, of Las Vegas, which I called 'Babylon in the desert'. 

And to do this in a sequence of images, we showed dice being tossed, one-arm
bandits whirring, the electrical sign outside a nightclub which could provide
enough illumination for a town of 60,000 people and then, to the accompaniment
of a blare of jazz, a strut of semi-nude girls in a midnight show. And for a
flashed second you saw a pair of buttocks and then a bare breast. Well, this
bit was also cut from the final film for the American showings. 

Although our cities and small towns are agog with cinemas showing intercourse
in gigantic close-ups, pornography as hardcore as any you can find, the
television networks, on the whole – the public television network is a brave
exception – believe that the sight of a buttock or a nipple would be too much
for the hundred millions or so who watch nightly television. Continuity
acceptance is there to keep us pure. 

Well, we didn’t fuss about the Las Vegas bit but I did put up a small, and as
it turned out, hopeless protest about the branding of the calf. It seemed to me
to be all right to cut out the branding in any country which also prohibits the
eating of veal, but I was not able to make the point convincingly enough that
there is a particularly offensive sort of hypocrisy in people who are appalled
at the notion of pig sticking but also love pork. So that had to go too. 

Well, what emerges from the freedom to edit tape – what emerges for me at any
rate – is gratitude for television when it's being a fly on the wall. In other
words when it's showing you something in the immediate here and now. The most
honest, the most memorable, stuff that comes out of American television is the
coverage once every four years of the national nominating conventions. There is
the speaker saying what comes to mind at the moment, there are the floor
managers ducking from delegation to delegation, cozening and cajoling, there
are the delegates mad at their own chairman, there are the protesting caucuses,
and there, in 1968, was the living fury of the cops and the protestors on the
streets. 

Now, of course, even when we're seeing a convention, or a fire, or a terrorist
besieged with hostages, or bits of guerrilla fighting, we're still at the mercy
of what the cameraman chooses to show us and that will always be so, but it is
possible to let our suspicion of his motives grow paranoid. If he has only a
minute of film, naturally he's going to look, like the earliest film makers,
for the most motion: bursting flames, a rifle shot, a tank on the move,
somebody in a temper, and this gives to much of our television news coverage a
frenetic quality which is something less than the whole of life. 

But the love of motion is inherent in the motion-picture medium and, in my
experience, cameramen on dangerous assignments do their honest best to give you
the feel of the experience of being there. And when it comes to a political
convention, there is a general in charge of the army of reporters and
cameramen, the director, who knows that if he skips some telling conversation
on the floor of the convention, some surprising alliance between political
enemies in a hotel room, the other network will get it. 

This week we have a far more serious complaint about the sins of television in
representing or misrepresenting the behaviour of the police and private
detectives. Two professors of law at the University of Massachusetts, Stephen
Arons and Ethan Katsh, watched and monitored television crime shows between
autumn 1974 and the spring of 1976 and they've published their findings which
amount to a powerful indictment of, especially, the most popular of the police
dramas. 

What they complain about in programmes like 'Kojak' and 'Colombo' and 'Police
Woman' is innumerable scenes in which the police or the detectives violate the
legal rights of people and project a picture of the police that is alien to the
constitution. Hardly a single viewing hour passes, they say, without an illegal
search or a confession obtained by coercion, or failure to provide counsel, or
any mention made of notifying suspect's of their right against
self-incrimination. What Mr Arons and Mr Katsh fear is that the constant acting
out of unconstitutional behaviour will soften up the public politically, so
that people will come to believe that just so long as the bad guys are caught,
violations of the constitution will always turn out to be a good thing.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP