Holiday reading

We used to be told that the great thing about a holiday, in fact the whole
point of it, was to get away and rest, just as, for a hundred years or more,
the routine advice of the family doctor to anyone who had a cold or who was
somehow exhausted or otherwise felt out of sorts was to go home and go to bed.

That was before the late, great Doctor R. Asher gave his funny and brilliant
lecture detailing all the appalling things that happen to the body when you go
to bed, how the mechanism develops quirks, how the engine starts to misfire,
how the whole organism begins to run down. 'When in doubt,' he said, 'stay up
and keep moving!' 

I imagine that his audience, which was an audience of doctors, felt it had been
caught out and I see them shuffling off, not looking anybody in the eye, since
one of their own had revealed to the world the secret of their daily practice,
which is to get rid of a bothersome patient in the easiest way on the hunch
that he's going to get well anyway. 

As for holidays, practically all travel literature, pamphlets and come-ons of
every sort, is based in the assumption that everyone yearns to lie down in the
sun by a swimming pool, with a bikini in sight, and maybe indulge in a little
shuffle-board and then repair to the Flamingo Bar, or whatever, rest again with
a couple of cocktails and then eat a rich and flamboyant dinner, which, they
don't tell you, is not a bad recipe for going to bed and getting a heart
attack. 

Well, everyone to his favourite poison. It must be obvious by now that my idea
of a holiday in hell is a resort. the tropical beach, the daily prostration in
blazing sun, the emerging appearance of a boiled lobster, the daily
encouragement on insipient skin cancer, the daily drink or meal with strangers.
I admit it's easy to scorn such pleasures if that's what they are when you live
in a part of the world – New York, for instance – where between May and
November, a good deal of the time, is spent staying out of the sun. If you want
it, it's there in sickeningly, pitiless doses, especially through June, July
and August. 

My own idea of a holiday is to go to another city and while mooching around and
enjoying its architecture, if any, to see what makes it tick and watch the
people, how they assume that their staple food is essential to life, whether
it's couscous in Tunisia, rice in China, meat and potatoes in good old
Derbyshire. And how they use different gestures for the same emotions. The
Italians, for instance, seem to be beckoning you when they're waving goodbye.
In Spain a chorus of whistles from the bullfight crowd is the worst form of
booing. And how in Harrods, say, or Bloomingdales' basement, the price marked
is the price you pay, whereas in Mexico where I now am, the marked price is
indicated as the sporting starting point for a bout of bargaining. 

'Four hundred pesos!' you say, aghast at a rug or a basket or some other bauble
you don't need. 'Senor,' the man says, man to man, ' you look interested, you
are much intelligent, 350!' 'Ridiculous!' you say with a grin and you walk
around the square and come back. He comes back, leaping as at a long-lost
friend, 'Senor,' he says, 'welcome again!' And then with a saucy wink, 'You're
wanting the rug!' Well, you don't want the rug, you want a margarita. 'You want
a margarita?' he screams. He rushes off to the waiter. 'What are you doing?' he
bullies, 'My friend wants a margarita. Why do you not attend on my friend?' Now
you have two of them at you. 'I tell you,' says the one who is festooned with
rugs,’ I make a beautiful bargain. I give you the rug and a basket for 275
pesos.' 

They're such amiable people and the waiter serving up margaritas by now like a
water boy succouring some sun-struck tennis player, is so concerned for you and
so amazed at the generosity of his friend, the rug salesman that you settle for
225 pesos – a bargain in any country. Except that you don't want a rug or a
basket and you curse both of them when the time comes to pack and there's no
way to pack either of them. And it cost you several porters to get them back
home and you look like an idiot fugitive from a circus juggling the things
through customs. But this is the fun of the game, the discovery of new ploys
and gambits in the human game or what our professors of sociology call
'non-familial interpersonal relations'. 

The other usual prescription for a holiday which now takes us into the
advertisements on the book pages, is to take along a little 'light' reading and
this again is something I find deeply depressing, like telling a man who's
ragged from the loss of a child or a fortune that he should cheer up and get a
hobby. On this trip to Mexico, I took one book and I hope you won't think I'm
being superior in not taking along the latest Harold Robbins or even a dollop
of the great P. G. Wodehouse. I put it down as an affliction, a compulsion
neurosis that I cannot go to any country, or for that matter to any new cit,y
and shut off my wretched mind. It goes on ticking, well or badly, and I find
the only way to peace and quiet is to feed it information about the place I'm
visiting. 

Well, the book is a short, crisp, scholarly history of Mexico. If it had been
written on this side of the Atlantic, it might have been magnificent but I'm
afraid it might also have been called something like 'Dark Conquerors of the
Hinterland'. Instead it's called, in the admirable English fashion, 'A History
of Mexico'. It is by Sir Nicholas Cheetham who was the British ambassador to
Mexico for four years in the 1960s. A strong hint of why he wrote it is given
in the first few sentences of the book and the hint is directed at his own
countrymen whose ignorance of Mexico, he discovered, was vast. 

'When the Prince of Wales,' he begins, 'passed through Mexico in 1966, the
Times reported him as having visited the Aztec pyramids of Teotihuacan. The
August newspaper,' he comments, 'failed to realise that in attributing these
famous monuments to the Aztecs, it was committing a fearful schoolboy howler as
if it had referred to the Roman builders of the Parthenon or to Sir Christopher
Wren as the architect of Canterbury Cathedral. In fact the pyramids had been
abandoned centuries before the Aztecs ever reached the Valley of Mexico.' 

Well, I won't say that I bored into these books every day or that I used them
for the indecent purpose of slaying friends with Mexican one-upmanship on my
return. My own ignorance of Mexico, if not vast, is certainly very great. But
it is that I'm simply an itchy type. If I'm in a hotel that looks like a
monastery, I want to know if it ever was one. Why do the motorcar horns go
peep, peep and not honk, honk? What explains the surprising point made in a
little guide I came on last year – a point that must surely produce sharp gasps
and winces in Americans, the hygiene maniacs of the world – the guide says in
travelling around Mexico, an American should try to be tidy and not, for
instance, leave washbasins un-scoured. Americans will find that, on the whole,
hotels and motels, both big and small, restaurants chic and humble, tend to be
much cleaner than their equivalents in the United States. 

Well, if that's so, then the visiting European, of all people, had better pull
up his socks, assuming he's just washed them. Well, to break down and be frank,
I didn’t take the history book as a first step in a boning-up project, I take
books everywhere, books I may never read because I dread holing up in some
foreign room with nothing to read. I once had a schoolmaster to whom I owe a
great deal about how to use a library and zero in on the heart of anything that
interested me. And he used to say that if the worse came to the worst, he’d
read all the way through a railway guide. 

In my boyhood, there must have been an awful lot of Englishmen who lived
similar lives of quiet desperation because the Times was always printing
scolding letters from the unlikeliest people, parsons and insurance agents and
carpenters and classical scholars, who knew every line of Bradshaw's Railway
Guide and were shocked to find somebody saying that the train from Penzance to
Woking left at 8.10 in the morning instead of 8.13. 

Last year, in Mexico again, I found myself in a hotel room which had absolutely
no reading matter except in one drawer an old, browned-off Manhattan telephone
book. So, reduced on a hot day to lying there and sitting there with no other
literature, I found that the amount of information you can pick up about New
York from the telephone book is both staggering and hilarious. There are two
pages of Kochs (K-O-C-H-s) but less than a column of Cookes (with an E). It's a
strange name to some Americans. I recall the time I was nominated for a
television Emmy and the old schnozzola, Jimmy Durante, was the MC. After
calling off the nominees, he said, 'Give me da envelope!' And he tore it open,
'And the winner,' he bawled, 'is Alistair Cookee!' 'Cooke,' muttered his
assistant. Durante was outraged at this ungentlemanly bit of correction, 'It
says Cookee here,' he said. 

There are pages and pages of Kleins and Kleinbergs and Kleinmans, though the
lady, an ardent women's libber who went to court to have her name changed is no
longer listed as Kugelman, she can now be found as Kugelperson. There are ten
pages, forty columns of names beginning with Z which only goes to show that if
Shakespeare had been an American he would not have written 'Thou zed, thou
unnecessary letter.' 

I found that reading the Manhattan telephone book was not to be recommended at
nightfall, it's too full of surprise, suspense and shocks to the nervous
system. And if I didn't have a date with a pyramid, pre-Aztec, and after that
with a combination of chicken enchiladas, crispy tacos and tostadas packed with
beef and salad, not to mention the splendid Mexican beer, I would enlighten you
with many more items from the Manhattan telephone book. 

As it is, I must simply leave you with the sobering information which tells you
something about the ethnic make-up of New York – that the first proper name in
the book is that of John L. Aab (two As and a B) and the last is a man, I'm
intrigued to see, lives only two blocks from me. He is Charles Zzzzynza (four
Zs – Z-Z-Z-Z-Y-N-Z-A). 

Live and learn!

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP