Dubious poll results

Two simple questions! One, are you in favour of a drug which claims to cure
cancer or are you not? Two, if you were a United States senator would you vote
for a treaty which limits both American and Soviet nuclear arms or would you
vote against it?

I should think that if you put those questions just that way, there'd be a 90
per cent 'yes' answer, since if you voted 'no' you'd seem to be coming out in
favour of cancer and nuclear war. There would remain, I hope, ten per cent who
would promptly refuse to answer because the catch in the first question is the
word 'claims' – claims to cure cancer. Many have been claimed and none so far
works. 

And the tricky word in the second question is 'limits' – limits both American
and Soviet nuclear arms. That's not a question but a declaration of fact and
the truth is that many good men and true, in and out of the United States
Senate, have looked into the new SALT treaty and have concluded that it would
not limit at all, but provide new production quotas. It would reduce the number
of certain missiles that one side or the other could have and increase the
number of other weapons. 

But the whole debate on the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty is confused just
now, or sidetracked by the hullabaloo over the 3,000-manned combat brigade
which the United States believes the Russians have in Cuba. The best
intelligence reports put the number of Russian military men at a much higher
figure but so far the Russians have stolidly maintained that there's nothing
new or threatening about those 3,000, that they are instructors, technicians or
such. 

However, the fact that they're there at all has vividly reminded some senators
of the so-called 1962 missile crisis, when American reconnaissance planes
discovered that the Russians had set up in Cuba launching pads and nuclear
missiles and all the paraphernalia for action. There was a dreadful week when
President Kennedy called in the perennial Soviet foreign minister, Mr Gromyko,
and confronted him with the facts. Mr Gromyko assured President Kennedy that
there were no missiles there at all. 

At that time, however, the Russians either didn't believe or didn't want to
believe that American reconnaissance planes from over 12 miles up could plainly
photograph objects on the ground as tiny as a turtle or a golf ball. But Moscow
was caught having to believe it and after the American threat of forcibly
turning back any Russian ships that approached Cuba with shipments of arms, a
Russian fleet, already on the way, turned back and the missiles were removed. 

Well, that was 17 years ago and since nobody can be elected to the Senate who
is not at least 35 years of age, there is not a senator who does not remember
the nightmare of that last weekend in October 1962. 

About the presence of Soviet troops in Cuba today, there are two extreme
positions. One is that of Andrew Young, the resigned chief American delegate to
the United Nations. He says – he said the other evening before a caucus of
black congressmen and congressional assistants – 'What's all the fuss about? If
3,000 Russians posed any threat to the United States, the United States could
obliterate them in a twinkling or a big bang.' 

The other position is that there are very many more than 3,000 military
helpers, technicians, advisers, troops, and that they could well be forming an
advanced corps or spearhead for supporting revolutionary movements throughout
Central America. 

Now it would be comfortable to say, as sensible commentators tend to, that the
truth probably lies in between but that is a statement as dogmatic as any
other. The fact is we don't know. If the 3,000 men were what the Russians say
they are, certainly, Secretary of State Vance, for one, would not have given
weeks of fretful nights and exhausting days trying to get them removed. Mr
Carter, in what has now become almost a professional reflex on any big issue,
has said, in effect, 'We must not get excited, yet we must be alert. We must be
firm, we must not overreact. We are watching the thing closely, we have it
under surveillance.' 

Anyway, as far as the Senate's concerned, the Russian troop presence made
enough powerful senators come out flatly and say that they will not vote for
the second SALT treaty until the Russians do with the troops what they did with
the missiles – remove them. 

So, the SALT debate is, or was at this talking, befuddled by another issue,
though befuddlement is the last thing it needs, for the arguments both pro and
con require a technical knowledge of the damaging or defensive capability of
many types of weapons, both singly or in combination, which not one layman in a
thousand possesses. So in a way, it's a problem that the ordinary citizen is
simply not qualified to pass on, and yet, in a democracy, he's expected to.
Since politicians watch the polls like cats watching a mouse hole, the debate,
the Senate vote, may well turn on how many millions of people come to accept or
reject the word 'limits' in the pollsters question, 'Are you in favour of a
treaty which limits nuclear arms?' 

This came up the other night when two famous pollsters got together to discuss
the effect of Mr Carter's sinking popularity on the voters on the leaders of
the two parties and on the delegates to next summer's presidential nominating
convention. Well, we don't have to go into all that to rescue their main
point. 

The big question was not so much how will President Carter react to his
vanishing popularity as how true is it that it's vanishing at all? Mr Roper of
the reputable Roper poll put it most tellingly when he showed on a screen the
results of four separate polls, taken in the spring of this year, about whether
or not Mr Carter was doing a good job. Between his poll and, let's call it Poll
B, there was an alarming difference of 20 per cent. His poll showed 49 per cent
of the people, on the whole, approving of Mr Carter as President Carter. Poll B
showed only 29 per cent. 

This absurd discrepancy was explained by the type of question put to the
citizen. Poll B asked if you thought Mr Carter was doing an excellent job or
merely a good one, a moderately good one or a poor one – 29 per cent thought
'excellent.' All the rest were lumped as unsatisfactory. So, the stunning
result was published, barely one American in four approves of the job he's
doing. 

Roper's poll, on the other hand, asked if, on the whole, you approved of the
way the president was doing his various jobs when you considered foreign
policy, inflation, energy and the rest of his domestic policy altogether and
there turned out to be 49 per cent who had something good to say for him. The
Roper poll, also, was the only one which put a careful – carefully-qualified –
question about the SALT treaty. It listed the number of weapons the Americans
and Russians would each be allowed to have. It mentioned that there was a great
difference of opinion in the Senate, whether the treaty would, or would not
limit nuclear production at all and then it said, 'If you were a United States
senator, would you vote for it?' Very many less people said 'yes' than they did
in another poll registering over 80 per cent in favour, but in response to a
question so slapdash, so naive, 'Are you for or against limiting nuclear arms?'
Which is about like saying, 'Do you want war or peace with the Russians?' 

This discussion went out over the splendid half-hour that's done on public
television five nights a week by the incomparable questioning team of Robert
MacNeil and Jim Lehrer. They take up every issue, not of 'our' day, but of
'that' day and getting the leading authorities on both sides, I mean they get
in the designer of the Pennsylvania nuclear plant that went on the blink and
the chief consumer opponent of nuclear power. They get in the Israeli
ambassador with the chief spokesman of the PLO in the United States and so on. 

Well, this one certainly made me think again about the dependability of the
polls, especially about presidential popularity. Mr Roper reminded us that
President Nixon was pretty low down in the popularity polls of late 1971. A
year later, he managed the biggest landslide victory in American history. About
Mr Carter's present moves and manoeuvres to reverse his low standing and
achieve the impossible re-election, we'll talk another time. 

The value of this disturbing analysis of the polls was to stress the
suggestibility of their language, which often is no fairer than the immortal
question, 'When did you stop beating your wife?' What it brought out to me was
the growing confusion of another public debate which is beginning to take on
the noise, if not the belligerence, of the great Vietnam protest marches of the
1960s. I'm talking about what the political folksingers call 'the nukes' –
nuclear power. It's a common place to say today that the Seventies have
considerably cooled the propaganda fervour of the Sixties about anything
political. But last Sunday, 200,000 people, mostly young, gathered down in
Battery Park in New York to stage the biggest anti-nuclear rally there has been
in this country and there were a dozen others across the nation. 

This movement, which was once confined to the small consumer groups, has
mushroomed into a mass movement since the terrifying accident at the Three Mile
nuclear reactor in Pennsylvania and while, originally, the movement appealed
for foolproof safety regulations at nuclear plants, it has now developed, or
degenerated, into a crusade against any nuclear reactors at all. 'Abandon
nuclear power!' is the cry. 

The 200,000 in New York were crooned to with nuke songs and passionately
addressed by Jane Fonda, the reliable passionaria of all radical causes. They
petitioned President Carter in May and he told them to come back with a plan,
for so far they talk only hopefully about alternative sources of power without
specifying which sources would replace oil, coal or everything else by which
America avoids grinding to a halt. 

Meanwhile, the government and the nuclear industry and the Senate and the state
of Pennsylvania and a consumer group and a group of independent scientists have
six separate investigating teams investigating on mock-ups of the Three Mile
plant, what happened there and why? 

When the passionate ones come through with a careful and practical plan to
replace nuclear energy once and for all, we shall certainly bless them first
and talk about them afterwards.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP