End of the year report, 1978

Some years ago, at this time of the year, I was invited to go down to Florida
and talk to a group, a forum or whatever, of people in Palm Beach who were
interested, according to their brochure, in the arts and politics. So I leapt
with alacrity from the northern snows and in a couple of hours I was driving
past Australian pines on a blissfully warm day, blinking in brilliant light.

Palm Beach is sometimes called in European magazines 'the Riviera' of North
America. If it was, it wouldn't be 80 degrees by day in December. The
Mediterranean is far to the north of the latitude of Palm Beach which is in
fact opposite West Africa below the bulge. Anyway, the... the group that met at
five o'clock on this perfect day consisted of many old people, most retired,
and a majority of ladies in very elegant clothes, exquisitely coiffed silver
hair and a good deal of what Damon Runyon's guys used to call 'ice', by way of
bracelets, necklaces and the like. They'd asked me to talk on what's right with
America and in case I hadn't got the message in time, one of the officiating
ladies patted me on my way to the platform and said, with a winking nod, 'Be
sure to keep it on the lighter side!'. 

Well, I gave my talk which began with a good look at the darker side of things,
went on to look at the lighter and ended with a list taken from Edward Gibbon's
'Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire' of the symptoms of decadence that seemed
to me just then to be much in evidence not only in the United States, but in
Western Europe as well. When it was over, there were drinks and polite
socialising and the officiating lady, who'd warned me about the correct tone to
adopt, came up and said, 'I thought you were going to talk entirely about the
lighter side.' And I said, 'Well, you can't see the lighter side, can you,
until you've identified the darker side?' This was less than satisfactory and
no more was said. And my suspicion that I'd been saying the right things to the
wrong group was confirmed by a wonderful remark I overheard as the last of the
audience was drifting away. Two, quite old, ladies were whispering busily
together on their way out and one said, 'I just refuse to believe that Ed
Gibbon could have said such awful things!' I discovered from a male official
between the tears of his helpless laughter that Ed Gibbon was a notable local
interior decorator. 

I thought of this while fishing around in my mind for some cheerful things with
which to brighten the end of your year, but I'm afraid I've come up with
nothing much. A year ago we were all gurgling over the warming photograph of Mr
Sadat and Mr Begin locked in an embrace and we were looking forward to 17
December as the great day when the Israelis and the Egyptians would sign the
peace treaty. As I'm talking now, it seems as far away as ever. In the
meantime, Mr Carter had to say, with the very faintest hint of irritation, and
I don't remember a president who ever showed less irritation in public, that
he'd spent a huge amount of time on the Israeli-Egypt business and really there
were other pressing things that had to be taken care of. Indeed there were.
While we weren't looking, the Soviet Union got itself another useful satellite
in Afghanistan, making yet another move toward putting a girdle round the
Middle East, or, if you like, the supply depot of our oil. 

I talked about China last time when we were heady with the news of American
recognition. According to Mr Carter in the flush of the announcement,
practically everybody on earth felt happy about it, except some of those
grouchy old conservatives in the Senate like Senator Goldwater who felt we'd
deserted an ally in Taiwan, in fact abandoned a dependant. Mr Brezhnev's
telegram of congratulation which Mr Carter quoted was a puzzle. He'd said that
the Americans' new relationship with the People's Republic of China would
contribute to world peace. Now this, I thought at the time, was a puzzling
response and suspicious, if you remembered that the Russians are the world's
best chess players. Which pawn was Mr Brezhnev throwing away? Which side of the
board were we neglecting to look at? 

I concluded that the Russians were certainly not stunned – they'd been
expecting this for some time, but neither, some of us assumed, could they
possibly break into cheers – they must be brooding and working out the next
move but one. Then, however, they evidently felt that Mr Carter had misread Mr
Brezhnev and they did something very rare indeed which was to publish in Moscow
the whole text of Mr Brezhnev’s telegram to the president. They did this
because they said Mr Carter had simply picked out the favourable things Mr
Brezhnev had said and overlooked the misgivings or fears we might have guessed
at – as, for instance, that the Soviet Union would take a dim view of America
and its Atlantic allies making an ally out of China in order to counter Russian
interests anywhere, but especially in Asia and Africa. Moscow says it will pay
particular attention to Chinese vocabulary. Now this means absolutely nothing
in itself. What they talking about is the word 'hegemony' which Mr Carter
defined literally as one nation's domination of others. 

Mr Carter explained this because the joint communiqué issued in Washington and
Peking said that both China and the United States were opposed to efforts by
any other country or group of countries to establish hegemony in the Asian
Pacific region or in any other region of the world. Now, according to Moscow,
the Chinese use the word 'hegemony' exclusively as a warning against the Soviet
Union. In other, and blunter, words, the Russians are warning us that this new
relationship could, in fact, become an alliance and, in time, a military one,
against them to which one irreverent old observer here said, 'Well, isn't that
the whole idea?' 

I have the strong feeling, based on no Gallup poll but on the tone of so many
editorials and so much talk on the tube that most of the 'comfort and joy' –
comfort, anyway – Americans feel from the recognition of China, springs from
the hope, at least, that with a hefty boost in its technology, China could
become a powerful deterrent to any more Russian adventures. The 'joy' is
reserved for industry and businessmen. Within 24 hours of the announcement, the
Chinese communist flag was flying over the headquarters of Coca-Cola in
Atlanta. The Chinese are going to be taught 'the pause that refreshes' and, in
time, to bottle their own. 

There was also great rejoicing among the manufacturers of farming tools and
equipment (tractors, reapers, harvesters and the rest). No arms, mind you. That
is the soothing syrup fed to the Soviet Union, but I'm right, am I not, that
the French and the British are selling arms to China? And its own nuclear
technology grows apace. So, it seems to me, the Russians from their point of
view have every cause for concern. 

The second great issue or headache at the end of the year was oil. When OPEC,
the oil-producing export countries, were about to meet, the experts here, to a
man, guessed a five per cent increase. They were staggered at 14 and a half per
cent but recovered their balance quickly for fear of frightening the average
breadwinner, the 60 or 70 million breadwinners who proceed to work every
morning in the ratio of one man:one car. Petrol, of course, is what we all
immediately think of and the government was quick to explain that the cost
would go up by only five per cent for a month or two and then gradually up to
the full 14 and a half by the end of the year when, incidentally, OPEC meets
again to figure the next boost. It was also explained that industry was not
likely to suffer just yet because power plant fuel oil would be hardly affected
and because industry had been a good boy and since the first big shocker of an
oil hike, had been using over 18 per cent less chemicals for refining and so
on. But they had to grant that utilities companies would suffer a four per cent
increase in the price of their fuel, that the Arab move made a recession harder
to avoid, that the economy would decline by something around two per cent –
which sounds piddling but can also be made to add a quarter million to the
unemployed. Also, to protect the dollar abroad, interest rates are bound to go
up and that, too, hurts the domestic economy. One government expert said he was
afraid, however, that the main, the most harmful effect on the public would be
psychological. 

The conviction is now fixed in people's minds that the Arabs have us over a
barrel of oil. We don't stop to consider that the disruption in Iran, for
example, makes it impossible for the Iranians to produce enough oil to meet the
normal demand. Also, anything that OPEC does, any move an Arab makes, appears
at this distance dramatic and we tend to blame him for any coming pinch on the
economy. For instance, the government, the American government, is going to be
blamed along with the Arabs for the predicted rise in the rate of inflation.
Not many people will stop to realise that Congress has just passed a general
increase in social security taxes and that this increase will hurt the consumer
exactly as much – something close to two per cent – as the increase in the
price of petrol. But a congressman putting social security figures into a
computer makes a much less colourful villain than a sheikh. 

So, the prospects for the New Year are dearer petrol, dearer telephones, buses,
tube fares, airplane fares, a rise in unemployment, a notch of higher
inflation, a Congress angry over the abandonment of Taiwan and likely to be
loathe to pass the Strategic Arms Limitation Agreement AND, as if this wasn't
enough, a brilliant new tennis star, John McEnroe, who throws such tantrums on
the court that even old 'Nasty' Nastase had to turn to the crowd the other day
and say, 'Please forgive him! He's only 19.' 

So the best I can wish you is a 'lucky' New Year.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP