O.J.Simpson, sports star

Watching the president the other day gamely, and rather nervously, standing his
ground against a barrage of questions from the press, I couldn't help thinking
back to the presidential press conference as it was in the days of Franklin
Roosevelt. It's strange to think now that while previous presidents had been
uneasy with the institution and most of them abandoned it, Roosevelt revelled
in it and made it a cherished bond with the press.

Of course, he had some enormous advantages over President Carter. I'm not
thinking of personal advantages – manner, demeanour and so on – but the
institution itself. There was no television in those days and the press
conference was not put on the radio, no transcript of the proceedings was ever
published, not until the president was dead and gone, when we could read the
transcript of most of his over 990 press conferences. 

More than that, Roosevelt, from the day of his first press conference in 1933,
laid down precise ground rules and nobody challenged them, which they certainly
would today. There were to be four categories of news, nothing was to be quoted
directly as coming from the president. There was news and comment he gave you
for attribution to a high official, unnamed, of the administration. Other stuff
could be attributed to the White House. The third category – and the most
useful to the press – was known as 'background', and always labelled as such.
That meant the president was giving you his view of how things stood on any
policy or argument that came up, but this was not to be printed in any form;
you're meant to bear it in mind in writing your own commentary. The fourth
category was that of direct quotation of the president in quotation marks and
this was so rarely allowed that whenever Roosevelt said, 'And you can quote me!
' there was a rustle of pens on paper like a convention of grasshoppers. The
next morning, every paper in the country would headline the actual word just
handed down from Olympus. 

This well-respected system meant that the president was, at all times, in
complete control of his questioners and could say anything that came to mind
without fear of being damagingly quoted. 

Now, here, for instance, I've come on a short exchange only a week or so before
the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor. At that time, the president and Mr Hull, the
Secretary of State, were exchanging messages and negotiating points with the
Japanese that looked towards a general peaceful settlement in the Pacific. At
the conference, the president handed out a government release about the neutral
status of American merchant vessels sailing to Europe, to Central and South
America, and the last sentence read: 'American merchant vessels sailing on
routes in the Pacific Ocean will not be armed under existing circumstances.' 

And now, a reporter asked, 'Mr President, could you say how long you think
existing circumstances may prevail?' The president, 'I think I'd ask that
question in Tokyo, not in Washington.' Question: 'Is there anything you can
tell us, sir, about these Japanese negotiations?' The president: 'I think I'd
better not.' Question: 'Well, Mr President, could you say, sir, whether these
negotiations have broken down temporarily?' The president: 'No, they haven't.'
Question: 'Mr President, can you tell when the next meeting will be held with
the Japanese?' The president: 'I don't know.' 

And, at the next press conference, the president reported that large Japanese
forces had been moving in Indochina and that, at his request, the Japanese
government had been asked, very politely, what was the purpose of these moves?
Question: 'Was there any time limit put on it?' The president: 'No, no! That's
a silly question! One doesn't put a time limit on anything any more, that's the
last century. We are at peace with Japan, we're asking a perfectly polite
question, that's all!' End of press conference. 

Well, imagine an exchange like that today, the next morning's papers headlining
'President vague about Japan negotiations. President insults reporter, calls
him silly'. 

Perhaps the commonest phrase the president used in those days consisted of two
famous words: 'No comment', said either firmly, or blankly, or with a wink or a
chuckle. In other words, he knew things that you didn't and weren't meant to
know. He was permitted the necessity – today we should say the luxury – of
keeping some things to himself. And it was well understood by all newspapers
and broadcasting networks that delicate negotiations could be conducted only in
secrecy, that their news value emerged only with the publication of a
communiqué. Any president who today said, 'No comment!' to anything, would be
considered not only rude, but evasive, deliberately cheating the people of what
they have a right to know. 

The way the press conference has gone, with the president knowing that every
word and gesture is being heard and seen on television and that next morning,
the New York Times will publish a complete transcript of the dialogue, does
this mean that we are now privy to state secrets, that we are better informed
than we ever were? I think not. It means that the president has to cover up the
delicate fabric of things being negotiated with not very illuminating verbiage.
If Roosevelt had been asked in the privacy of his White House office, where the
press conferences were always held, whether he thought the recent elections in
Rhodesia were free and fair, he'd have said, at least, 'No comment'; at most,
'We're going into that with the British. For the moment, I have no comment'. 

What Mr Carter said was, 'We have been consulting closely with the British
government since the new administration under Mrs Thatcher took over. Secretary
Vance has just completed several days of discussions both with her foreign
minister and with other officials. The new Rhodesian government will take
office, I think, the 1st of June. Within two weeks after that date, I will make
my decision about whether or not to lift existing sanctions. I've given the
Congress this assurance and obviously my decision would be made taking into
consideration those consultations with Great Britain.' 

Well, there's not much more in that than 'No comment yet'. But the president
now has to pretend that he's giving the people, through the press, all the
facts. He promised a government open to the people before he took office and
he's stuck with that promise. So, nothing is too complicated or scandalous or
indiscreet, or silly, to ask him. And, you'll have noticed there's less formal
respect paid than there used to be, less 'Mr President' and 'Sir' and more,
'Why did you do this, or that?'. 

In short, in Roosevelt's day, the president granted the press the favour of a
press conference. Today, the president is up against the press. We don't really
know any more than we did but we have a greater freedom to embarrass the
president and make him appear to be cagey or indecisive. 

Now this new openness or, if you like, this new convention, of allowing the
press to challenge rather than inquire, to demand that he tell all, to put him
on the spot, I think it has much to do with the general complaint that we lack
great leaders. Old men shake their heads in any country. They think of
Churchill and Roosevelt and Smuts and Menzies, and say 'There were giants in
those days'. If so, I can only say they were lucky giants. They lived at a time
when public opinion granted them a measure of authority which they did not have
to prove. They may have been as baffled as President Carter is by the
intransigence of Congress and the indifference of the public to shrinking
supplies of petrol or natural gas, but the giants could say 'No comment' or
they 'had the matter under consideration'. 

Today they have to bare their ragged state and confess that, once you get in
the presidency, it's a brutally complicated job that tends towards muddling
compromises rather than strong, authoritarian measures handed down from on
high. 

Well, while the president stands there like the boy on the burning deck, forced
to make positive statements about oil, inflation, airplane safety, Rhodesia,
Palestinian autonomy, the MX missile, the presidential intentions of Senator
Edward Kennedy and why he, the president, used up fuel in a helicopter to go
fishing last Saturday? The rest of us knit our brows about all these things and
don't pretend to know much and say 'Fill her up' to any petrol station that's
open and go fishing. Or watch baseball, or tennis. 

The dog days are on us. The steaming summer days are coming in and this, of
course, is the great season for games and wishing good riddance to all
sententious or apologetic politicians. 

Next week there will be a banquet in the Waldorf Astoria Hotel given for the
benefit of the American Cancer Society. The tab is $150 per person per dinner
and there the award will be handed out, as it is once every ten years, to the
athlete of the decade. Lesser awards will go to the swimmer, Mark Spitz,
swimmer of the decade, Chris Evert-Lloyd and Jimmy Connors, tennis players of
the decade, and so on. But the grand award, Athlete of the Decade, will go to
Jack Nicklaus, the best golfer of his time and probably the best golfer of all
time. Certainly, while other golfers have dominated the game for as long as
four years or five years or, in Bobby Jones's time, six years, nobody has begun
to approach Nicklaus's record of being the number one man for 15 years. It is
enough. 

Among those who'll be present and honoured is the extraordinarily attractive
figure of O. J. Simpson who is probably the best black American footballer
there has ever been. Mr Simpson made a lucrative living at football and he's
made a princely living by doing television commercials for an automobile
renting agency. He will stand there as a model and an enviable example to
millions of black boys who yearn for similar national fame in the big games for
the big money. It's a dazzling will o' the wisp. 

A sociologist at the University of California has just published a study of
sports and the black man. He finds that no more than 900 black athletes in this
country earn any sort of a living and that the odds against any ambitious black
boys making a career as an athlete are about 20,000 to one. Arthur Ashe, that
very sensible black tennis star, has urged the black sports stars not to appear
before schoolboys except to urge them to get an education. 

Or better, he suggests, 'send to the schools the guy who didn't make it and
have them ask him if he sleeps every night. Ask him whether he graduated. Ask
him what he would do if he became disabled tomorrow. Ask him what happened to
his old high-school athletic buddies'.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP