William Safire on Thatcher

Before we come to the big news – I ought to say what looks like the big news –
about the American-Soviet agreement to limit strategic arms, I really must add
a PS to last week's talk on the British election.

It's a rollicking piece written by a man you might call the resident bad boy of
the New York Times because, while the Times is dependably liberal in its
editorial policy and so are its house columnists, James Reston, Anthony Lewis,
Tom Wicker, the Times was moved a year or two ago by a noble impulse to give
some space regularly to a professional non-liberal. They hired William Safire,
a mischievous and gifted fellow, just crowding 40, who once wrote speeches for
Vice President Agnew and for Mr Nixon, who then quit and set up his own store
to hawk colourful and very funny, little statuettes of liberal gods and
goddesses. 

I hasten to say that I speak in metaphors. Nothing delights Mr Safire more than
to read the Times' editorials and the deep thoughts of its columnists and then
write a devastating and always merry piece making great fun of the Times's
heroes and the Times's point of view. Mr Safire is even more of a professional
conservative than the Times's columnists are professional liberals. He's also a
first-rate student and mocker of the language of politics and its standard
jargon. He has in fact put out a fat and funny book called, 'Safire's Political
Dictionary'. 

Well, with those credentials well established, I hope nobody's going to huff
and puff when I quote a few passages from the column he wrote after Mrs
Thatcher's triumph was authenticated. He called his piece, 'The British Voter
Arrests Robin Hood'. Safire begins by noticing that Robin Hood has been a hero
of British and American folklore ever since he was mentioned in the fourteenth
century in Piers Plowman. It's typical of Safire, by the way, that before he
starts shooting from the hip, he's careful to establish the fact that he knows
more about the man he's going to knock off than the man's own disciples. I'm
pretty sure Safire boned up on Piers Plowman before he dashed off his column. 

Well, he says, Robin Hood's fame is based on the fact – and I'm now quoting –
'that Hood and his motley crew of early socialists, Little John, Friar Tuck,
Alan-a-Dale and Maid Marian, the Jane Fonda of her day, robbed from the rich
and gave to the poor. That is now called income redistribution and has had a
good press for five centuries.' Safire goes on to suggest in what he calls a
'revisionist' theory that Hood and his band were well-meaning villains who did
more harm than good to the poor. And this is the way Safire figures it. The
Hood system was to waylay rich merchants and take their goods on a progressive
basis, and that's to say the more successful the merchant, the more he had to
pay back to the Hood system. Then the proceeds were handed to the poor as
welfare payments. And now a Safire collaborator comes in, in the person of an
American economist Arthur Laffer, a big proponent of California’s tax-cutting
Proposition 13. 

The Safire Laffer theory goes this way: what did the merchants do? They hired
security men to see them through Sherwood Forest or they bypassed Sherwood and
went the long way round, so naturally the costs of producing and shipping the
goods went up. They added the costs to the price of their goods, inflation grew
its kangaroo head and thus, says Safire, the distributions from Robin Hood
could not keep pace as merchants avoided the forest. This is known as the
shrinking of the tax base, while in robbing from the rich, adding to costs,
stealing incentive, Hood and his Piers Plowman pinkoes ultimately hurt the
poor. Mr Safire guesses, or assumes, that the original Hood, who was probably
the Earl of Huntington in disguise, your typical elitist do-gooder, was bled to
death by a woman, the Prioress of Kirkley. Significantly, he notes, it has
taken another woman, the redoubtable Mrs Thatcher, to nab the modern Robin
Hoods and roll back the welfare state. 

Well, come out from behind his Punch and Judy show. Mr Safire notes correctly
that while Mr Carter and his advisers are saying nothing about Mrs Thatcher and
her promised domestic reforms, they are wishfully thinking that the
conservative campaign rhetoric will soon soften as it applies to foreign
affairs. They have in mind particularly, of course, British policy towards
Rhodesia or should I say Zimbabwe, Rhodesia. The State Department – which, I
think, would have a severe case of the shakes if Britain moved soon to
recognise the new Rhodesian government – the State Department has been very
profuse with its assurances that Mrs Thatcher and Lord Carrington will not
dream of doing anything about Rhodesia before the Commonwealth conference in
August. 

At this point, we come back to Mr Safire. Being a fervent conservative with a
temperamental dislike of compromise and moderate reform, he says poignantly, 'I
wonder, to paraphrase Churchill, Mrs Thatcher was not elected to become the
Queen's first minister because she is made of cotton candy'. The Safire gift
for satire is not suppressed under the force of his yearning for a big, bold
Boadicea of a prime minister. 'If', he says, with something of the bloodshot
passion of his liberal puppets, 'If she is ever going to count for anything at
home or in the world's councils, she is going to have to establish a reputation
for boldness and soon! If she temporises on the need for income tax reduction
or if she tries too hard to accommodate the foreign policy of an American
administration already afflicted with terminal lame-duckedness, her monument in
British history will be made of vanilla ice cream.' But he doesn't think, he
doesn’t dare to hope, rather, that she will move over to the middle. She now
sees the tide that Safire sees all the time. 'Robin Hood,' he ends on a note of
wishful triumph, 'stands exposed as a villain. In the next remake of the film,
a dashing Errol Flynn-type will play the good guy, Sheriff of Nottingham.' 

I added these more solemn thoughts of Mr Safire after his fun and games with
the old legend because nobody should assume that the convictions of Mr Andrew
Young about Rhodesia are shared by a majority of, for instance, the United
States Senate. Mr Young is the United States ambassador to the United Nations
and he has survived many a gaffe, most notably his scornful, offhand remark
that Britain started the colonial racket, and his other remark – which raised a
tornado of protest here – that no doubt the United States, so busy condemning
the imprisonment of political prisoners, had hundreds of political prisoners of
her own. After a very hurt telephone call from Mr Carter on that one, Mr Young
said he'd been misunderstood. 

The Young idea is that the recent election in Rhodesia is at least suspect but
there are powerful forces in the Senate, and even more powerful lobbies within
call of the Senate, who are anxious to lift all sanctions. Without going into
it any further, I'd say that Rhodesia is one of the two issues which Washington
sees as likely to be affected by the British election. The other is the status
and strength of the North American Treaty Organisation and here the
administration takes heart. Even though Mr Carter is about to sign a treaty
with the Soviet Union on limiting strategic nuclear arms, I don't believe the
administration has lost any of its desire to see the NATO allies in Europe lift
their heads from the sand and see the massive build-up of Soviet conventional
arms on that continent. 

Which brings up an intriguing move just made by the Russians and one that's
going to take all the Kremlinologists in America and Europe to analyse
correctly. It's just come out that, in recent weeks, the Russians have been
holding secret conversations with the Americans with the aim of reducing the
numbers of Western, and Eastern, troops stationed in Europe. The move was
reported in the New York Times in this surprisingly bland sentence: 'With the
two countries expected to sign a new strategic arms treaty at a summit meeting
next month, officials said that Washington and Moscow have expressed the desire
to make headway on concluding a companion accord that would cut back the
presence of Soviet and US ground and air forces stationed in Europe.' 

Is this possible? Has the Soviet Union, after 20 years of creating an
irresistible, mighty army in Europe, repented and now wants to turn her swords
into ploughshares? Could it be with the arrival of spring that the time of the
singing of birds is come and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land? It
is beyond my powers to say. I can offer only the reminder that the Russians are
the world's best chess players. 

The big, roaring domestic topic this week is the sudden shortage of petrol. On
Wednesday, the Senate voted by 66 to 30 to approve President Carter's request
for a 'stand-by' petrol rationing plan if things get really bad and of course
it will have to go to the House. Whatever the cause, there has been a sudden,
unexplained shortage of petrol and in the state that uses it more than any
other, California, the governor brought in a rationing system of his own
whereby you can't buy petrol unless your tank is less than half full and you
can get it only on odd or even dates, according to the last figure on your
licence plate. California, you have to remember, is 200 miles wide and 900
miles long (from roughly Edinburgh to Milan) and it has a very, very sparse
public transport system. So, last week there were queues at petrol stations,
two, three, literally five miles long. 

Now here, again, is a very complicated topic, far more complex than 99 citizens
in a hundred care to discover. It's resolved itself into a clean-cut and
passionate debate. One side says the energy shortage is an invention of the oil
companies. The opposing side – much smaller I may add – says that there is a
real and spreading shortage. 

Whether you are simple or sophisticated doesn't seem to matter in choosing up
sides. One thing is for sure. Most people shy away from Mr Carter's sad
conclusion at the end of the first year of his presidency, 'I had no idea that
government, governing was so complicated'.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP