Interest rates rise

Every newspaper has, or used to have, an anniversary man whose job was to keep
a close watch on the calendar of 50 years ago, 100 years ago, 200 years ago,
and so on. This used to require something of a scholar who could commute
between his pocket diary and an encyclopaedia, but by now the book market,
certainly the school book market is cluttered with cross-index atlases of
history with all sorts of fancy names in which it's possible, by looking first
to the left hand page and then to the right, to discover what German composer
was writing which of his minuets at the very moment that the Bostonians were
throwing the British tea shipments into the sea.

I once worked for a paper that went after really earthshaking anniversaries so
that I remember the time when the editor was showered with congratulations – by
his staff if by nobody else – for having been the first newspaper in England to
print a piece celebrating the 500th (or was it the 1000th?) anniversary of the
birth of Alfred the Great. 

The feature editors of American papers are pretty spry people, even sprier
since they began to give women equal standing on the editorial ladder and never
a week goes by when we don't have at least a half-page piece on the 100th
anniversary of the typewriter or the hamburger, the 50th anniversary of the
Charleston or the, say, 200th anniversary of Benjamin Franklin's invention of
the down-draught stove. I am a continuing admirer of Benjamin Franklin,
especially when I'm living through the summer and fall at the end of Long
Island. 

In the fall particularly, the weather is subject to sudden, violent changes and
when the wind shifts and blows in from the north-east, we notice what he was
the first to notice, that we're in for a three-day storm of wind and rain. We
retire indoors, batten down the hatches and stoke the stove, putting the heavy
logs on the bottom, the kindling on top of them and the crumpled or tied knots
of newspaper on top of (it all). You then light the newspaper, open the vents
and, on Franklin's principle, the fire then lights from the top down and pretty
soon the room is hotting up in fine style and you settle down to read for three
days and to remember to bless Franklin also for his invention of bifocals. 

Well, this past week, I doubt that any American paper has overlooked the 50th
anniversary of Black Tuesday 1929, the October day when the bottom fell out of
the stock market and dumped the American people, and shortly afterwards the
people of Europe, into what will always be known as the Great Depression. Ten
years ago, I seem to recall, we had fugitive pieces about the Wall Street Crash
and I suppose for every 10-year interval before that, but the magazine pieces
this time, the television specials, the general debating and pondering, was of
that economic earthquake. 

This preoccupation is not caused simply by the round figure of 50 years. The
American economy, for that matter the economies of most of the world have come
to seem, in the past year or two, enigmas which cannot be solved by the old
rules or the classic text books. And the reminder of the Great Crash and the
following worldwide depression comes at an anxious time when we don't know for
sure – nobody knows for sure – whether we are going into a recession or pulling
out of an invisible one. Few people, however, echo the tolling bell of
Cassandra. Mr Wynne Godley, the head of the department of Applied Economics at
Cambridge, he doesn't think we're in for a recession. He predicts, and soon, a
depression of staggering magnitude. 

In other words, these anniversary pieces have been less interested in recalling
the awful and colourful details of the 1929 crash and more concerned about
asking the question, can it happen again? There is no halfway, certain answer.
Ten, certainly 20, 30 years ago, the economists were of two schools. They were
conservative or Adam Smith free-market men or they were New Deal Keynesian
deficit-financing men. They argued incessantly among themselves but so long as
things prospered, the rest of us simply recalled somebody's definition of
economics as 'the dismal science' and we paid them no heed. 

Today, there are at least four or five fiercely competing schools of economics,
at least four of them have nurtured Nobel Prize winners. By the way, I made a
slip the other week. Arthur Lewis, the black man who won a Nobel Prize this
year, got it not for medicine, but for economics. And the outsider, perhaps the
insider too, is less and less certain that economics is a science at all. I
take scientific method to be the search for a generalisation that covers all
the known facts and this is true in any science. It's not enough for a man to
get a hunch and scurry around for facts to prove it. 

There is, for instance, a great and raging debate about the dogmatic assertion
of Dr Linus Pauling that vitamin – or if you must, vitamin – C will prevent or
cure the common cold. All his experiments support him but there have been
numerous other experiments in Britain, at Harvard, Chicago and other medical
schools, blind tests where the victim doesn't know whether he's getting Vitamin
C or a sugar pill, double blind tests where neither the doctor nor the patient
knows what's being given, and so far the evidence is, to put it mildly,
contradictory. The double blind tests to date show that Vitamin C seems to have
little or no effect. A wry doctor friend of mine, asked about the Pauling
experiments, predicts that, 'Linus Pauling will be the first human to die of
the common cold'. 

The present difference of opinion among the doctors of economics centres on the
action of the Federal Reserve System, the board, in raising the interest rate –
which is the privileged rate it charges sound banks – to an unprecedented 15
per cent. Neither smaller banks, nor you, my friends, are going to get a bank
loan for anything under 17.5 per cent at best. By the time the Federal
Reserve’s action has reverberated through society, we find that within ten
days, mortgage rates on new houses and the purchase of flats have almost
doubled and the cash you have to put down when you buy a house, or a flat, is
now generally 50 per cent. So one thing most people are fairly sure about is
that the bottom is about to drop out of the real estate market. I give this as
only one result with quick effects throughout the social scale, of the Federal
Reserve board's decision to raise the prime interest rate. 

They did it, of course, in the hope of putting a rein on spending, on making
people conserve. This means less demand for manufactured goods of all kinds and
the theoretical hope is that inflation will dwindle and droop. But, if there's
less demand for goods, there's going to be less production of goods, which
means – has always mean – lay-offs and more unemployment. When the federals, as
we call them, announced their stiff 15 per cent, we read of a chorus of
congratulation from the Swiss, the Germans and British economists. 'Thank God!'
said one famous official in Bonn, 'The Americans have at last had the guts to
call a halt on inflation.' 

Lord Robbins was a prominent member of the hallelujah chorus. While
congratulating the Americans, he feared only that next year, an election year,
would irresistibly tempt the running President Carter to go into reverse and,
and I quote, 'take the popular solution. Cheaper money and a more expansive
government and therefore a cheaper dollar.' 

But there are just as many, as influential, economists who think the Federal
Reserve is dead wrong. Lord Kaldor is one. He points out that high interest
rates were the prescription used in the depressed 1930s and what they did, he
says, was not to reduce the pace of inflation but to reduce investment and so
lead to more unemployment and more recession. Yet another dissenter is Joan
Robinson, the old Keynesian. She accuses the United States through the Federal
Reserve action of 'economic nationalism'. Putting up the discount rate, she
says, throws a tremendous burden on everyone because the United States is the
world's major banker. 

And, meanwhile, some economists deplore the fact that Germany and Japan sit
tight, enjoy their orgy of exports and strictly limit their imports and don't
allow their currencies to be used as reserves. 

The import/export battle which is now on among all the chief industrial
countries is the one symptom of our present discontent that worried the Wall
Street Journal in a long and thoughtful piece it published on the comparative
situations of 1929 and 1979. Incidentally, just about everybody is agreed that
one element, and a very strong element, of the 1929 crash that does not exist
today – the 1929 stock market was open to anybody, every citizen, high and low,
who had ten cents with which to buy a dollar's worth of stock. When the crash
came, there was nothing like the money needed, no money anywhere, to cover the
purchase of stocks on ridiculously low margins. Well, since then the Securities
and Exchange Commission has been invented and one of its strictest rules
prohibits the purchase of stocks on low percentage margins. 

Now back to the symptom that worries the Wall Street Journal. In the wake of
1929, the Journal wrote the other day, as countries felt the slip and tug of
the Depression, they rushed to save themselves with economic policies that had
a selfish goal, to export their problems somewhere else. Anywhere else. They
raised tariffs to keep out imports and started competitive currency
devaluations to increase foreign sales. The rich surplus countries stopped
lending to the poorer deficit countries. But the Depression couldn't be
exported. It was prolonged and deepened and touched off reprisals. 

Similarly, as long as economies boomed after the Second World War, countries
were glad to cooperate, but now growth has slowed and some of the causes of the
collapse of the international economy 50 years ago have parallels today. And
some of the people who shaped Europe's economic policy in the 1930s are worried
that the world is returning to 'beggar thy neighbour' nationalism, again trying
to export hard times. 

Well, in the next few months, in this country anyway, once the Carters and
Kennedys and Reagans and company get on the electioneering stump, we shall know
which of them, if any, dares to urge American shoe workers and car builders and
TV assemblers to be good chaps, lay down their jobs and encourage the
importation of shoes and cars and TV sets made in Italy and Germany and Korea.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP