Inflation fears rise

I believe there are people still alive and kicking – just – who remember the
proud phrase, 'the almighty dollar', though I imagine we'd have to go back to
our grandfathers to recall anyone who ever actually said, 'It's as safe, my
boy, as the Bank of England!' Yet, I suspect, millions, maybe most, Americans
and Britons still go along, though a little nervously, on the assumption that
the dollar and the pound are THE great currencies of the world.

Nobody that I know has yet to coin an idiom vivid enough to make the mark or
the Swiss franc or the yen pass into the language, not into our language
anyway, as the great yardstick or true measure of prosperity. It will be quite
a day when some European or Oriental orders us, as Prime Minister Ramsay
MacDonald ordered the countries of Europe 45 years ago to stop thinking of
ourselves as proud, free, floating planets and attach ourselves as satellites
to some other planet. He didn't say it quite so colourfully as that for, as
anyone who remembers that doughty and complicated Scot, can recall, he had a
gift – it was Winston Churchill's description – the gift of compressing the
largest amount of words into the smallest amount of thought. 

I remember the day very well because the report of Mr MacDonald's speech next
morning in the New York Times had my Harvard room-mate and me – he was another
Englishman and an economist to boot – falling about for the best part of the
day and rushing from room to room and friend to friend to exhibit possibly the
most gorgeously unfortunate misprint that the good, grey New York Times has
ever committed. 

It was the opening of the London economic conference in, I believe, January
1934. Prime Minister MacDonald opened the conference with a speech in which he
told the Europeans – the countries of Central Europe in particular – that the
Austro-Hungarian Empire was finished. Sounds comical now but I suppose millions
of Austrians and Hungarians couldn't believe it after only 15 years of being a
non-empire. Anyway, MacDonald said that they couldn't go on maintaining their
own currencies in steady competition with us. 'You must,' he said, 'in effect,
from now on, tie your currencies to London or Washington. The obligation,' he
said, 'to do this is on each of you.' 

Next morning, the New York Times had, of course, a big, front page story and
the banner headline, as I recall, was, 'London Economic Conference Opens.' The
sub heading was the startler. It printed, 'MacDonald puts onus on individual
nations' but there was just one initial letter of those six words which was
misprinted. Talking, as I am, to a family audience, I must leave you to work
out which one for yourselves. I put the onus on you. 

Well, I'd better begin by saying that while you run into businessmen and
economists every day who deliver themselves of passing sighs like, 'My God, the
poor dollar!' the fact is that we trust our habits more than our eyesight. Most
people, I'm convinced, can not yet take in, and don't want to, the possibility
that Japan, say, might shortly be the world's leading economic power. 'The
almighty yen' sounds like a rock group or the leader of some Southern
California pet religion. Most Americans, I'd guess, even businessmen, may worry
about the mark and the yen but they tend to say, riffling their newspaper first
thing in the morning, 'How are we doing in London?' 

I didn't pick Japan idly. Do you remember the name Herman Kahn? He was the deep
thinker who, a decade or more ago, impressed the Pentagon and alarmed the rest
of us by urging the government to think the unthinkable, namely the prospect of
a nuclear war. What was not so well noticed at the time was a book he published
in 1970 called, 'The Emerging Japanese Superstate'. In that book, he predicted
quite firmly that by 2000 AD Japan would be the dominant economic power of the
world. 

To all but his most fervent disciple, Mr Kahn seemed to be taking off on a
flight of Wellesian fantasy but now he's put out another book in Japanese – we
won't see it in English until the spring – which chides the Japanese for
muffing their great opportunity. They're making too much, he says, of exports,
with the result that the cost of living in Japan is out of control. He wants
them to invest billions in themselves, in their domestic industry and market
and dramatically increase their imports which would cure their chronic problem,
which is their huge trade surplus with the United States. 

The most reliable report says that the Japanese, while they once welcomed Mr
Kahn's thoughts as those of a great prophet, are not taking kindly to his new
prescriptions. Here in America there are a score of doctors with conflicting
prescriptions for the one disease that, according to all the public opinion
polls, is the overwhelming worry of Americans today – inflation. 

A year ago, inflation ran at just over seven per cent a year. Today it is at
seven. Why, then, the sudden alarm in the White House? Well, food prices have
almost doubled in two years and though the solution to these problems boggles
every mind in the Western world, the answer in this country is quite simple. A
week from next Tuesday, on 7 November, there is a national election – not
presidential, of course, but the first congressional election since Mr Carter
came to office. All of the House of Representatives and a third of the Senate
are up for election. Now once Mr Carter had achieved or appeared to achieve a
peace treaty between Israel and Egypt, he had to do something bold about
inflation. The Middle East may touch people's hearts and minds but it doesn't
touch their pay check, their mortgage payments, their school bill, their
grocery bill. 

Until a couple of weeks ago, before the Congress expired in an orgy of law,
making over a hundred new bills, Mr Carter was being advised by some of his
people in the White House to wait for the election to be over and then, like a
great field marshal announcing a new and bolder campaign, proclaim his battle
plan against the monster, inflation. 'Don't bring it up!' one or two cagey
advisors recommended, 'Let the sleeping dog lie.' But, in one scary week, it
brought itself up. The sleeping, if snoring, dog woke up and roared. 

First the dollar dropped to a record low against the yen, while gold was rising
to a record high. What most people understand better, or what's more important
think they do, was a disastrous tumble on the Stock Market. I think I ought to
mention here an American oddity. Every night on the half-hour news which the
three networks broadcast across the nation, there is, without fail, a graph or
other indicator, of the day's Dow Jones stock average. 

Now I've heard economists and financial experts and other Wall Street men say
that the Stock Market no longer reflects, if it ever did, the state of the
economy, that it reflects nothing more than a seesaw of Wall Street's
transitory confidence in itself. Whether this is so or not, to the layman, the
Dow Jones average is a barometer of the health of business. And if the layman
thinks it is, maybe it is, or becomes so. 

Anyway, last week the Dow Jones average fell 59 points which is a one-week
record worse than any single week, even the week before the deluge of October
29. The Department of Commerce, which is obliged to report the inflation rate,
among other matters, at the end of each quarter, reported that in the summer
inflation had gone up to an annual rate of seven per cent. At which point the
bank interest rates went up to ten per cent. And on all sides we hear that it
will go higher. And that alone, more than edging inflation or the whimsy of the
Stock Market, convinces businessmen that the economy is going to dip and
decline. One responsible corporation chairman, asked about the chance of a
recession, replied, 'A recession? In 1980? It's already baked in the cake.' 

Well, in the wake of all this related bad news, President Carter and his
advisers were tossing and turning and staring at the polls, which registered
inflation as the first public anxiety and the rest nowhere. So, with the
election ten days away, Mr Carter announced he was going to give a talk, a
fireside talk in the Roosevelt manner, which would be one of the most important
speeches he'd ever be likely to make during his presidency. So last Tuesday he
gave it. 

He wants – he hopes – labour will not ask for more than a seven per cent wage
increase each year. He wants – he hopes – firms will not increase prices by
more than six and a half per cent. It's a voluntary programme and already
neither business nor labour thinks the other will abide by it. And this mutual
suspicion, itself, I'm afraid, is enough to guarantee that it won't work. 

The very awkward fact which Mr Carter couldn't have been expected to applaud
was that Mr Nixon was the only president in history who's imposed wage and
price controls in peace time and inflation took a jolt and a tumble. But, at
that time, the economy was gagging at the bit and raring to go and he had to
release the controls. Nobody today believes that forcible controls would force
anything but a bitter tug-of-war between labour and business. 

One thing Mr Carter did mention and it is the spring of the inflation, which
has jumped from two per cent to seven in six years. To put it roughly and
bluntly, nobody in America paid in money at the time for the Vietnam War. It
was the first American war which saw no increase in taxes. The government
simply printed – what was it, 27 billions? – in paper money and we are now
paying over every counter for that debauching of the almighty dollar. 'And the
only way to restore it to any might at all', Mr Carter wistfully suggested, 'is
for the people to accept and practise a long bout of austerity. Voluntarily.' 

'Be good, sweet children,' he's saying, 'and let who will, be clever!' He's
asking us, I fear, to be like Scrooge and change our characters overnight.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP