New York's ethnic mix

I've often thought that if you wandered through the streets of New York with a
movie camera and filmed not the streets, but the tops or superstructures of
various picked buildings, you could fool an audience into thinking they were in
Russia, Greece, Romania, Poland, anywhere but the United States of America.

The buildings you'd pick would have to be mainly churches and, in the past
couple of weeks, it's been brought home to us again that America is not so much
a melting pot – since there are ingredients of the stew that more and more
refuse to meld or melt – but a goulash of many peoples, which we all know, but
also of many faiths. 

This thought has of course been powerfully reinforced by the inauguration of
the new Pope. I'm sure the event, if only for its colour and majesty, has been
widely covered in every country outside the communist countries, and perhaps in
some of them, every country that has a television system. But I doubt that even
Central and South America have spent so much television time as we've done on
the whole sequence of ritual and routine since Pope Paul died. 

Ah, it would be natural, for British people especially, to assume that the
United States is a Protestant country. That's because the legends and the myths
of the Pilgrim Fathers and the Puritans are so solidly established in
everyone's childhood instruction. The fact that many of these childhood
assumptions are dead wrong does not take away from their acceptance. As, for
instance – and this came up the other evening with a perfectly sophisticated
group – as, for instance, that the Puritans came to Massachusetts to establish
freedom of religion. They most certainly did not. 

They came as a protest against the corruption of the Church of England in
England. They came here to establish it in a pure form but they made no bones
about that being the only church to believe in. Dissenters were treated almost
as roughly as they are today in totalitarian countries and, by dissenters, I
don't mean anything as awful as an atheist, but people who wanted to practise
in other sects or denominations – Methodists. Quakers were banished from
Massachusetts because they were stigmatised as 'questioning' people. 

However, back to the tops of the buildings, the domes, onion bulbs, spires,
oriental-looking friezes and such. What you can see within ten blocks of my
apartment building is a Russian Orthodox Catholic church, a Greek Orthodox
church, an Episcopal church – a Zionist African Episcopal church, not to
mention a Meeting House and a synagogue. 

All but one of these are, of course, variations on the Christian religion but
there are enough Jews, Mohammedans, even Confucians, to have made it the custom
centuries ago for Americans to refer – always to refer – to a first name or
given name and not to a Christian name. I believe this custom came in early,
even when the United States was overwhelmingly Christian because one of the
first things the first Congress did was to proclaim that, in this new nation,
there should be no official, established religion. They'd seen enough of
religious persecution and the plight of emigrants fleeing from it. The very
first phrase in the first article of the Bill of Rights says, 'Congress shall
make no law respecting an establishment of religion.' So, visiting clergymen,
however pious, have to be warned not to end an address to a general, American
audience with an invocation to Our Saviour Jesus Christ. 

I remember an occasion in London, a few years ago. I was staying in a hotel
with my lawyer whose surname is Cohen. Late one night, the telephone rang and
the hotel operator said, 'Is that Mr Cohen?' It was. 'Just a moment, please!'
she said. Evidently, there was more than one Mr Cohen staying in the hotel. And
then she came back to him and he frowned. He looked puzzled and said, 'I don't
understand. I haven't got one.' He cupped the mouthpiece with his hand and
turned to me and said, 'What's the matter with this girl? She wants to know,
what's my Christian name?' 'Given name!' I translated. 'Oh oh,' he said,
'Pardon me, it's Irving.' 

So you might think that the networks would be very gingerly about giving undue
stress to any one religion when America has such a multitude of faiths, not to
mention pseudo and junk faiths. I don't think anyone had to pause for a second
thought when it came to televising and reporting the ceremonies attending the
choosing and enthronement of a new Pope. We forget, some of us Anglo-Saxons do
anyway, that there are in the United States 50 million Roman Catholics and at
least a dozen Eastern variants going alphabetically from the Albanian Orthodox
Archdiocese in America to the Ukrainian Orthodox or Ecumenical Patriarchate of
America. So about one American in four is a Catholic, mostly of the Roman
faith. 

There are very few cities in America that dare compose a city council without
including, at the very least, two Catholic politicians and, as you might guess
in some states – Rhode Island is a good case having by now a huge population of
Italian-Americans – it's just about compulsory to have one of the two United
States senatorsa Catholic. But more than anywhere, the government of New York
City has to be always the finest balancing act between the interests of what
used to be called the 'immigrants' and what are now called the 'ethnic
minorities'. We always talk about ethnic minorities though in New York City
which has more Jews than Tel Aviv, we would do better to talk about 'ethnic
majorities'. 

Long ago, more than a century certainly, the running of New York City was taken
out of the hands of the surviving English and Dutch majorities simply because
they'd turned into minorities. And the invading Irish, once they were settled
and 'in to' politics, named Tammany Hall, the clubhouse of the Democratic
party, as a joking slap at the declining influence of the old English families.
They had founded – and it's going to this day – a St George Society which was
once powerful in the city's affairs. 

When the Irish allied with the Jews and set up Democratic headquarters, they
looked around for a name and decided it must also be that of a patron saint.
They found him not in any religious calendar, but in a tribe of Delaware
Indians whose chieftain was called Tammany. So, the Order of St Tammany it
became, and remains. 

At one time, I was fairly close to a mayor of New York. His father was a very
distinguished United States senator and a famous Catholic layman. And one night
in September, the son, who was now the mayor of New York and was retiring , sat
around with his lieutenants and cronies composing a ticket of candidates for
all the city offices in the new election , including municipal judges who are,
as you know, not appointed but elected. It's never in this city a question of
sorting out the men and women best qualified for the jobs, what you have to do
is to put together the best team that most accurately represents all the ethnic
groups that make up the city's inhabitants – or better say voters. 

So, they thought of good men and checked at intervals to see that they had
three Jews, three Catholics, one Protestant, a black – nowadays it would have
to be two blacks at least and also two women, one black for sure – a Puerto
Rican, a Pole, among the Catholics, two Irishmen. The team was coming together
nicely and they ticked off the offices they had filled – city controller,
commissioner of public health, water commissioner, deputy mayor, and so on.
They were about to congratulate themselves on a cunningly well-balanced slate
and were leaning back and being served drinks when they were struck by a
thunderclap of an omission. 'My God!' said the retiring mayor, 'we haven't got
an Italian!' One of those absurd oversights that can only happen to experts,
like the famous surgeon who leaves a sponge inside your transverse colon. 

They also noticed – they'd been working in a state of extreme concentration –
they also noticed that the one office they had not filled was that of the mayor
himself. There was about an hour to go before the deadline for filing the slate
with the bureau of elections. I was privy to this crisis and it was a scene
worthy of O. Henry or Preston Sturges, who wrote and directed the only
first-class satirical movie I can remember about American politics. Somebody
suddenly cried, 'What's the name of that guy who used to be the night clerk in
a hotel in Long Island City? Salvatori, something, Andreotti, Cantona? Oh, help
us Lord!' They rattled their brains and somebody came up with it. What was he
doing now? Nobody had the faintest idea. They put in phone calls, they riffled
through the telephone directories of Manhattan, Queens, the Bronx, Richmond,
Staten Island. 

Well, they caught up with him on Staten Island at a family birthday party in an
Italian restaurant. They brought him to the phone. They asked him, 'Do you want
to be mayor?' He said, 'There's an awful noise in here. They bawled back,
'Look! We've got half an hour to filing time. Do you want to be mayor?' He
said, 'Yes!' He was put on the ticket. The Democrats were riding high that
year. They won. And the man on the end of the Staten Island phone became mayor.
Honest to God! 

Some of you may be itching to know the name of the movie I called the only
first-rate movie on American politics. It was called 'The Great McGinty' and it
was about an unshaven tramp, a bum, hired by Tammany to go out with a little
list of names copied down from gravestones. It was an election of course and he
had six names. 'Go to these polling booths,' they said, 'and vote in these
names!' 

He was so dumb, he went round four times and so he voted 24 times. When he came
into the party clubhouse on election night, it was a melancholy scene. The
machine had lost to a reform candidate for mayor and the machine boss, Akim
Tamiroff, was gazing into the dregs of his drink. Nothing to do now but start
at once to groom for the next election their own reform mayor. 

At this moment, the bum, drenched with rain, shaggy with a three days' growth
of beard, timorously appeared – he was played by Brian Donlevy – the miracle of
his dumb loyalty was revealed to the boss. Tamiroff called him over. 'Come over
here, bum!' he commanded. 'Me?' said the startled Donlevy. 'Listen, bum!' said
Tamiroff, 'How'd you like to be reform mayor?' 'Me?' burbled Donlevy. 

The boss brought his fist down on the bar. 'Why?' he moaned, 'Why do I have to
say everything twice?'.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP