Carter reshuffles his team

So now, after all the upheaval in the government and the scolding of Congress
as a body unresponsive to the people and the president’s firm declaration that
the fight for his energy bill, postponed for almost two years, is the moral
equivalent of war, he now tells the Congress he'll be quite happy if his energy
bill is put off until the fall.

At a breakfast with some senators and congressmen of his own party, having
handed them this reprieve, he was quick to warn them that his entire energy
programme must be financed by what he calls 'a windfall profits tax' on the oil
companies and that he won't stand for any monkeying around with it. 

Well, we'll go into that 'windfall profits tax', but not now. Not before I've
checked with a posse of tax experts and confirmed or disapproved or disproved
my suspicion that the windfall profits tax is not a profits tax at all but an
excise tax. And, after all the rumblings and lava flow over the past two weeks,
it's the rueful consensus of the Congress, Mr Carter's own party men as much as
anybody, that his main purpose in scaring everybody about reorganising the
government was to organise the team which will manage his next campaign for the
1980 election. 

His personal motives in doing this are still very obscure but I would be remiss
if I didn’t report that there's a sinking feeling in Washington and around the
country about the qualifications that the president has laid down, the
qualifications for being a member of his new team. The main qualification, he
says, is loyalty to him. Well, this reminds me, with no pleasure at all, of a
scene in Washington exactly, as it happens, six years ago when a Senate
committee, the Senate Armed Services Committee, was looking into the amazing
charge that between 1969 and 1970, President Nixon, while solemnly announcing
that Cambodia was the territory of a neutral nation and so to be honoured, was
actually secretly ordering over 3600 bombing missions over the sacred soil. 

An air force major who had, under orders from on top, the Pentagon, falsified
the orders to make them look like bombing raids into North Vietnam, he was
called before the committee. And when he told his awful story, a hawkish
senator doubted the major's loyalty to the United States and the major came
back with the snapping retort, 'Sir, I didn't take an oath to support the
military, I took an oath to support the constitution.' And so, of course, did
President Nixon when he was sworn in as president. But for several disreputable
years, he surrounded himself with a small, compact team of cronies whose only
vow was personal loyalty to Mr Nixon, whatever he did or thought. 

Well now, Mr Hamilton Jordan, the Georgia boy who managed Mr Carter's first and
unsuccessful run for the governorship of Georgia, is elevated to a post that
the constitution does not mention, that of chief of staff to the president.
There is, of course, always one such man deeply embedded in the system, if not
in the constitution, a man un-elected, usually unknown to the people, an old
and dependable crony to whom the president turns in elation and despair, and in
all the moods in between, for sympathy and advice. 

I mentioned last time that the Cabinet is allowed for in the constitution, but
that it's a great pity the parliamentary word 'Cabinet' was ever picked up by
the new republic. Since, whereas the Cabinet is vital to a parliamentary
government, it is quite unimportant in the American system. It's a collection
of friends who come zooming out of obscurity when it's first chosen. One or two
strong men usually, if they're made secretary of state, can take on the
functioning importance of a British foreign minister but that's due to their
character or their president's ignorance of foreign affairs and not to any
powers inherent in the office. I think I'll try and sharpen the difference
between the Cabinet's power in both countries by telling you two contrasting
anecdotes. 

A century, or maybe much more ago, I believe it was either Lord Melbourne or
Lord Salisbury was Prime Minister. There was a Cabinet meeting about some
burning issue and the debate in the Cabinet Room grew hot and bothered. There
was so much wrangling, so much contention that finally the prime minister
walked to the door and shut it. 'Gentlemen,' he said, 'it doesn't matter what
we agree on so long as we all agree.' 

Well, the other story is about Abraham Lincoln holding a Cabinet meeting when
there was an early move during the Civil War to bring in conscription. You can
imagine what a... what a tenuous hold on his office a prime minister would have
if the whole Cabinet was against him and yet he tried to have his way in the
Commons. He and his government would fall. Well, Lincoln, after a lot of
argument around the table, said, 'We'll take a vote'. He nodded in turn to the
men sitting there, 'Mr Stanton, Mr Seward, Mr Cameron' and the voices came back
like a tolling bell. Aye! Aye! Aye! Aye! He went right round the assembled
cabinet and they were of one mind. And then Lincoln said, 'The nays, gentlemen,
have it'. And that was that. 

In the United States, the effective Cabinet is what came to be called, in
Theodore Roosevelt's time, the 'kitchen' Cabinet and this was nothing in any
constitutional document, it was simply a happy, slang phrase that somebody'd
coined. And it was applied to Teddy Roosevelt's cronies, reliable buddies that
he'd known when he was police commissioner of New York and then governor and so
on. They were the ones who were close to him every day. They were even required
to meet him on the White House lawn before a working breakfast and toss a
medicine ball at each other. Teddy Roosevelt was a great believer in what he
called 'the strenuous life'. 

There's no rule or law which gives these pals power or takes it away, just as
there is no rule or law which says the president must consult his Cabinet once
a week or once a month, or ever. In fact, one of the absolutely dependable
grouches in the memoirs of ex-Cabinet officers – officers they're called, not
ministers – is the complaint that they got to see the president only at his
pleasure and that in order to see him, if he wasn’t calling them, they had to
arrange a meeting with another, anonymous grandee, the president’s so-called
'appointments secretary'. 

During the reign of John Kennedy, nobody could get to see the president except
his wife. Not a Supreme Court justice, not a general or a governor, a senator,
anybody, until they called an Irishman from Boston, an old buddy of Kennedy's,
Ken O'Donnell, whose name Americans never knew till the day Kennedy died or,
indeed, until the day the man himself died. 

And, similarly, when Woodrow Wilson thought there might be a chance of stopping
the First World War after the first appalling three months of casualties, he
didn't send his secretary of state to see the Kaiser and Lord Grey and Monsieur
Clemenceau, he sent an old Texan, his closest friend who bore the courtesy
title of 'colonel', Colonel House. 

In the early years of the new deal, the man Franklin Roosevelt called to his
dinner table or a late-night confidential talk was an old newspaper man that
he'd known when he was governor in Albany. And in the war years, the one man
who had access to Roosevelt at all times of the night and day, was no senator,
no Cabinet officer, but an unelected old social worker friend from Iowa. And
when things went askew in the transatlantic calls between Roosevelt and
Churchill, it was not the American ambassador in London who went to Churchill,
Harry Hopkins was the man sent across the Atlantic. 

And when the founding conference of the United Nation seemed on the point of
foundering in San Francisco because the Russians were against allowing freely
elected Poles to represent their country and the wartime alliance of Russia,
American and Britain appeared to be falling apart. I well remember how the
conference staggered and stalled for a day or two, until the great news came in
that Harry Hopkins, sent to Moscow by Truman, had saved the day after a long
personal meeting with Stalin. 

Closer to our time, I remember one weary day in the presidency of John Kennedy
and a sentence he confided to his mafia, or kitchen Cabinet at nightfall, which
tells volumes about the way presidential government is run. On that morning,
President Kennedy received a very unusual letter, a letter from his own vice
president. This is about as rare as a husband's receiving a letter from his
wife in the next room. The letter was from Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson
who, like every other man tapped by the incoming president to be vice
president, thought he was going to be the second man in the country. 

He's never any such thing. The constitution puts him first in line of
succession to the president, but that is all. His only other power, and it's
more of a chore than a power, is to preside over the debates in the United
States Senate. Otherwise, no matter what powers the president has promised him,
he will get to attend the best funerals in Europe, Africa and Asia. How much do
you hear these days of the man Mr Carter said would be his 'strong right arm'?
Who is the vice president of the United States? Fritz Mondale. 

Well, this, er... this Johnson letter complained to the point of whimpering
that he rarely got to see the president and wasn't consulted and he didn't know
what was happening. Kennedy read the letter and sighed and said to his old
Boston buddies, who saw him every day and knew everything, 'I'm sorry for old
Lyndon but the thing about this job is the only people you can see are the
people who see the overnight cables'.Nods of sad agreement from the really
powerful henchmen, Larry O’Brien and Dave Powers and Ken O'Donnell. 

Well, Mr Nixon had his Haldeman and now Mr Carter has his Hamilton Jordan
pronounced 'Jerdan'. Thirty-four years old, ten years of intimacy with Jimmy
Carter, no harm in his being senior crony but never did Colonel House or Harry
Hopkins or Larry O’Brien do what Jordan did the first day – distribute a stack
of questionnaires to the Cabinet and all the senior White House staff and
demand, within 72 hours, completed forms to be returned. 

They were to mark their subordinates as to competence, punctuality, when did
they get to work, personality traits and loyalty to the president. It's almost
as if Watergate had never happened. And Jimmy Carter, alone, had discovered the
secret of an effective administration. Not devotion to the constitution, but
personal loyalty to the president and no backchat. 

Well, in this rather bewildering situation, there are congressmen, even
Democrats, who would like to hear that some new appointee had sent back one of
those loyalty forms unanswered, with a note saying, 'Sir, I didn't take an oath
to support Jimmy Carter or Hamilton Jordan. I took an oath to support the
constitution'.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP