Stagnant economy warning

I know a man, a New Yorker who now lives in Florida. A novelist who is as much
of a professional as any farmer or surgeon. I mean that his work is organised
according to a strict and unchanging daily timetable.

He's the temperamental opposite of those writers who, after a swift bout of
writing take a walk or scuff their heels on the lawn or brood and await the
next spasm of what they call 'inspiration.' This man, who agrees
enthusiastically with the remark of the late James Agate that a professional is
a man who does his best work when he doesn't feel like it and that no
householder would tolerate for a minute a plumber, who being summoned to an
emergency a leaky tap and an overflowing bath tub, look the situation over and
said, 'Sorry, I just don't feel inspired at the moment'. 

This man gets up at 5.30 every morning. He stands at a sloping desk in his
apartment, buzzing his chin with an electric razor and reading, at the same
time, one chapter of Dickens. When he gets through all the novels, he starts
again. After a cup of coffee, he sits down at his typewriter at precisely 6.15
and he begins to write. He finishes his first stint at about 11 a.m. and then
swims 20 lengths of the apartment house pool. After that, a light lunch and a
nap and by about two o'clock he's back at the morning’s manuscript. He goes
over it, he rewrites, he retypes till 6 p.m. when he puts it away neatly in a
folder and leaves his desk as clean as a demonstration model. He watches the
evening news, he has his dinner and then he reads. Sometimes he's asleep by ten
o'clock, if so he wakes at 2 a.m. If he goes to sleep at 1 a.m., he sleeps
through till five. He puts out one novel a year and has been on this routine
since the early 1930s. 

He's plainly a healthy man but the irregular, or rather the odd, thing that you
notice is the remarkably short night he gets by on. Four hours sleep is his
limit. He'd make an interesting case history, I think for the University of
Minnesota biorhythm department which has a lab devoted entirely to the study of
humans' sleeping habits. They've been at it for several years now and have made
some remarkable discoveries, one of which is that if you put somebody with
perfectly regular habits in an underground apartment where there's no daylight
and you give them everything they need by way of food, drink, icebox, stereo
deck, books, so on – no television, no radio, no clock or watch – they will
gradually work out an entirely personal rhythm and one that becomes less and
less attuned to the 24-hour day. So that, for instance, and even though they
may use all sorts of mental devices to mark the passing of day and night, they
can be depended on to go wrong about how long they've been down there. 

Now you'd think, I'd think, that being cooped up that way, sleeping and eating
when you felt like it, the days would lie heavy on your mind and that, when you
were let out, you'd greatly exaggerate the time you'd been cut off from light
and dark and the 24-hour clock. On the contrary, without fail, they always
think they've been down there for a shorter time than they have. They
calculate, say, that they've been isolated for five days and nights, when, in
fact, they've been there for eight days and nights. 

Not the least of the University of Minnesota's useful contributions to human
knowledge is the debunking of age-old superstitions, the most tenacious of
which includes such hoary clichés as 'that we all need eight hours sleep a
night' and 'early to bed, early to rise, makes a man healthy', never mind
'wealthy' or 'wise'. They've also done some work, complementing the full-time
research of the Goddard School of Aeronautical Medicine in Maryland on what
happens to the human brain in space flight, in jet flight, and especially the
tricky cycle of human behaviour which goes under the beautiful name of the
circadian rhythms. What happens to your body, your brain when you fly from San
Francisco to London, say, and find yourself eight hours behind the clock? My
own modest contribution to this research may be summed up in a theme song I've
suggested for all California London jet travellers. 'I left my heart in San
Francisco and my bowels in New York'. 

Obviously these thoughts have come up because I've been boning up a little on
the sleep research bit, but only because I was looking to see if any
university, or neurological centre, has done work on what happens to the human
brain when it's working in the dog days, in high heat and humidity. Of course,
I'm sure the actual changes in pulse rate, respiration, brainwaves and so on
are well known but whereas the Goddard people have come to the conclusion that
no transatlantic flier should make an important decision within 24 hours of his
arrival at either end, something goes wonky with the judgement – paging Dr
Kissinger. Nobody, so far as I know, has suggested that in our fairly hideous
summer, mid-summer, no government official should put out a statement of policy
before checking with several departments and the Congress, not to mention his
doctor. 

This proposal is not wholly facetious. I have noticed for years that, in the
dog days, the news, especially news of policy, of what American policy is,
lurches alarmingly between opposites. It may be because Congress is taking a
month's holiday and so the White House, for example, can make big, dramatic
statements without stirring an instant cry of protest on Capitol Hill. But I
suspect that midsummer madness tends to induce midsummer optimism or confusion.
While we're waiting for Congress to get back to Washington and work on, say, an
energy bill, all sorts of other interested parties have time to sit down and
put out ingenuous or cheerful suggestions in the manner of pep talks. Let me
illustrate! 

The other morning there was a full-page ad in The New York Times and since it
was placed there by a national oil company, I'm sure the ad appeared also in
many more metropolitan dailies. It is topped by a drawing of a happy-looking
motorist with his happy dog leaning out of the rear window. This is to show
that he's got his air-conditioning off. The slogan says, 'The less you use your
car air-conditioner, the more you save!' Which is a glimpse of the obvious
people don't care to take in the broiling days. With your air-conditioner on,
you use, at the very least, ten per cent more petrol. It then offers, on behalf
of your friendly oil company, the following recommendations: don't carry excess
weight, keep your tyres properly inflated, avoid jack-rabbit starts and sudden
stops, combine short trips with other riders, form carpools, keep your engine
tuned. 

All this, of course, is splendid advice and, if followed by America's one
hundred million motorists – half the population – it would drastically reduce
our dependence on imported oil. In fact, the government put out a report, only
a couple of weeks ago, saying that after the last Arab price hike and in the
wake of all those queues at petrol stations, the traffic on main highways
across the country dropped by 15 per cent. 

It was rough on country motels and tourist agents in the mountains and the
lakes and the national parks and so on, but the whole country saved, in one
month, more petrol than the president had said was necessary to offset the
restrictions on imported oil. Alas, the queues vanished because the demand was
down and the supply was up, so now we've decided the crisis is all over and
traffic is back to within one per cent of what it was at the peak when the
alarm rang out. There's trouble ahead. 

So this oil company was being very civic-minded when it published its list of
dos and don'ts. It was creditably obeying our beloved president who urges us to
save oil not only for cars but for things like, er... kerosene, diesel oil for
heating, come the Arctic winter. So what is our president, himself, doing about
it just now? 

Well, the same day as the ad, a bulletin came out of Washington announcing that
the government, with the president's approval, has just sold $47 million worth
of kerosene and diesel oil to Iran, a government which makes a policy of hating
the United States and which has had appalling press here for the 400-odd
executions of the Ayatollah Khomeini. The oil company and the president, are
evidently working on different lobes of the brain. Maybe it's the heat, maybe
the stupidity. 

Another weird example of informing the people by announcing opposite findings:
on his holiday, or campaign trip, down the Mississippi, the president made
headlines one day by saying that all the evidence leads him to feel optimistic
about the nation's economy. By the end of the year, he said, we will see the
inflation rate turning around and start going down again. Whose evidence has he
been studying? How about that of the government of the United States
congressional branch? 

His optimism followed the publication of a report by a body of Congress which
has extraordinary influence because it is not the work of a partisan body.
Congress has something called the Joint Economic Committee, it's a committee of
both Houses of Congress and is recruited from both parties, from senators and
congressmen who are also members of the standing committees that touch on the
economy, such as the committees on commerce, on banking and currency, on
finance, on ways and means. Twice a year, the Joint Economic Committee analyses
the economy. It is well aware that its findings could themselves powerfully
influence the economy one way or the other so, usually, its reports are pretty
measured, pretty cautious. 

Well, the new one isn't. It says, flatly, that what was once the pride of
Americans, their man-hour productivity has declined so badly that the 1980s
will be dismal indeed unless the government acts now to raise productivity and,
quite apart from the dent in the economy that might be made by the oil price
problem, productivity in private business has registered the largest quarterly
decline, 5.7 per cent, since statistics were first kept in these matters 30
years ago. This, the committee says, points to a stagnating economy and a
drastic drop in living standards. Ten years from now, it sees petrol at $7 (£3)
a gallon, a loaf of bread at £1, the cost of the average house at £70,000
($151,000) and, even to stand still, the middle average household income would
have to go from the present $15,000 to $36,000. 

Time for the Congress and for Mr Carter to come home to Washington. They should
meet each other some time.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP