Lee Marvin property suit

It must be a very long time since so many Americans, women especially, have
followed a court case with such palpitation of the heart and purse as they have
in waiting for the outcome of the case of Michelle Triola Marvin versus Lee
Marvin.

So much gossip, so much wild legal speculation, so many high hopes and low
fears have been roused by this case that I think I ought to start to say as
simply and accurately as possible what it was all about, what was the suit that
Miss Marvin brought. 

Now you see at the beginning we have a little trouble. 'Miss' Marvin would
suggest a legal relationship with Mr Marvin. I won't call her 'Ms' Marvin
because I object to the Ms usage on three grounds. First it sounds like the
buzz of an insect, secondly if anything it is the abbreviation for 'manuscript'
and thirdly, if a woman (married or single) achieves any professional
independence of her own she has the right to the honourable title of Miss which
has nothing to do with marriage or the lack of it. 

I think I shall call Michelle Triola Marvin simply Michelle as one of the two
contending parties in the case. The other, of course, is no one but the actor,
Lee Marvin, known to us all before this case as a gritty upholder of the law,
sometimes in, for instance, 'Bad Day at Black Rock' as a very mean man biding
his time, but never as an injured party. Well, as Sergeant Busfuz said, 'These
are the facts and circumstances of the case detailed by me.' 

Michelle Triola, who is now 45, was a youngster when she moved from Chicago to
Los Angeles shortly after the end of the Second World War. Once out of high
school, she started singing in nightclubs, became a featured dancer at shows in
Las Vegas, had a brief marriage with an actor, went to Europe, sang in
nightclubs for pretty good fees and went back to Hollywood in 1964 and there
and then she met Mr Marvin and they lived together from December of that year
until June of 1970. 

Then he left her and married an old high school sweetheart. For a little time
she went on singing and while she was with Mr Marvin cut a record but she had
no time to promote it, because by now, she says, she had all but abandoned her
career and given her life and time to Mr Marvin wherever he was making a
picture or wherever he wasn't. 

A few months before they parted in the spring of 1970, she legally changed her
name by adding Marvin to Michelle Triola. They were never married but she swore
in the trial that at a very early stage in their living together he'd said to
her, 'What I have is yours and what you have is mine.' I isolate that simple
sentence from the huge transcript of an 11-week trial because it reduces her
case to its legal nub in California more than anywhere. 

California is one of the south-western states that inherited much of its law
from the Spanish and one element of Spanish California law, still extant and
binding, is what is known as the community property law. Now this law is not
much known about abroad but it's quickly and painfully learned by, say, an
English or French movie actor, or a foreigner of any trade who marries in
California, or marries somewhere else and become a permanent resident of
California – of course it applies to people born or ever resident in
California. 

No bachelor whoever fantasises about conjugal happiness with some nubile
Hollywood actress should ever envy her husband. If they get a divorce, he
delivers over to this wife exactly half of all his property, house,
furnishings, income, the lot. If he marries a new houri and divorces her, he
then has to give her exactly half of what he has left. There are much-married
actors who are generally thought of as carefree millionaires who today are
living on one-eighth or one-sixteenth of what they have owned and earned. 

In other words, the California community property law is implicit in the
marriage contract. When Mr Marvin said, if he did, 'What I have is yours and
what you have is mine', though it might sound very gallant, even poetic
elsewhere, in California it's simply the repetition of a literal fact that
applies to every married person. Half the man's property in the moment of
marriage belongs to his wife. And half her property belongs to him. But, you'll
say, they were not married. That's right, but it was Michelle's contention that
she had been for six years a wife in all but name. She hoped. Her whole suit
was a dogmatic declaration of her belief that they had a contract equally as
binding as a marriage contract. And since it happened in California, she sued
him for exactly one half of the $3.6 million he'd earned while they were living
together. She deserved, she said, a property settlement comparable to that any
California wife would get the moment the marriage was dissolved. 

Well, the question before the judge was whether the law said she deserved it.
Put very simply, she was asserting a new view of contract which I don't imagine
would have been tolerated 10, 20 years ago. But since today living together
outside wedlock has shed the stigma it's had for centuries, there must be
hundreds of thousands of American couples who followed this case with the
concentration of ferrets, especially the disillusioned couples – the women
panting in hope and the men in fear. There are, in fact, over a thousand
similar suits pending in California alone. 

When the trial started, its possible outcome was generally debated more than
the rights or wrongs of the case. I'm thinking now of lawyers, not of the rest
of us who thought the suit either vindictive or quixotic or a brave blow for
women's rights, apart from the millions of newspaper readers who merely lapped
up the juices of their imaginations. 

What many lawyers, and the advocates of women's rights, debated was whether
Michelle's contention about having been the party to a solemn contract would
come to stand up in the law at a time when old laws about the marriage state
are being challenged and new laws are being proposed. All across the country
there are wives who contend that a housewife's work, which runs to 10 or 12
hours a day if she has small children, ought to be legally recompensed at a
going rate – so much an hour, so much a week, so much a year – and these
contentions are before the courts and they're being maintained by women who are
not intimidated by the stamina of ancient laws. 

A lot of evangelists in the cause of equal rights for men and women, are, I
must say, stymied when they come to look at the California community property
law. What could be more equal than a law which makes the marriage certificate
itself say 'What I have is yours and what you have is mine'. I'm sure that if
Michelle had got what she wanted there would have been a landslide move in
other states to adopt the California law. As it is, California was a key state
in which to test Michelle's contention and she lost – that's to say, lost the
main point. I hasten to report that she says she won and so does Mr Marvin.
What did they win or lose? 

Well, the judge hewed to the law of contract. 'To accede,' he said, 'to such a
contention would mean that the court recognised each unmarried person living
together to be automatically entitled to half of the property bought with the
earnings of the other non-marital partner. It would be tantamount,' he said,
'to recognising common law marriage which the state of California abolished in
1895.' And as for Mr Marvin's heroic declaration, assuming he made it, that
'What I have is yours and what you have is mine', the judge, who had more than
a touch of the wryness common to Western judges, said that, 'under the
circumstances of swearing fidelity to an alliance not bound by a contract, it
could be put down to the sort of,' he said, 'hyperbole typical of people who
live and work in the field of entertainment.' 

So, he threw out Michelle's suit for half of the $3.6 million Mr Marvin earned
during the years of their unmarried bliss, but he threw her a bone. And it's
one dignified by a legal doctrine that goes back in English law at least to the
fifteenth century – the law of equity. He thought she ought to have some balm
to soften the wound and he awarded her $104,000 which is $1,696,000 less than
she asked; $104,000, representing a thousand dollars a week (£500) for two
years to help her retrain herself for a career so that, as he put it, 'she may
return from her status of a companion of a motion picture star to a separate
calling, an independent but perhaps a more prosaic existence.' 

The judge called this award justified by the legal principle of what is known
as 'equitable remedy' and I'd better say at once that while there will be
rejoicing among many similar disillusioned women, there will be loud and
contemptuous protests from many lawyers who maintain that the law of equity had
nothing to do with the case. And among those who think it did, I hope there are
many honest ones who will cool their clients' ardour for litigation by pointing
out that in an 11-week trial which was nine years in the making Michelle's
legal fees are likely to be considerably more than the soothing balm that the
judge applied. 

Now the law of equity is so ancient, so enormously complicated, so barnacled
with sore points that no layman should touch it, but I am intrigued by two
early definitions of it. In 1525, during the reign of Henry VIII, it was laid
down that 'a man shall have remedy in Chancery for covenant made without
specialty, if the party have sufficient witness to prove the covenant and yet
he is without remedy as the common law'. Maybe Michelle, in the nine years of
her cogitating had dug deeper and gone back to the reign of Edward IV where, no
later than 1480, there is a seeming defence of her contention. Five hundred
years ago, Chancellor Stillington may have had Michelle in mind for he said,
'He that is damaged by the non-performance of a promise shall have his remedy
here.' 

Well, the judge seemed to say, 'Maybe. It was a promise all right but not a
promise given on paper in a marriage contract.' The little bone he tossed her,
even though he called it an 'equitable remedy' should, I think, give pause to
the millions of the emancipated, swinging couples who swear to love eternal and
disdain to anything so square and bourgeois as a piece of paper.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP