Dollar slumps in Europe

I was about to begin by saying that in my campaign against the jargon that's
beginning to be rampant in the Congress, the Pentagon, the colleges, all
government offices and the newspapers – so that everybody now says he's going
to 'conceptualise an innovative programme' when he means he hopes to do
something new – in this little campaign of mine, I was going to say I feel like
David facing Goliath except I'm David without a single stone, let alone the
five that he carried.

Well, such is the infection of this gobbledegook, that I almost began by
saying, 'Whenever there's a major airplane disaster' – 'major' has displaced
the words 'main, serious, important' and even 'big.' 

Let's start again. What I mean is, whenever a big airplane crashes it
inevitably makes the big headline and the first thing that dinner guests
mentioned the other evening was the crash of that DC-10 at Los Angeles on
Tuesday. What appalling luck it was for the pilot that he was a veteran about
to retire that very day and ready to take off for his last flight. The
consolation, if ever there can be a consolation for an air crash, was that with
a less skilful pilot, the plane would have plunged into a plant that stored
aviation petrol, not to mention a parking lot at the end of the runway. 

It was a great relief to hear from everybody, the airline officials, the first
inspectors on the scene, most of all the passengers who still had their wits
about them, to hear tributes of the courage of Captain Hershey. He can retire
if not happily, at least honourably. It must have been a blessed moment for his
family and friends to see the sub-heading to the story which read, 'Pilot on
final trip is credited with saving many lives'. 

However, I brought this up not because it was the first story on the television
news on Tuesday night, but because it wasn't. The first story – which always
carries more emphasis than the big front-page newspaper story, since on
television your mind can't wander to other things – the first story was the
brutal battering of the dollar on the European currency markets. Currency
trading is to most of us one of those mighty mysteries like dating the arrival
of man on earth by the slivers of iron or zinc or bicarbonate of soda, or
whatever, that some moocher finds in a pit in Devon or East Africa. 

And on Wednesday morning, a great friend of mine who's been in investment
banking all his life said, 'I don't imagine that 98 Americans in a hundred have
any idea how the currency market works. I'll go farther,' he said, 'I don't
believe 90 per cent of the boys on Wall Street understand it.' 

Well, I must say that I am certainly among the 98 per cent, but I also must say
that the National Broadcasting Company – to whom, I hasten to say, I owe
nothing whatsoever, so I can identify them – NBC did a service the other night
by ending its nightly half-hour news programme with a little six-minute
documentary showing half-a-dozen Englishmen in London coming to work in the
morning, on the telephones all day talking to clients all over the continent
and swapping dollars for marks and dollars for francs and airily tossing off
figures like 1.5 which turned out to mean 1.5 millions. When five o'clock
struck, they yawned, stubbed out a cigarette, put on their jackets and
assembled at the local pub and was seen as just another bunch of affable office
workers who'd done a day's work. A pretty hot one, though, as one of them
confessed. 

In view of the universal ignorance of how or why the pound or the dollar is
strong one day and weak the next, what most of us want to know is, and I
suppose it's natural that several million Americans watching the other night
must have had an immediate reflex and said to themselves, 'Bang goes our summer
holiday in Britain – or France, or Germany, or wherever' because through the
jungle of jargon that covers most financial and economic stories, one reporter
had the brutal sense to say, and he was talking about the disastrous collapse
of the dollar against the mark, 'What this means is that an American going out
today in Bonn or Berlin with 50 cents in his pocket to buy his usual cup of
coffee would find when he got to the café that it was going to cost him 80
cents. Well, he'd certainly need a shot of caffeine to recover from the shock.'
Of course, as we always read, things settle down later in the day. 

What do you suppose was the response in Washington? Well, you have to say which
part of Washington, which branch of the government? The newspaper critics and
the Republicans in opposition were saying, as many more Americans than
Republicans have been saying these past few weeks about the coal strike, why
didn't Carter do something? This is a cry that's grown louder and louder from a
baffled populace in the past year, so much so that the latest reliable poll
shows only 30-odd per cent of the American people thinking that Mr Carter is
doing a good job as president. 

However, that is if not another question, a larger one which no doubt we'll be
forced to face a little later on. At the moment, the interesting thing is the
variety of reactions in Washington according to which government agency you
work for, according to whose bread you're buttering or failing to butter. Let
me give you only a couple of examples and you can probably go on to guess at
others. 

The Department of Commerce, especially its overseas division, could be cheered,
even considerably bucked, by the news of the sagging dollar, or as they put it,
'the dollar-to-mark relationship could signify some export advantages for the
United States in competitive markets.' Well, that's plain enough. Let's
exaggerate wildly for the sake of simplicity. If it takes five marks to buy one
dollar, then a German has to pay out five marks to buy one dollar's worth of
goods, but if the dollar slumps so badly that the dollar is worth only one
mark, then a German importer can get from America five times the amount of
goods he used to get for the same price. He would be tempted, shall we say, to
buy American rather than Italian, French or whatever. 

Of course, by the same rule, Americans buying German goods are going to have to
pay five times what they used to. This would delight the American industries
hard hit by foreign competition and I don't doubt there could well have been
rejoicing in such a town as, say, Brockton, Massachusetts which one time called
itself 'the shoe capital of the United States'. For many years it has been a
severely depressed town, beaten down and put out of business by the arrival in
this country of excellent shoes – the Italians were the first mass invaders –
made by much cheaper labour. 

Well, we could go on and on to the end illustrating the contradictory emotions
of various Americans and different trades to the simple headline, 'Dollar
Battered on European Markets', but the first question the news reporters asked
is why the sudden lack of confidence in the dollar? And that question is
naturally put as a political challenge to the administration, more than to
anybody else, to the State Department which is charged with administering
foreign policy. 

The administration was quick to come up with an explanation. It was all the
fault of the stubborn Congress in refusing to pass the president’s energy bill.
You remember that – how long ago was it, two, three months ago? 

President Carter was going to go on a world tour but, at the last minute, he
postponed it because he said it was essential to pass an energy bill that would
save all forms of energy, penalise gasoline guzzlers, encourage the making of
small cars and so on. In fact, he said, we were now importing more oil than
we'd done before the Arabs put on the squeeze and this, he warned, was a sign
of our descent into a position of disastrous dependence on foreign oil. So
another feature of his energy bill was much encouragement to invest large sums
of money in discovering other sources of energy. At the time, and until we've
broken the 30-odd year deadlock in finding cheap, nuclear energy, he said the
main switch must be from oil to coal. That cheered up everybody except the
conservationists who hate to see a beautiful landscape in such western states
as Montana ploughed under or scarred or stripped for coal. 

But it greatly cheered the coalminers to the extent that they heard themselves
saying, 'So, the country has finally found out how vital we are to its
existence! Very well! Then we're going to get better working conditions, fairer
pension plans, better sick pay.' And so, the coalminers struck and have stayed
'struck' far beyond the ability of industries to keep going at full blast or
anything like it. 

If the strike were to go on and on, for a couple of months, I'm sure, there'd
be only one big American story. It would be the alarming shutdown of industry,
the rationing of electricity and water in the cities and a massive rise in
unemployment. The casualties of the coal strike, after all, are people who've
never seen a lump of coal and every night now, for several weeks, we've seen
pictures of silent factories, overworked employment agencies, bitter
steelworkers laid off and several towns across the country that went on strike
against their electric bills and voluntarily stopped using electricity, taking
to candles and fiddles and dancing instead of frozen foods and television. 

And when the dollar slump happened, again people said, 'What is Mr Carter doing
about it?' Maybe they'll believe him when he puts it down to what old Harry
Truman used to call, 'his do-nothing Congress' – at least the Congress that is
doing nothing about energy. 

From Europe, however, we heard louder echoes of the same questions about Mr
Carter's leadership. 'Why can't the most powerful politician in the world, why
can he not persuade or bully his Congress? Why can he not assert himself in a
national coal strike? Is such an administration to be trusted in its promises
to defend Europe at all costs?' 

So, put it down maybe roughly and sloppily, but a lot of people feel that way,
to lack of faith. The Europeans may be wrong but when, the other night, one
European here said, 'What Europe is saying is quite simply – take me to your
leader!' A rueful American present said, 'Which leader?'.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP