Carter's energy bill

'Let's face it!' said my wife, 'We simply have an awful climate.' Now, this is
an astounding, late confession from a girl, sorry, woman. Girl, is an
Americanism for any woman over 50, as in the idiom current at summer parties,
'Let's round up the girls and get going to dinner!'

I repeated some astounding remark from a woman who has been a dedicated,
practically a belligerent New Yorker since, I should guess, the time when Peter
Stuyvesant was mayor, who cavorted with the boys, and I mean boys, all over
town, a couple of decades before the word 'air-conditioning' had ever entered
the language, who always said she wouldn't want to live anywhere else on earth,
etc. etc. But this new confession was not rung from her. It came quite quietly
with a sad inflection, as I'm told all true confessions do, not screamed out in
agony after a bout of torture as confessions are always shown in the movies. 

What caused it? Well, superficially, you could say it's because she'd been,
during July, in London, so now she's saying, 'The best thing about London is
the climate'. A wild remark, if ever there was one. The real reason for this
turnabout, I suspect, has everything to do with the coming on of age. For the
past month, more, the young people I know around New York say, some time every
morning, 'Isn't it awful?' 'It,' of course, being the blanketing heat. But they
say it almost as a greeting with a sunny smile. To the young, stifling heat and
piercing cold are like wet nappies to a baby. Simply, life. You squawk about it
briefly and then somebody makes a funny face or dangles a toy and you're happy
again. But, as you get old, the wet nappy is a permanent fact of life. 

When I first covered Washington, in fact for the first 15 years or so, Congress
used to work up a head of steam through June and quit before 4 July in order,
at all costs, to get out of what the television commentators call 'the nation's
capital' and what Thomas Jefferson called 'that Indian swamp in the
wilderness'. It does seem at this time of year as bad as Delhi. 

But air-conditioning did one dubious thing to government. It attracted more
people to Washington and it made the law-makers want to stay and talk more. In
some years, they barely get away for two weeks, but this time they are in
recess until September and the last thing they received and voted on was the
president's energy bill. The house debated it hotly for a week, kicked out some
of Mr Carter's favourite provisions, amended others, added their own and
finally passed it by a comfortable margin 244 to 177. Now, I assure you, I'm
not going into the details of a bill, which is, if anything, more complicated
than the American income tax. It has over a hundred provisions, by which I mean
sections, and once you plunge into the thickets of them it's like trying to
find your favourite wild flower in the jungles of the Amazon. 

Very briefly, and in the main, I'd like just to mention some of the devices
whereby President Carter hopes to pour billions of dollars into the economy to
save about three million barrels of oil a day and persuade the public utilities
to shift from natural gas, which is dangerously scarce, to coal, which is
abundant but uniformly dirty, as the environmentalists have started to lament.
Congress absolutely refused to go for an increase in the price of petrol,
simply because that is the symbol to the ordinary citizen of a government raid
on his pocketbook. So what they're doing is imposing a tax on crude oil that's
domestically produced so as to bring the refiners' cost up to the world level,
and this increase will then be passed on to the ordinary car driver as, in the
next year or two, a seven-cent increase in the price of petrol. So the increase
will come at him sideways and nobody can say, 'My Congressman voted to increase
the price of petrol'. 

There are two new items which can fairly be said to be President Carter's own
ideas and both of them have an old-fashioned, moral touch which I think will
appeal to a lot of Americans who've been suspecting – however wrongly – since
the Arab boycott that the big boys, the oil companies, have profited from it.
One of the new laws is a punishment for bad guys and the other is a reward for
good guys. The punishment takes the form of a stiff tax on the purchase price
of cars that don't get many miles to the gallon. In fact Congress has set a
standard of good behaviour. The 1979 car models are expected to get 15 miles to
the gallon. Any car that gets less will have to bear this new tax the day you
buy it. By 1985, the manufacturers have been warned, the acceptable standard
must be 23 and a half miles to the gallon. The main idea, of course, is to
encourage the manufacturers to make, and the people to buy, cars that don't
gobble up the fuel. 

These taxes are really something. If, in 1979, your car gets only 12 or 13
miles to the gallon, you'll pay an extra £200 for it and if, in 1985, you're
rich enough to buy a big car, and there are such that gets no more than ten
miles to the gallon, then the government figures you can also afford to pay an
extra £2,270 over the purchase price. 

Well, the reward is given to home owners who insulate their houses against the
winter cold and so may expect to use less heating oil, and they could get as
much as a £250 credit on the first £1,200 they pay into the federals as income
tax. Well, these are the provisions that affect you and me directly. The rest
of the bill is taken up with, ooh, innumerable provisions for stopping existing
power plants from using natural gas, punitive taxes against industries that use
oil and gas to fire boilers, overhauling electricity rates according to how
effectively the companies conserve energy, and so on. 

But President Carter, having got most of what he wanted in this bill, he, too,
quit Washington and went off to his hometown of Plains, Georgia 'on holiday'
the papers said, and he'll be there maybe a week or so, for these days there's
no such thing as a summer holiday for the President of the United States. What
a happy, long-gone time it was when the August newspapers showed you President
Coolidge wading a trout stream, or President Roosevelt hauling in a big marlin
from the stern of a friend's yacht. Even if President Carter dares to go out
and hunt a rabbit, you can be fairly sure that the news photographers will not
be encouraged to shoot it – to film it, that is. 

With all the problems of the world on his desk, the president must be known and
seen to be at them all the time and, it has to be said, to the alarm and
exhaustion of his hundreds of aides, President Carter fills and apparently
enjoys, a regular 18-hour day. 

It's an interesting hangover from the pioneer days that of the last eight
presidents, four of them were born on farms – Truman, Eisenhower, Johnson,
Carter – and have the farmer's habits. Mr Carter is up at 5.30 and he says he
feels it's almost a privilege to have about 30 minutes to himself sitting out
on a rocker, on a balcony overlooking Washington, just thinking. But at 6 he's
ready for work, at 7 for breakfast, at 7.30 the overnight cables come in and
then the bills and the reports from government departments and the speeches to
get ready. Not to mention the trips to and fro, the boning-up on what the Prime
Minister of Israel has on his mind, and then Mr Sadat of Egypt, and then the
President of Mexico and maybe Mr d'Estaing and other bigwigs who'll be on their
way to Washington from Chile, Sweden, Canada, Argentina, Somaliland, South
Africa, Uruguay, you name it. 

He works through normally until about 7 or 8 and then has a short, austere
dinner. Even the formal dinners throw a shock these days into visitors
expecting Mrs Kennedy's French chef. A couple I know who were all a-flutter at
being asked for dinner at the White House wrote an indignant letter to us after
the event, appalled at receiving bean soup, pork and corn pudding and ice
cream. No cocktails and no wine either. 

Well, after dinner, there are more papers and bills, and letters by the
hundred, and unlike the Carter of the old farming days, he's up till midnight
or beyond. The one break he admits is an indulgence, and he conveys it almost
as a frivolity, is early in the morning when he doesn't go out on the balcony
to his rocker, he sometimes sneaks into his study and spends as long as forty
minutes, before breakfast, listening to Mozart. 

Any superior person who's appalled at good corn pudding might care to remember
that it's been quite some time since we've had in the White House a president
whose musical preference was for Mozart. Not, I should guess, since Thomas
Jefferson. Some of the more high-toned types, Woodrow Wilson, for instance,
never went to the opera in their lives. Franklin Roosevelt was tone deaf. And
there's no evidence of any musical taste at all on the part of Eisenhower or
Kennedy or Johnson. But Farmer Carter loves Mozart as Farmer Truman loved
Chopin. 

Well, Mr Carter is listening more and enjoying it more on his glorious
week-long vacation in the dog days. But don't think he isn't on the ball. Never
more than ten seconds from him is an obscure, inconspicuous man who carries in
his pocket the code, the code that changes daily, and is hooked in to the
sealed code in the computers in the bowels of the earth below Omaha, the
headquarters of the strategic air command which holds at the ready never less
than a thousand missiles. And that obscure man's code is plugged also into that
one single model plane, a model of the air command which is always in the air
droning between there and the Baring Strait, just in case the impulse comes
through that announces an enemy missile launch. It must be a creepy thing to
have to live with. 

Let us hope that once a day the president can forget the hellish possibility in
the angelic music of Mozart.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP