Shah flees Iran

I don't remember a time when any one topic or event has so overwhelmed or
suffocated the rest of the news as the fate of Iran has done in the past week.
Come to think of it, of course I can remember a time – the invasion of Poland
and the Nazi invasion of Russia, the election of any president, the resignation
of Richard Nixon – but it's something, even to have the impression, that the
fate, the still-impending fate, of Iran should loom as large as these other
tremendous events.

Before I go on, I think it's worth asking ourselves here in America, why this
should be so? I put in the passing thought 'here, in America' because I notice,
from the one or two foreign papers I see, that Iran, though taken seriously,
does not blot out most other domestic and foreign anxieties. And I don't think
this comparatively unruffled treatment of Iran in Europe, for example, is due
to anybody's taking it lightly. I'm sure the papers of South Africa, which gets
almost all its oil from Iran, are not taking it lightly at all. The enormous
emphasis on Iran here can be rationalised in the way that, for instance, the
enormous emphasis on the Boer War could have been rationalised in England,
while other countries reported it as being yet another foreign uprising. 

The United States has had, since the Second War, a stake in Iran as the
bellwether, the one constant reliable ally in the Middle East, throughout all
the upheavals and shifting loyalties. We've been told that if the Shah went
and, especially, if a government friendly, to put it mildly, friendly to the
Soviet Union came in, then the huge crescent might be endangered from Pakistan,
through Iran, Iraq, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, on through Ethiopia, the great
mineral mine, the whole powerhouse of Western industrial energy. 

And nobody should pooh-pooh this suggestion as a morbid fear. A good many of
us, 10, a dozen years ago, pooh-poohed the morbid domino theory in Indochina,
the theory that if South Vietnam went to the communists, then Cambodia would
go, and Thailand would be threatened, and Singapore, and the neighbours on into
India. Well, the domino boys seem to be doing pretty well. 

However, experts can rationalise anything and it's nothing against them that
sometimes they turn out to be right. There has to be some more pressing reason
for the enormous emphasis on Iran's fate. And I think it has to do with the
shift, in the past 30 years, the shift in popular power from newspapers to
television. The three main networks here, in the past week, have given over
most of their nightly half-hour of world and domestic news to Iran, and
sometimes even done special hour and half hour programmes on Iran later in the
evening. 

Of course it's an intensely dramatic story. The proclamation, about half a
century ago, of a dynasty by a not over-educated Persian soldier, his
abdication in favour of a stripling son and the setting up by the son of an
absolute monarchy. And his ability, by whatever means, to hold on to it for 38
years through all the political upheavals of our time, simply is an
interesting, to put it cold bloodedly, an interesting case of survival against
all the trends of the time. It is at least as fascinating as the long, long
survival of Franco in Spain. 

And then what could appeal more directly, more melodramatically, to an audience
brought up on straightforward violence in the movies and on TV, than the riots,
the great, hoarse marches through the streets, the shootings-down, the gunfire,
the burnings, the entire country in a leaderless shambles, while off in a Paris
suburb, a great brooding, bearded holy man lays down the law and bides his
time. Like Gandhi. Like, I had better say, a Gandhi who if not devoted to
violence is at least ready to sanction it. 

The whole public drama of it has been as yeasty and forthright as the French
Revolution when told by Charles Dickens. And I think it was this combination,
the thumping melodrama, combined with the genuine American stake in Iran, that
made it irresistible to the television news editors who must decide what are
the big stories and what is the biggest. However, the New York Times is not
usually seduced by mere violence or by the collapse of one political ally and
the morning after the Shah departed the New York Times had twenty-two columns
over four pages and 12 correspondents on the job. Of course not all in Iran,
but three in Tehran, one in Aswan, where the Shah went with Mr Sadat, another
in Paris with the Ayatollah Khomeini, the exiled Muslim leader, one in Lubbock,
Texas where the royal children had landed, three in Washington, the rest
'think' pieces by diplomatic trade and business specialists. This is about five
times as many correspondents as covered the abdication of Edward VIII. 

So, if you ask what's happening in America this week, you'd have to say, apart
from the normal January blizzards and Chicago at 19 degrees below zero, you'd
have to say 'Iran'. I'm sure that if the story were over, there would have been
an epitaph on the Shah's long reign and one or two final speculations about the
political line of the new regime. But nobody here believes that any new regime
can last without the blessing of the holy exile in Paris. So, the
correspondents and the cameramen, especially, and the big thinkers are all on
the alert for what, at best, seems like a Kerensky pause. A brave, but probably
doomed, caretaker regime, even as you hear this, it may be toppling or gone
beyond recall. 

And what has the President of the United States been thinking through all this?
Twenty, even a dozen years ago, that would have been just about the dumbest,
the most ridiculous question an otherwise sensible person could ask. The
president, from time immemorial, through Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, did not blab
aloud, or even speculate aloud to mere newspapermen what was on his mind about
the ticklish questions of the day. 

Gerald Ford surprised us at the end of the year he took office by letting a
clutch of correspondents, and foreigners at that, come into the White House and
be televised answering their questions. But Jimmy Carter has gone far beyond
any previous president in being available for a public chat, even in the
tensest times. This past week, he's been on the National Broadcasting Company's
evening news for five-minute interviews, three nights in a row, talking not on
large, vague plans for the future but on the issues, the puzzles posed by that
day's news. 

Now this may not sound very remarkable to listeners in parliamentary countries
where the prime minister, the chief executive, as we call him, sits in the
legislature and simply has to say what's on his mind, every day, about anything
he's challenged on. But part of the secret power of the presidency, and the
useful air of mystery that surrounded the office, used to be that the president
was above and beyond the legislature, the parliament, the Congress, except on
foreign affairs and kept his own counsel so that when he made a statement, a
speech or even allowed himself to be quoted directly, it had the effect of the
oracles being brought from Olympus. 

But, for reasons that I, frankly, have never worked out – I've heard lots of
explanations but I've never been convinced – the recent presidents and Jimmy
Carter, more than anybody, have chosen to forfeit the mystery and the Olympian
stance of the presidency. True, Mr Carter kept making a sharp point all through
his presidential campaign of having a presidency, as he put it, 'open to the
people'. Of course, he was making the most of the dubious behaviour of Nixon. A
month before his election, Mr Carter said, 'We've ignored or excluded the
American people and the Congress from participation in the shaping of our
foreign policy. It's been one of secrecy and exclusion. I'm not going to
exclude the American people from that process in the future as Mr Ford and
Kissinger have done. Our policies should be open and honest, shaped with the
participation of Congress from the outset.' 

Well, it sounds open and honest. But a few weeks ago what did he do? The
headline in Time magazine put it starkly, 'Carter Stuns the World'. He
certainly stunned both the Congress and the people, when he suddenly announced
that, from 1 January, the United States was going to recognise communist China
and cease to recognise Taiwan. This was more Olympian, more imperial, than
anything Nixon or Ford ever did in foreign policy. There was no consultation,
as the constitution requires, with anybody in Congress, no hint dropped to the
people. You have to go back to Kennedy's secret backing of the Cuban Bay of
Pigs invasion for a presidential gesture at once so independent and so
unconstitutional. Maybe Mr Carter, getting wind of the storm brewing in
Congress about his single-handed abrogation of a treaty, has decided to try and
cosy up to the people in these nightly chats. 

Whatever his motive, he's been on hand for network correspondents, for
reporters, doing interviews for publication. And what has he said? He's said
openly that the Shah couldn't handle the power he'd given himself, that the
United States doesn't want to influence the people of Iran, one way or the
other, and that he hopes – he hopes – Iran will get a stable government that
will trade with the West and will not be pro-communist. He also added that he
doesn't believe – and this too may be a hope – that the Soviet Union wants to
cause trouble in Iran. It wants, he believes, he hopes, a stable, unaligned
government. 

Well, that's not much to go on by way of opening up foreign policy to the
people. The fact is, and we've seen it a hundred times in the United Nations,
open agreements openly arrived at are an impossible diplomatic method between
nations. When he's out in the open, the president has to fence and he does it
very adroitly. We saw that in his last Wednesday's press conference.
Presidential press conferences, by the way, used to be closed and strict rules
governed what might be published. Since Eisenhower, they've been televised and
this doesn't mean that we know any more, the fencing has simply to be more
artful. The president still minds his own business. 

If you and I knew everything that was on Mr Carter's mind and he said it aloud,
every ally, every potential enemy would go into tantrums of doubt and
indecision. Still, there's one body that wants to get a glimpse, a hint of what
he's up to in foreign affairs. The constitution demands it. And the new
Congress, I'm pretty sure, is going to insist on it.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP