Carter cuts aid deals

A few weeks ago, an old Yale man turned up on the campus to talk to some picked
classes of students and though he was shadowed, so to speak, by a couple of men
who always have one hand in their coat pocket, there were no surging crowds, no
fuss, no Klieg lights, no whining sirens. His name is Gerald Ford.

I suppose there are few countries where the gap, the chasm, between being in
power and out of it, is so enormous and so visible. A prime minister is
comparatively inconspicuous walking along the street whether he's in office or
out of it, but the difference between being President of the United States and
being ex-president is the difference between being a field marshal in full
regalia inspecting a guard of honour and the same man in retirement pottering
around a golf course in a sweater and slacks. 

The main reason, I suppose, and it's not true in most other republics is that
the president is the king and the prime minister and the commanding general of
the armed forces all at once, which is to say that he is the head of state as
well as head of government and the chief of the party in power. Even Mr Ford
seemed at times swallowed up by what movie and television people call the
'production values'. 

The president can go nowhere, up to the Capitol or off for a walk without
lights flashing all over the White House switchboard and the secret service
going into a dither of walkie-talkie instructions, screening shops and
buildings along the way, clearing streets. He can't even go to the bathroom
without an agent accompanying him to the door and standing guard. 

When he gets out of the White House, he is, at a stroke, Mr X. On the day of Mr
Carter's inauguration, Mr Ford decided to show his family and a few friends who
were following him into retirement in the California desert, he decided to give
them a final bird’s-eye view of Washington which is as handsome a government
city as there is. And the cameras followed him, the television cameras, almost
reverently, leaving the Capitol, down to the helicopter and then traced the
flight of the copter till it was out of sight. Next day he was on the tube
again. This time he was walking along a fairway in California with the old golf
charmer Arnold Palmer and they were joshing each other and ex-President Ford
was in trouble with the ball behind a tree. And when he managed to loft it over
the tree, there was a good-natured little cheer from a little bunch of people
who stood not ten feet away from him. 

There's another thing that makes the contrast between being in and out so
sharp, so dramatic, it is that – how can I put it? – a man is plucked for glory
from his hometown and then is immediately dumped back in it. The locality rule
in American politics, the tradition that you stand, run for political office
from the place you live in, preferable were born in, it's very strong. The idea
of Winston Churchill becoming MP for Oldham (was it?) would be impossible in
this country. I can't think of a president who, once his term was over, ever
stayed on in Washington or bought a house there. You go back where you came
from. And it's not the same as the president or the prime minister or the
foreign secretary retiring to his country place. Only two of the last nine
presidents had anything you could call a country place. Coming from the
country, that's a different thing. 

Franklin Roosevelt, with an estate up the Hudson, is rare enough to be bizarre.
Harry Truman is closer to the regular type. Born in rural Missouri on a farm,
family moves to a small town, Independence. He goes to the day school there, he
goes to work as timekeeper for a railroad construction gang. He becomes a
haberdasher, he goes to war, he comes back to Independence. In time, he gets to
be a United States' senator and then president. And on the very day that
another country boy from Abilene, Kansas, is being feted in the streets of
Washington with bands and parades and drum majorettes and cavalcades of
Cadillacs, Harry Truman is at the railroad station, not many people around,
climbing aboard a train and saying, 'It'll be good to be home'. And he's off to
the old house on the same street in Independence and he dies there. 

It's hard to believe, watching President Carter now, that when his time is up,
he'll be on his way back to Plains, Georgia, population, what is it, 265? But
it's more likely than not. What always surprises the big Washington social
crowd is how soon and how easily the new man fits into the magnificence of the
White House. You'd expect they'd be permanently uncomfortable with it and want
to do it over like the old homestead. 

Well, Jimmy Carter, as he insists on being called, is, I don't think,
uncomfortable anywhere. He has one of those characters that's so
self-sufficient, so aware from birth what it can do and what it cannot do and
aware who he is, that nothing seems to faze him – a peanut wholesale business
or the command of a nuclear submarine, a raft of foreign grandees or a
churchwardens' meeting – he's appointed some famous and learned and powerful
men as his advisers, to his Cabinet, whatever, and I'd guess that the first
time you sit with them assembled, you'd be pretty scared. Being scared under
such circumstances can take two forms. You either shut up like a clam or talk
your head off. Carter evidently does neither. One of the men who's there all
the time says he sits upright, very much at ease, he listens coolly to some
expert try to expound the complexities of a problem that he wouldn't expect a
new president to know much about and when he's finished, Mr Carter has taken it
all in, summarises quickly the alternative lines to take, takes one and moves
on. 

We kept saying for months and months – and some boneheads still think it
fashionable to go on saying it – that Carter was a mystery man, unfathomable, a
character that nobody could pin down and examine. Well, the mystery seems to be
clearing away like a morning mist. What we now have is a man, whatever else he
is, a man of remarkable natural dignity. It appears that he has ordered to stop
all White House limousines for his aides, to keep the thermostats down to 65,
to stop the riffles and flourishes of the marine band, not to require people at
work to wear jackets and ties and, as he did, to open up his telephone for one
day to the American people, that these were not showy, populist gestures, not a
well-advertised theatrical performance, like Lyndon Johnson's padding round the
White House turning off lights. 

Carter, I think it's fair to give him the benefit of the doubt, Carter seems to
share the strong feelings of Thomas Jefferson that, with all respect to royal
houses, a republic should not ape display and any form of regal ostentation and
that its president should be, as sensibly as possible, the symbol of the common
people who put him there. This is a very tricky thing to do without affecting a
sort of mucker pose and from all I hear there are more surprises of this sort
to come. From people who've watched him since he got in the White House, I
gather that he does not intend them as surprises, just as expressions of his
resolve to simplify the presidency and make the office, and not its trappings,
the main thing. 

Jefferson appalled a lot of people, especially visiting dignitaries from
Europe, by greeting them at the White House in his carpet slippers. Mr Carter
equally appalled a lot of people but today, I should guess, not proportionately
so many, by doing his first television fireside chat in a cardigan. Apparently
there was a flurry of debate before this decision was made but he saw no
problem. 'It's what I wear,' he said, 'when I sit by my own fireside.' This
doesn't excite every American to admiration. One man, I'm sure, spoke for many
when he said, 'I don't want my president to be a buddy. I want him to be
President of the United States' which is a rather baffling prescription. One
man's presidential get-up is another man's poison. 

However, in one resolve, President Carter is running, I think, a big risk, or
you could better say, is treading a high wire between the ideal world and the
real world. He said during the campaign that his devotion to human rights was
unqualified. Well, during a campaign, presidential candidates say anything and
everything and after the first January sneers, we usually forget it. But Mr
Carter has done what Mr Gerald Ford now says he wishes he'd done, which was to
greet and salute a famous Russian dissident. Mr Ford told the students at Yale
he thought he was in error in not welcoming Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn to the White
House. President Carter has taken in Vladimir Bukovsky, whom the Soviet leaders
describe as a criminal and potential terrorist. 

Mr Carter's more alert critics, and he's collecting more of them every day,
said, 'Fine, fine thing... make a big gesture protesting the Russians'
suppression of civil rights but how about the other countries we trade with and
to whom we even give large dollops of foreign aid?’ So Mr Carter promptly cut
off foreign aid to Argentina, Uruguay and Ethiopia on the same grounds – they
violate human rights. 

Well, it would be the understatement of the year to say that the Soviet Union
is furious at Mr Carter. The Russians have mounted a counter-propaganda
campaign and their papers this past week have painted a picture of the United
States in which the prisons are packed with political prisoners put there on
other trumped-up charges, in which the rich escape jail and the blacks, Puerto
Ricans and Indians languish there, in which no American can pick up his
telephone without wondering whether his call is being recorded by and I quote,
'special secret agents'. 

Asked if he'd expected this vicious, backbiting campaign, the president said,
'What else?' A very cool, a rather tough hombre.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP