Death with dignity law

This has been the week when clean-faced young men in the newspapers and on the
networks have put on their grey beards and looked back over 1976 and told us
what was probably – they can always hedge by saying 'probably' – the most
significant events and movements of the past year.

Well, I've heard some of these but the fallacy of doing it at all seems to me
to lie in assuming that the most important things that are going to happen have
already shown, last year, at least the tip of the iceberg. But maybe
something's happening quietly somewhere that never even rated a paragraph in
the papers and it will turn into a thunderbolt this year or two, five, ten
years from now. 

I was vividly reminded of this fallacy the other evening when a weekly
scientific programme that's done on the non-commercial public broadcasting
system put on an hour called 'Hitler's Secret Weapon, The Making of the V-2
Rocket'. Now, I've taken my fill of wartime memoir now that the British Foreign
Office has drastically reduced the interval between filing away secret papers
and opening them to publication and now that the United States has an even more
revealing Freedom of Information Act whereby, for instance, you can make the
FBI open up to you the whole personal file they've kept on you. So we've become
inured to discovering the secret sources of great events. 

But the V-2 film was a shocker. The two people who narrated it – and at every
stage of the conception and testing of the rockets they came on alternately and
recalled the hows, the whys, the when – they were Wernher von Braun, the
theoretical inventor and General Dornberger who was in charge of the whole
thing. I don't remember anything in the memoirs of Churchill, Linderman,
Stimpson, or anybody else on the Allied side, I don't recall anybody's getting
excited about the V-2 much before the Germans were getting it together after
the shooting down of so many V-1s which flew at the ordinary speed of propeller
planes and so were handy targets for anti-aircraft. 

But the astonishing thing about this film was that von Braun and company
started on the jet-propelled rocket as a weapon in the late 1920s, by the time
Hitler had been in power a year or more; even he didn't know about it. And when
he did and first looked it over, he took a poor view of it and he kept it very
frugally financed for a long time. They had films of everything. The first
rockets, not much bigger than vegetable marrows, little torpedoes, the testing
of water sprays for cooling, the big jump into liquid fuel and failure after
failure rockets that looked like Apollo rockets blasting a hundred feet into
the air and fizzling into the sea or exploding over fields. This, plainly, was
not the film that Hitler must have had made for morale purposes. 

I don't know where they kept all this material. The late 1920s, early 1930s
stuff looked like something dug up from old prints of the Keystone Cops. But we
saw every stage from a hunch to a blueprint, to a model, to all the duds and
the final launching of the first success. 

I seem to recall a film, a feature film I mean – one of those wartime epics in
which somebody like Michael Redgrave was the cool squadron leader, and Gordon
Jackson the Cockney or Clydeside sparrow, doomed, you knew it, from the start
by his very niceness – which showed the bombing and lucky destruction of
Peenemünde, the construction centre on the Baltic Sea. The implication was that
our chaps were very much on the ball, and no sooner had von Braun and
Dornberger got their monster in the air than we sniffed out the base and
abolished that threat. Well, the truth seems to be that nobody in Britain had a
clue, throughout all the 1930s and far into the war, that anything in this line
was brewing at all and if the tide had not turned against Hitler in the autumn
of 1944, the V-2 would have done devastating damage to the cities of England. 

However, my point is not argumentative. I just thought, listening to the
pundits telling us what were the most significant, or 'meaningful', as they
say, happenings of 1976, I thought if we'd heard some big commentator on the
air, way back, reviewing the year 1933 and saying, 'The most significant event
of 1933 was the development of a rocket bomb in Germany.' What a hoarse laugh
that would have given to the cavalry officers, not to mention the whole army,
navy and air force. 

Well, I looked back, not very far, and two or three items come to mind, only
one of which, I suppose, is significant in an historical sense, but I have the
notion that these three things will stay with me when the Olympics, and even
the Bicentennial, are fading memories. 

The historic item comes, as so many things later seem to be historic do, from
California. On 1 January, there came into force, in California, a law – the
first in all the 50 States – which is generally known as the 'Death with
dignity' law. The California legislature passed it three months ago. It is no
slapdash, humanitarian effort at what's called mercy killing; it's a very
detailed and thoughtful bill. It was exhaustively debated by politicians,
lawyers, the clergy, the insurance companies, doctors – everybody. 

It pronounces the right of anyone who is terminally ill to refuse artificial or
mechanical, electronic or other aids without which the patient would die. This
bill was given a powerful momentum in 1976 by the well-publicised case of that
girl in New Jersey doomed to a vegetable life because the law required every
known medical aid to keep her alive. The word 'alive', by the way, is legally
in dispute. In some states it means the existence of a heartbeat. In others, a
discernable brainwave. Also, I have no doubt the parents or children of
terminally ill people gave their shivery attention to the long ordeal of
Generalissimo Franco, who was not pronounced dead until teams of doctors
finally allowed mortality to settle in. 

Well, already in California close to two thousand people, young as well as old,
the healthy as well as the ailing, have applied for a form which the state has
printed up that allows you to make up what is called a living will, which
prohibits, on your say-so, now, before you're in a coma, the use of
respirators, dialysis machines and all other unusual or artificial means to
sustain life. The insurance companies were, understandably, very alert
watchdogs over this bill. There loomed up before them the likelihood of wills,
otherwise legally imperfect, malpractice suits from relatives opposed to the
idea, the definition of what is unusual – as, for instance, the use of dialysis
in acute kidney disease. 

But the early, and the most tenacious, opposition came, as you'd expect, from
Roman Catholics. This has dissolved, however, not because of any secular
persuasions on the part of the bill's authors, but because of one crucial word
spoken by the Pope himself. The Pope recently said that human life is sacred
from the first moment until the last instant of its natural survival in time.
And the man who introduced the bill says that the word 'natural' was a godsend
for its passage. It will, of course, be tested, most likely by the grieving
relative of some patient who signed the appropriate form after being told that
his or her illness was fatal, and it will, I imagine, go to the Supreme Court.
Anyway, the whole question of maintaining human beings, either in agony or in a
vegetable state, has been brought out of the cellar for the first time and
given an airing no doubt shortly in the courts. 

In the past few days, we've heard a lot about the next, the new, Congress,
though about 90 per cent of its members were there in the old Congress. We've
been reading profiles of Mr Baker, the new Republican leader, and Mr Byrd, the
new majority Democratic leader, and we've been boning up on some of the more
colourful, or voluble, or rambunctious, newcomers. To me, the most moving
figure was not anybody coming in but one old man – not so old, 67 – going out.
He is Wilbur Mills, congressman from the second district of Arkansas. I did a
talk about him long ago and called him the 'Confederate president' because as
chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, which has jurisdiction over all
matters of public finance, tax bills, tariffs and the like, he could watch the
President of the United States rant and fume about the pressing need to pass a
money bill, but if Wilbur Mills didn't like it, he could bottle it up and kill
it. 

However, Mr Mills was the victim of a scandalous episode. He got drunk one
night and, when he was picked up, his companion, a stripper known as the
Argentine Bombshell, fell into a nearby pond. He pursued her to Boston, he
embraced her on stage. He subsequently went into a hospital to dry out for many
months. His fall from power was very swift and very pathetic. He's now a
reformed alcoholic and giving his time to other alcoholics. 

On his last day in his congressional office, he stood upright and very
forthrightly defined an alcoholic as 'anyone who feels he has to have a drink.
If you ever think you have a drinking problem, then you probably do. I found
out I was an alcoholic when I tried to prove I wasn't. The key to living with
it,' he said before he locked up and closed his door for the last time, 'is to
remember the past. Don't forget it, but don't dwell on it! That, and forgiving
yourself, are the most important. Come and see me any time!' 

The third item I'll remember is a simple sentence from a survey somebody did on
the twentieth anniversary of the Hungarian Revolution. Thirty-two thousand
Hungarian refugees came into this country and the piece was about what had
happened to them. Most of them, a large majority, have done well. The memorable
line came from a man who arrived with his wife and his health and nothing else.
They learned the language, he did odd jobs, he went to night school and
architecture school and today he's a 44-year-old architect and his wife is a
chemical engineer. It was a long pull. Why did he feel rooted here and now
content? 

'Well,' he said, 'you still have the idea in this country that if you roll up
your sleeves and work hard, you can succeed.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP