Severe winter weather

One of the pleasures of these talks and, I hasten to say, from my end of the
microphone, is the knowledge that I am free to stay with the assignment that
was given me all those years ago when the war was just over and we could
finally stop talking about offensives and jungle warfare, and rationing and the
rest of it – the assignment to talk on anything that came to mind about America
and her people and the way they lived.

It was an enormous relief, after six years of the politics of warfare to talk
about the history of ice cream, or why maple leaves go scarlet, or what
happened to a baby that was missing one winter night from a New York hospital. 

From 30 years' mail, I've learned a curious truism that is distressing only to
studious types who want a radio talk to be a thesis – that people remember most
vividly what happened to people. And it's not, I've discovered, only farmers
who like to hear about the strange and ingenious uses of soy bean, say. It's
not only tobacconists that are interested in how a man in South Carolina still
makes a million dollars a year on pounding dates into tobacco and selling it as
snuff. And it's not only commercial travellers who smack their lips over the
misfortunes of other commercial travellers. 

I well remember, years ago now, sitting in a lounge at Kennedy Airport in New
York and being approached by a formidable Englishman in late middle age. He
simply wanted to say something nice about the talks and quickly said there was
one he would never forget. He'd introduced himself and I recognised the-then
Lord Chief Justice and I riffled on the instant through my mind and thought,
'Now let's see, what could it be? Some forgotten piece about the Supreme Court?
The trials of Alger Hiss? An appreciation of Chief Justice Earl Warren?' 

No! It was about a businessman who flew from Chicago to New York for a meeting
and got snowbound in the airport motel overnight. I could barely recall it but
he tickled my memory and, for inquisitive people, may I say that the man never
got into New York City from the airport. He abandoned his meeting and, once the
runways were cleared, flew back to Chicago. So he intended, but approaching
Chicago they ran into a storm system so wide that the plane had to go on and on
and land 2,000 miles to the west, in Los Angeles. 

The passengers were then told to hang around the airport for a few hours till
the mid-west's storm had moved on. Eventually his plane was called. He put in a
quick telephone call to his wife in Chicago and though I guess she was first
alarmed at his being in Los Angeles, she was heart-breakingly sympathetic with
his plight and told him to hurry on home. He boarded the plane for the trip
back to Chicago but, this time, there was a storm coming in from the north-east
which had closed in all the airports from Chicago to the Atlantic coast. So,
his homebound plane flew on and on and landed a thousand miles east of Chicago,
in clear skies back at Kennedy. 

Now, so far as I can remember there was no more point to the story but what had
stayed in the Lord Chief Justice's mind was the very short and snappy dialogue
that took place between the husband and wife when he phoned her again and told
her he was now back in New York. She was unamused and unbelieving. And to this
day, I imagine, whenever the poor fellow says, 'Honestly, honey!' I can hear
her snapping back, 'Don't give me that "honestly"!' 

Well, although this freedom is very enjoyable to me – to take up something
that's far removed from what newspapermen call hard news – there are times when
you would have to be blind and deaf to ignore something that overwhelms the
life of a nation. An earthquake terrifies Los Angeles. The commanding general
of all the United Nations' forces in Korea is fired. The president is murdered,
another resigns in disgrace. And this is such a time. 

It may be possible in your country, wherever you are, three thousand, eight
thousand miles away, to take an interest in the early adventures of the new
team in the White House, but to everybody over here, with the possible
exception of Californians and the inhabitants of the Florida Keys, there is
only one possible topic which amounts, over a vast stretch of the country, to
an obsession. And that's understandable enough since, in some places, it is
neither more nor less than an obsession to survive. I mean, of course, the
onslaught of the most severe winter since 1888. 

My first bad winter in America, '33, '34, I remember running into old gaffers
who kept saying, 'Huh! If you think this is something, you should have been in
the winter of '88!' Come to think of it, you didn't have to be ancient to have
endured that. It was after all only 45 years away, but '88 was so much of a
legend that it was a regular joke in the vaudeville and burlesque theatres. But
from now on the legend of '88 will be buried under the memory of '77. It's
difficult to begin to convey the severity, the feel of it to anybody like a
beloved London friend of mine who comes stamping indoors out of a temperature
of 39 degrees Fahrenheit saying, 'My God, it's bitter!' Thirty-nine is tropical
to 70 per cent of the American population these days. 

And here again we have a special difficulty which is the fact that you have
either always used Centigrade – what we call Celsius in the United States – or
are moving over to it, but the movement has been tentative enough in Britain to
leave most people quite unaware of what Centigrade feels like. In America, they
use Fahrenheit everywhere and the word 'below' means 'below zero'. I shall use
Fahrenheit from now on and ask you to imagine what it's like to wake up in a
big city, Chicago or Cleveland, and find it's 20 below zero outside or 52
degrees of frost. It happened last week and wherever the snow ploughs had been
able to cope and the drifts had not built up over the roadways, police cars
hobbled along with their loudspeakers warning everybody to get indoors and stay
indoors. In hundreds of cities and towns across an Arctic stretch of America,
say, 1500 miles wide and 800 miles long, there was no need to urge people to
stay indoors. 

There's a new phrase, a new menace abroad in America this winter. It's an old
phrase to Polar explorers and the air force patrols who maintain their watch in
igloos on godforsaken islands around the tip of our globe, but because of a
radical and puzzling shift in the prevailing winter winds across America, the
phrase has come into use with us and we don't need to ask what it means. It's
'wind chill factor' and what it means, quite simply and frightfully, is that if
the temperature is only one below zero, as it was in New York City last week,
but there's a 45 mile an hour wind, the effect on the human body is that of
about 40 below zero. Walking one block of this was enough for me. 

But to try and give you an idea, a comparative idea, I have it from the London
Meteorological Office that, in the past eight years, there has not been
measurable snow in London. Now going outside and noticing that snow comes up to
the rim of your shoe sole does not mean, technically, half an inch of snow. 

Let me put it another way. Many of you may remember, with a shudder, the bad,
bitter English winter of 1962/3. London that winter had between three and four
inches of snow. In the southern counties in general, a foot. Well, Watertown,
in upstate New York, has had 71 inches of snow in six days this week. And
Buffalo, also in New York, usually has about 40, 50 inches of snow in a normal
winter. In the past four weeks, they've had 124 inches. Now these are figures
that on paper boggle the mind but, as white stuff on the ground, they literally
overwhelm the geography of any town and threaten to suffocate its life. The
winds whip ten foot snowdrifts into little mountains 20 feet high and inside
them, invisible, are motorcars and many people frozen in them. Across half the
country, the pictures have had a gloomy monotony, snow up to the tops of shop
windows, the great interstate eight-lane highways obliterated. And this,
remember, is in a country that's used to heavy snows, with lots of mammoth
equipment that can comfortably keep the railroad tracks clean and the highways
free enough. 

This year nature is too much for all of them. And too much for the Great Lakes,
the lakes 200 miles long, 50 miles wide, frozen solid, with the freighters and
barges locked in and helicopters flying out to drop food to the crews. And the
natural gas that provides one-third of the nation's heating is not enough for
the paralysed north-east and Midwest, so hundreds of factories are closed,
between two and three million more unemployed, millions of schoolchildren at
home – not a one at school in Pennsylvania, which is a region almost the size
of England – and the winter outlook is for no change in the strange new
trajectory of the winds which normally blow from the west, more or less, east.
But, for some reason the meteorologists cannot fathom, the winds have come in
from the Pacific, swerved up north, gone right up into the Arctic Sea and then
looped and come tearing down north to south, so that this year they have
carried the zero experience down even into the American Deep South. The Florida
vegetable crop is already totally ruined. 

And there's another consequence of this shift in the prevailing wind which the
north-east and the Midwest have been too preoccupied to care about. The usual
straight west-to-east wind hits the cold air over the High Sierra and the
Rockies and deposits masses of snow. But this year the winds, swerving way
north, have deprived the far western states of their normal run-off from the
continental watershed. Add to this the fact that California has had an 18-month
drought and you have another vast region of the country begging for snow and
itching for rain, with its crops and its cattle withering in the brown stubble
down about a thousand miles. 

Courage, friends. And pray for those in peril on the American land.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP