The political filibuster

Let us now consider the verb 'to filibuster' in its American political sense.
If you can rope in a schoolboy, he'll tell you that in its original sense, it's
an English corruption of the Dutch word meaning 'freebooter' and for about two
centuries it was applied to buccaneers who plundered ships on the high seas.

The English started it with men who held up and looted Spanish ships and
settlements in the Caribbean and then in the nineteenth century it got used in
this country for freewheeling or free-sailing American adventurers who mounted
armed expeditions against countries they didn't like but which were officially
at peace with the United States. 

I imagine that that all-knowing schoolboy could go on and on and bend your ear
with such variations from the beginning of the 19th century to the end of it,
as Americans who swiped bits of West Florida from Spain with nobody's
permission and Californians who kept biting off bits of Mexico, but what we're
talking about is a parliamentary tactic – some people would say an outrageously
non-parliamentary tactic – practised for a very long time in the United States
Senate, whereby a minority faced with the passage of some bill which they find
obnoxious, defies the majority will by what is known as a filibuster, and the
usual tactic is to make the most of the Senate's time-honoured rule of
unlimited debate. 

Now before we get into the ingenuous and sometimes hilarious ways that this has
been done, you may rightly wonder why any great legislative body should ever
have adopted a rule which allows it to debate till the end of time, if the
lungs and the indignation hold out. Well, like many other devices of American
government invented by lawyers, this one is about as complicated as the wiring
of an astronaut's instrument panel – we mustn't go into that. But the rude,
original idea was a sound one. 

It's the Americans ever-present fear – ever present since the break with
Britain – fear of dictatorship, and this began with the fear of a president
with enough power to call on his own standing army, but it developed into the
fear of a majority in Congress that might be able, at all times, to impose its
will on a minority. 

A cantankerous but wise Southerner, in the early nineteenth century, developed
a theory based on this healthy fear that democracy, or that part of it which
submits to the vote or the will of a majority, is not going to work if it can
always crush minority opinion and leave that minority frustrated and
embittered. He believed that democracy will work so long as a minority has a
sporting chance of proving that the majority can be wrong. 

And this produced in the senior house, the Senate, a rule which said that in
matters of great moment, there shall be no limit on debate. Well, since then
all sorts of checks and bypasses have been invented, but if a filibustering
minority is strong enough, has enough people who are prepared to go till
Doomsday offering irrelevant amendments to a bill they don't want, or is
healthy enough to stand and talk and talk through many nights, the bill can be
defeated. 

I remember hearing about this strange custom, which seemed like something
invented by a Hollywood crowd director, some time in late 1937. As a young
British correspondent new to the halls and the cloakrooms of Congress, I was
eager to see it at work and, in 1938, it happened. The Roosevelt administration
had put up a bill to make lynching illegal and may I hasten to point out to any
listeners in Eastern Europe that, before the Second War, lynching had become a
criminal offence. 

Well, one quiet day while the anti-lynching bill seemed to be moving slowly
towards passage, a bell rang in the press room of the Senate and the magic word
went out – 'Filibuster.' On to his feet went the senior senator from Louisiana
and he spoke for 28 hours, spread over six successive days. He could take a
breather by challenging a quorum, drafting a subordinate talker, calling for a
natural recess and so on. 

A filibusterer is under no compulsion to address himself to the subject matter.
Over the winter of 1922/3, for instance, President Harding wanted a federal
subsidy for shipbuilding. Four powerful senators were adamant against it. They
got up and spoke in rotation. One of them gave an interminable speech about the
League of Nations; the second appeared to have only one aim in life which was
to establish an official home, a sort of second White House, for the vice
president. The third spoke at vast length on the burning issue of recognising
the Soviet Union. And the fourth, a Southerner with long experience of
filibusters, made a passionate speech in defence of three employees of the
government's Bureau of Engraving and Printing who'd been fired. 

I wish I'd been present, but I wasn't. In 1935 when the late Senator Huey Long
got up to fight any extension of the Roosevelt administration's main recipe for
curing the Depression, the National Recovery Act, he killed it by talking for
15 hours and 35 minutes continuously. And a very moving passage in that
continuous burst of eloquence was the recital of his mother's recipe for frying
oysters. 

To give you a final example of how effective the filibuster can be when, in
1917, President Wilson, before America was in the war, asked Congress to
approve the arming of American merchant ships. The bill was overwhelmingly
approved by the House, 403–14, but when it went to the Senate there were seven
of the then 96 members against it. But these men took turn and they talked and
talked and talked until that term of Congress expired. And the president's bill
expired with it. 

Well, this past week, we've had a filibuster – historic, in more ways than one
– which might well lead to a revision of the Senate rules. In fact a couple of
senators have already moved to set up a committee to do that, but not to
abolish the filibuster, rather to see that the vice president, who's the
presiding officer over the Senate, and the administration’s Senate leader
cannot again conspire to defeat a filibuster by twisting the rules about
unlimited debate. 

Let me anticipate your correct inference that filibusters are always, nearly
always, staged obviously by the Opposition party. But take the present case.
The Senate had before it a bill to take the controls off the price of natural
gas. Most senators, of whichever party, from gas-producing states said that
this would give an incentive to more production and America needs all it can
get. President Carter had been against the bill since the beginning. He says
that abolishing price controls would not produce all that much more gas and
would send the price to the consumers sky-high. So, two of Mr Carter's party,
two liberal Democrats, went to work to block or kill the bill in the old way.
They staged a filibuster believing they were fighting as loyal soldiers on the
president’s front line and it seemed for a time they might succeed, but then an
odd, an unprecedented, thing happened. 

Their filibuster was broken not by the Republicans, not by a majority of the
opposition, but by the president's leader in the Senate, Senator Byrd, the man
whose main job is to push the president's will over all opposition. So these
two filibustering senators came to look on that leader as a traitor. And, of
course, they bitterly assumed that Senator Byrd was taking his orders from the
White House. They were aghast at what appeared to be treachery on the part of
the president, himself. 

Now the technical way it was done was for Senator Byrd to be recognised by the
Senate's presiding officer, Vice President Mondale, and to hold the floor and
then to have the vice president invoke various overriding rules that the Senate
had either forgotten about or that many veterans thought to be illegal. Anyway,
it was a railroading tactic and pretty brutal and, at the end of it, people
were saying, 'What happened to President Carter's brave stand on behalf of the
consumer?' For, in the end, when the filibuster was broken, with the
cooperation of Senator Byrd, the Senate voted 50–46 to put an end to price
controls on natural gas. 

What seems to have happened is this. At some point during the stubborn
eloquence of the two liberal filibusterers, the president was privately told
that the filibuster would not succeed. The two liberals say, understandably,
that the president should have got the word to them – two words, one of
congratulation on their brave battle, another, a warning word that if they
succeeded there would be no energy bill at all, for this natural gas
controversy is only one big item in the president's bill to force the
conservation of energy. 

But they didn't hear a word from the president. They went on fighting assuming
the president was urging them on from base headquarters. Well, it was Senator
Byrd who warned the president that, if the filibuster succeeded, the Senate
would take its revenge by voting down other provisions of the energy bill and
the president then gave the nod for Senator Byrd and the vice president,
between them, to override the rules and bully their own men into submission. 

As you can imagine, the Republicans were saying in public that the
administration has outraged the dignity of the Senate by bending its rules. The
Republicans are tickled pink in private because they have seen a bad break set
in between the leaders of the Democrats and the body of the party. And the
whole operation seems to have been very ineptly handled, a gross failure not
only of communication, but of generalship between the White House and the
Senate. All the bitter feelings are being expressed against by the Democrats
against their own leaders. 

This is only one of the devious – unwittingly devious no doubt – ways in which
President Carter seems to be losing the backing of many of his own party. For
instance, he no sooner put out the joint American-Soviet statement on the terms
for a Middle Eastern settlement, or conference, than a congressman who is going
to be the next mayor of New York wrote a letter to the president declaring the
terms to be, quote, 'outrageous and a betrayal of the American commitment to
Israel'. And when the president came to New York to talk to the United Nations,
he snubbed Mr Koch. 

It's much too early to take solemnly the passing thought of an old Republican,
'I think I see before me a one-term president.' But if this goes on, Mr Carter
is going to hear an avalanche a year from now – it will be the sound of
Republicans moving into Congress in large numbers in the elections of 1978.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP