'Son of Sam' killer caught

It's about to be the end of what American's call 'summer'. New Yorkers, at
least, don't follow the poets for their signs of changing seasons, they follow
the Old World.

New Yorkers may think of themselves as totally emancipated immigrants melted
down into pure distillations of a foreign triumphant American type but New York
still clings, unconsciously no doubt, to some of the customs of Old York, after
which they city was named. That's to say that August Bank Holiday, now it's
been shifter nearer to the American Labor Day – the first Monday in September –
is what the bosses say is the end of the proper time for boating and fishing
and wiggling your toes in the sands of Blackpool or Brighton. September is the
time to stash away the sports shirts, the old gym shoes, the barbecue griddle
and get back to work. 

Well, to call an end to summer with the end of August is ridiculous in New
York, or for that matter in about two-thirds of the American continent.
There'll be more blasting heat: September can be as awful as anything Europe
knows in mid-summer. October has it in the 80s quite often. October is, in
fact, the month when the winners in the rival baseball leagues go into the
week-long national orgy known as the World Series. 

But I guess the example of the colonial Britons is still stubborn after three
centuries and a week from now there'll be the long holiday of the Labor Day
weekend and the vast trek back to the cities – the summer cottages deserted,
the beaches empty through a couple of months of what in Ireland or Norway would
be considered marvellous summer weather. 

Labor Day, by the way, was the invention of an Irish carpenter named Peter
McGuire. He founded the Carpenters' Union and in the spring of 1882 he proposed
that there should be an annual labour day, so-called, to pay tribute to the
workers, so-called, of America. His notion was no more than an annual parade on
a date to fall mid-way between July 4 and Thanksgiving Day at the end of
November. This was one of those proposals like having an annual Mothers' Day,
something that nobody wants madly but something that no politician can dare to
come out against. 

Well, within 12 years of McGuire's suggestion, by 1894, 31 states declared the
first Monday in September a legal holiday and then the heat was put on
President Cleveland and he was not the type to say, 'Hold! Enough!' He signed
the bill making Labor Day a national holiday – parades in every city and town
that could claim a citizen who had any other occupation than that of milking
cows. 

And then, what with the growth of labour unions and the coming of the
automobile and the transformation of open country into picnic grounds, cottage
colonies, mountain guesthouses, circus stops, somebody decided that there had
to be a day when you closed up the summer retreat and called a moratorium on
holidays. And so, on Tuesday September 7, millions of Americans, in spite of
their wildly different climate, will be back in their offices and factories for
the long winter (pull), comparing summer tans and postcards and brief romances
and getting back to the insurance payments and who ought to be mayor. 

There is, however, one institution that goes on through most of the summer –
through all the summer – and it's that of the courts, since crime rarely takes
a holiday. The last time this happened in New York was in November 1965, the
night of the first blackout. We reel now for an answer to the fact that there
was not a case of arson or looting. The United States Supreme Court is in
recess, since it ponders matters that take a long time to resolve whether the
matter is weighty or seemingly light as fluff. A case that goes before the
Supreme Court is one that claims to have violated a citizen's constitutional
rights. Whether the plaintiff says he's been denied his right to vote or, as
once happened, a man claimed he had a constitutional right to eat a meal in a
restaurant without being annoyed by the scrapings of a string trio. But
violence and murder and rape go on and there are similar atrocious crimes that
do not, however, have anything to do with constitutional rights. 

Last Tuesday, a plump, pleasant-looking young man appeared in a court in the
New York borough of Queens. He was dressed in hospital-green pyjamas and a blue
dressing-gown. A clerk of the court asked him if he was David Berkowitz. He
said he was. He was asked if he was represented by counsel. He was. He was
arraigned on a charge of having committed two murders and attempted seven
others in Queens. He'd been indicted a week ago in Brooklyn for murders alleged
to have been committed in that borough. He was asked how he pleaded. He
pleaded, 'Not guilty.' 

On Wednesday, in a hospital hearing, which was held there for security, he said
he was not David Berkowitz. He is, of course, the suspect known to the papers
as 'Son of Sam, the .44 caliber killer'. This mild-mannered youth will make
another court appearance in the next two weeks by which time a team of
psychiatrists will submit their report on whether he's legally insane or
whether he's mentally competent to stand trial. 

The fury over 'Son of Sam' was, until Berkowitz was arrested, was... must have
been as fearful as any that seized a big city since the days or nights of Jack
the Ripper. But this week the news of it retreated on to the back pages while
the papers and the magazines recalled the 50-year-old memory of a murder case
that has been called 'the case that will not die'. On 23 August 1927 not only
America, but much of what we call the 'civilized' world was shocked to hear
that two Italian immigrants had been executed for the murder of the paymaster
of a shoe company and his guard in a small town outside Boston. Their names, of
course, were Sacco and Vanzetti. I suppose they're the first names of Italian
immigrants into America that I ever heard, except of course that of Cristoforo
Colombo. 

No item of American news stirred my school and its masters more than the word
of the execution, unless it was the word three months earlier that Charles
Lindbergh had made the first solo flight across the Atlantic. And I must say
that if I'd been asked in 1927, or for many more years thereafter, what Sacco
and Vanzetti were all about, I should have said that they represented a
monstrous miscarriage of justice for that was how the case was reported in our
papers. And this prejudice was powerfully reinforced by the public statements,
cablegrams to the governor of Massachusetts, denunciations given to the press
by such people as George Bernard Shaw, H. G. Wells, Albert Einstein. 

Now, in simple but I hope firm outline – there was a robbery which didn't work
at a shoe company in another Massachusetts town in December 1919. The following
April, the paymaster and guard in South Braintree were murdered. An informer
told the police chief of the first town that the failed robbery and assault had
been done by Italian anarchists and the police chief came to the quick
conclusion that the South Braintree murders were the work of the same men.
Sacco and Vanzetti were arrested in a streetcar. They were both carrying guns. 

They were about to be charged with the first robbery but no witness could
identify Sacco, he was let off. Vanzetti had 20 witnesses say he was somewhere
else, nevertheless he was sentenced for assault with intent to rob. And after
that they both stood trial for the murders. They were admitted anarchists at a
time when the United States was bristling with suspicion of most immigrants
with halfway radical ideas and the trial turned on their radicalism. At the end
of seven weeks they were found guilty of murder in the first degree. 

Well, for the next six years the defence filed eight motions for a new trial
bringing a wad of testimony, prejudice, suppression of evidence and a fellow
convict of Sacco's had given him a note confessing to the South Braintree
murders. Through those six years, but especially towards the end, the world was
roused by the contradictions and mysteries of the case and many distinguished
people were convinced that Sacco and Vanzetti were innocent illiterates, the
victims of WASP prejudice and the prevailing witch hunt. 

The last Court of Appeal upheld the verdict. Final appeals to stay the
execution went to the governor of Massachusetts. Over 60 professors of law were
sufficiently disturbed to beg the governor for a committee review, a rare
proposal, if not a precedent. The committee was formed, a tribunal. The
president of Harvard, the president of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and a former probate judge. Two months later, they upheld the
verdict and, on 23 August, Sacco and Vanzetti were put to death. 

To commemorate this famous case, two books have come out this week. The one of
them adds very little by way of facts or interpretation and the other, I'm
sorry to say, is so passionately and indignantly convinced from the start that
the case was one of 'Justice Crucified' (the title of the book) that one either
swallows whole the author's thesis that the men were put to death by a puritan
legacy of White Anglo-Saxon Protestant elite or one gags at the unflagging
prejudice of author. By the way, great numbers of WASPs contributed thousands
of dollars and hundreds of hours of spare time by way of financial and legal
aid to Sacco and Vanzetti. The fair, if agonising, conclusion seems to me to be
that of such a WASP professor who wrote, 'against a masterful and
none-too-scrupulous prosecution was opposed a hopelessly mismanaged defence
before a stupid trial judge.' 

Fifty years after the event there is no rousing place to go for an answer. When
all the heat and the roaring indignation has cooled, the case of Sacco and
Vanzetti remains a tragic legal puzzle but what has passed over into the
American memory is a strong and nagging doubt that the shoemaker and the
fishmonger were guilty not beyond all doubt – nobody then or now would say that
– but, as the law stipulates, beyond a doubt that might be entertained by
reasonable men.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP