Loss of sportsmanship

I saw, somewhere, the unlikely statement that half the world would have watched
or listened to Wimbledon before its hundredth anniversary was all over. I fancy
I hear the high, protesting voice of Muhammad Ali crying, 'No way brother! Not
one tenth of the world is going to watch that tennis but the whole world
watches me because I'm the best, the prettiest!'

Well, never mind the percentages, let's hope simply that many more thousands,
or millions, saw Chris Evert correct the umpire's ruling in her favour than saw
Connors snub the parade of champions and spend the time of the ceremony
practising 50 yards away with his partner in boorishness, the inimitable, if
not unspeakable, Nastase. Miss Evert reached to lob a return of Miss Wade and,
according to the umpire, made the return and won a point. But she shook her
head and pointed out that she had not reached the ball before its second
bounce. It's a small thing and would have gone unremarked ten, twenty years ago
but today, in the money jungle of professional sports, it shone like a candle
in a naughty world. 

Some months ago, some time in the autumn, I think, I tried to say something
useful about the increasing embarrassment of having to use the word 'sport'
about the greedy branch of show business that is professional games playing.
Well, since the autumn, many things have happened to make some of us think a
little more about the topic. The organisers of sports events seem powerless to
do much about the growth of the sports industry. They either shake their heads
or rub their hands. But some sportswriters have started to say that enough is
enough, that throwing your racket on the ground in a spasm of temper is one
thing and making obscene gestures at the umpire, the press and any other
protestor in sight is another. Bill Tilden, about – oh about 50 years ago –
threw his racket at Wimbledon and was warned that one more tantrum like that
and he would be thrown out of the tournament. And he didn't do it again. 

Whereas no more than two years ago I saw one of the most famous of women tennis
players reel with shock at a linesman's call. She stopped play. She walked over
to her chair, gathered the four or five rackets which now seem required to play
one game of tennis, tucked them under an arm, raised her forefinger at the
umpire in an obscene invitation and walked off the court. She hadn't quit, she
was just biding her time and temper until the officials came running, or
kneeling, and begging her to return, which, about five minutes later, she
graciously condescended to do as the thousands of spectators came to their feet
to pay tribute to her bravery in giving the umpire his comeuppance. The umpire
didn't take her out and paddywack her. He didn't fume or shout. He cowered. He
knew he'd behaved badly. He seemed truly sorry and the crowd applauded their
heroine again and forgave him. 

And it's this sort of thing which led an American political columnist, at the
end of last year, to offer some pointed advice to Mr Carter, who was then about
to begin his term as president. At the end of 20 numbered tips, most of which
had to do with political tactics, the writer put down three: don't use football
lingo by way of encouraging your political party, don't talk about team play or
coming through in the last quarter, or giving it that old one-two, don't invite
athletes to the White House for dinner. Don't invite athletes to the White
House ever, but have the courage to decide, with Harry Truman and I quote,
'that sports is a lot of damned nonsense!' 

Now, this attack of bile may have been brought on by unpleasant memories of Mr
Nixon, for nobody in American history I dare say has ever used the language of
sports and sportsmanship so often to describe a strategy of crookery. It sent
us back 20 more years ago to a famous old American baseball manager, Leo
Durocher, who really wrote the text by which so many athletes today seem to
conduct their professional lives, 'Nice guys come in last'. 

At the end of last year too, the most gifted, the raciest writer and the most
knowledgeable of American sportswriters wrote a piece called 'Whatever happened
to Frank Merriwell?' Frank Merriwell was, a couple of generations ago, the
fictional hero of all American small boys. Today, I suppose, he would provoke
loud and raucous laughter as a square and a sissy because, to use the quaint
old phrases, he always played fair, he lost with grace. Sports to him was
synonymous with what we used to call sportsmanship. 

Well, it now seems ages ago since we had such a character looming large on the
American sports scene. The tone of the 1970s is now set by the most popular,
the richest, gamesman in America. Not baseball players by a long shot. Baseball
now ranks about fourth in popularity behind, in ascending order, ice hockey,
American football and, at the top, basketball. The basketball stars get
prodigious salaries, they are admiringly interviewed, given the same adoring
space as rock stars about their lavish pads, their king-size beds with the
sable quilts, their ceiling mirrors, their European cars, their sleek girls in
every port. 

Basketball stars now earn more money than the President of the United States.
That has got to be the reason, a primary reason anyway, why the insulted umpire
sent his officials to beg the slut of a tennis star to return to the court and
go on with the game. She earns a fortune. The fans pay to subsidise that
fortune. The fans come today not merely to see a game superlatively played,
they have learned to expect high jinx and very low jinx as part of the show and
any sports promoter will tell you that 'hell hath no fury like a sports crowd
spurned!' 

In other words, the officials, who sometimes seem so cowed, so poltroonish,
must have in mind the maintenance of public order, which has come to have
nothing to do with public courtesy. In America, for no good reason I can see,
we have not yet had baseball, or even basketball, crowds breaking the barriers
and indulging in violent free-for-alls. The crowds that swarm up to Yankee
Stadium or other baseball grounds do not yet break up trains or rip the tubes
apart. I don't know why this hasn't happened since we read with dismay of the
hooliganism bordering on criminal assault of British football crowds and such
desperate proposals to meet it as walling in the playing field and ringing it
with a few hundred cops. 

Now, I may have seemed, so far, to be reacting in a standard, fussy fashion to
the decline, the practical disappearance of amateurism in first-rate sports and
it's true that, in tennis particularly, much of the genteel air of the sport in
the old days was due to the comfortable fact that most players at Wimbledon
were upper middle-class offspring who didn't have to work for a living. The
same, at one time, was true of international golf. 

Plainly, it's not only absurd, it's unjust to expect people who earn their
living at a game to have the same nonchalant code of behaviour as the loitering
heirs of city directors who could afford to go to France or America to play a
game, while professional footballers, at that time, were paid at the going rate
of plumbers' assistants. 

I applaud the fact that games can now be a career, and a profitable one, and
that the experts should be considered like any other star, public entertainer
and be paid accordingly. But six figures seems to be a turning point. A
youngster who earns a hundred thousand, dollars or pounds, in a year, sees
himself, and is encouraged by the press to see himself as a movie star entitled
to adoration, the pamperings of luxury and no questions asked about behaviour
on or off the court, the field or the course. 

I suppose the television satellite has had a world to do with it. Boxers know
that the manager will take in $20 million, so they don't pause long before
saying,’ some of those millions should be mine!' And if the difference between
winning even £40,000 and £20,000 turns on an umpire's call, it would take a
superman of a sportsman to make no protest when the umpire might be wrong. 

Well, it doesn't take a superman! It takes the type of human who, I'm happy to
say, in one sport at least, is still extant. To me, golf remains an oasis in
the desert of gold and scruffy manners. Maybe because it doesn't allow for team
play in-fighting. It's you and the ball and the course, and the rules. A single
act of cheating, or moving a ball, a few years ago, caused a well-known pro to
be suspended from the tour for good. And three years ago, Jack Nicklaus and
Johnny Miller were offered one million dollars to the winner of a head-to-head
18-hole game. One round. One million dollars, to one of them, in an afternoon.
They promptly turned it down as being, as Nicklaus put it, 'not in the best
interests of the game'. Let us only hope that his tribe may increase. 

And ten years ago, Arnold Palmer was offered by a promoter his own tour – pick
the 30 best players and they'd all be guaranteed more money than they'd get on
the regular PGA tour which includes about 160 players. 'Great,' he said, 'but
it would ruin the game for the other 130.' 

A year or two ago I watched a young Tiger, a promising golf pro, hitting balls
on a practice tee at a famous tournament, and afterwards we had a drink and he
talked about his ambitions for the big league and the big money. He chafed
about the extreme severity of the rules in golf and I told him about the time
the late Bobby Jones drove his ball into the woods, far from any spectator or
marshal. He went in after it and then reappeared and made a signal. And a
marshal came running and Jones told him that he had, deep in the woods,
accidentally just touched his ball when he stood to address it. He asked for a
two-stroke penalty to be imposed on himself. 

The young pro I told this to looked at me in disbelief. 'What', he said, 'was
the matter with the guy? Was he nuts or something?' Well, at the time, Jones –
who incidentally lost the tournament by one stroke – was highly praised for his
sportsmanship. He was incensed. In his soft Southern accent, he said, 'You
might as well praise a man for not robbin' a bank!' 

If there are any such young on the million-dollar circuit today, will they
please stand and be praised!

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP