Anti-Semitism and WASPs

This episode contains references to racially offensive song lyrics.

New York City was extraordinarily quiet this past week... I pause to let the
deafening absurdity of that sentence resound through your living room. New York
City was extraordinarily quiet this past week – what does the man mean? 

I admit that at first hearing it sounds as awful and banal – the Oxford
dictionary says the proper pronunciation is 'bane-al' – all right then, as
'bane-al' as that other journalistic cliché, 'the eyes of the world this week
were on...' Yet I'm reporting nothing but the literal truth. It's a truth so
obvious and yet these days not one that you shout out loud. It must be
delicately handled. 

It wouldn't have been so 30,40 years ago, in fact I remember the New Yorker,
the magazine, making the point boldly which I'm making with so many flounces
and hesitations. The New Yorker ran a full page cartoon, it must have been I
think in the Thirties, it showed Times Square – which is the symbolic New York
equivalent of Piccadilly Circus – Times Square with the triangular New York
Times building standing at the point where Broadway and Seventh Avenue shoot
off their separate ways like the legs of a compass. 

That's really all there was to the cartoon – there were no people in it. Of
course there has never been a time, day or night, war or peace, sunshine or
blizzard, when Times Square was entirely denuded of human beings. But in the
drawing, there was not a living soul and the caption said simply, 'Yom Kippur'
– a simple idea and true. But however true, I doubt very much that the New
Yorker would print it today. If they did, there'd be letters to the Times, a
stream of pickets outside the New Yorker offices, an angry feature on
night-time television and apologies all round. 

I just remember now, and I've just looked it up, that I talked about this new
delicacy, or a new timidity, that crept into New York life and I'm shocked to
see that it's been 28 years since I first mentioned the subject in a Letter
From America and if anyone is still in the dark about the subject, let me come
right out and say it is acute sensitiveness to national or religious origins,
what we now call 'ethnic' origins. 

I mentioned it then in connection with the death of a famous American comedian,
Willie Howard, and the point was that you could no more avoid talking about
Willie Howard as a Jewish comedian and you could have talked about Harry Lauder
and avoided mentioning that he came from Scotland. I was put on to this subject
when I saw in the papers, and learned for the first time, that Willie Howard's
real name was not Willie Howard. It was Willie Levkowitz. 

Born and grown to fame as a very funny man at a time when the American theatre,
the vaudeville theatre especially, abounded with comedians who were frankly and
joyfully Jewish or Irish or Italian or German or, as they call them in New
York, Dutch – that is Deutsche – comedians. They were billed as such. An
old-time vaudeville show was a racial free-for-all and to a new immigrant, the
American vaudeville theatre was a place to get together with all the other
immigrants, all barriers down, and stew in the broth of each other's failings
and oddities. 

I noticed at the time that to have such an institution as the old vaudeville
theatre, you have to start with the unspoken conviction that different
countries have different and laughable peculiarities and the enjoyment of these
peculiarities by a typically polyglot New York or Chicago or Pittsburgh
audience could be taken for granted as late as the Second World War. 

Yet even four years later, in 1949, I noticed that there had been a subtle, yet
radical change. There was, I remember, a precious talent, a man named Lou Holtz
who told stories mostly about his friend Sam Lapidus. Holtz's whole repertoire
was about different sorts of New York Jews and he kept them apart, or had them
collide in many a funny story told in the separate accents of Brooklyn, the
Bronx, the Lower East side, the Upper West side. And when television came in,
Lou Holtz was one of the first talents to be exposed on it. And then a sad, a
sinister thing happened. He got first a dribble, then a flood of letters
protesting that he was anti-Semitic. Luckily he'd saved his money and he
retired in comfort and disgust. 

Before I go on, I can hear somebody asking the sensible question, 'If Willie
Howard flourished in the day of the accepted, what I've called racial,
free-for-all, why did he change his name from Levkowitz?' It's a good question.
Well, the answer is a riddle wrapped in an irony. Outside the vaudeville houses
and the comic strips, there was no such racial free-for-all. New York’s
politics might be run mainly by an astute alliance of Jews and Irish Catholics
but New York's social tone was set by the WASPs – by White, Anglo-Saxon
Protestants – and social tone controlled such things as the opera, as the sale
and renting of property, as the careful preservation ('zoning' was the delicate
word they used) of certain areas of the town as high class. 

Long after I first came to this country, as late I should guess as the 1940s,
you could see in abundance beautifully painted signs outside blocks of flats
and houses for rent and after some such announcement as '4 & 5 Room Apartments
For Rent – Enquire Within or Phone Trebling & Sanderson, agents' there would be
printed in bold letters the single word 'Restricted.' The word 'restricted' had
only one meaning. It meant 'no Jews need apply' and none did. 

Anti-Semitism was not proclaimed from the housetops but it was accepted, not
least by Jews, as a fact of life that had to be put up with. Today no real
estate agent would dare advertise on a sign or in a newspaper the word
'restricted.' If he did, he'd be hauled up if not on New York's Fair Employment
Act which was passed in the late 1940s, then certainly on the Supreme Court's
landmark decision of 1954 on the necessity of integration for, although that
decision was handed down on behalf of a little black girl who had to walk a
mile to a segregated school, it has since provoked a rush of laws forbidding
discrimination of any sort on account of sex, race or religion. 

But way back in the dark days of the word 'restricted', it was the general and
uncomfortable understanding of the whole country, not merely New York, that a
name which was conspicuously Jewish or otherwise immigrant was too much of a
social burden for an entertainer, especially, to bear. And even in Hollywood,
or I should say in Hollywood more than anywhere in the old days and into the,
possibly the last decade, Jewish producers were the first to sign up a
promising actor and actress and promptly rechristen them with a WASP name. I
could go on to the end of this talk reciting all the famous movie stars whose
real names were 'bleached' into Anglo-Saxon. And not only Jewish names but the
names of anyone who was plainly the offspring of a Central European family. 

In other words, the irony lies in the fact that when anti-Semitism was most
flagrant and practised by the reigning WASPs, Jews could earn a rich living
being funny as Jews in their own neighbourhoods, but if they wanted national
acceptance, they changed their name and dropped their Jewish material. And
today when anti-Semitism is legally prohibited and socially disreputable among
all but a tiny, inbred and contemptible county sort of society, today Jews can
no longer rollick on stage or in print about the foibles and fun of their race.
Of course the jokes are still there but they're circulated enthusiastically
among Jews themselves in private and furtively among gentiles. 

This new restraint or self-censorship works, I ought to say, for all the ethnic
groups. There's been, for instance, in the past year or two a whole repertory
of Polish jokes and (there are) I suppose other nations, other victims, the
point of which is always the implication that Poles are abysmally stupid. But
these jokes lead an underground life. You tell them at your peril in a bar in
Pittsburgh or down in the potato country at the end of Long Island where I live
and where, for several years, the champion of my golf club was one Steve
Dabrowski, where the village grocer is Mr Riscow, the plumber Mr Stepnowski –
Polish Catholics, all. 

Well, I leave it to the sociologists, professional or armchair, to explain why
the new touchiness set in, exactly when the anti-Semitic barriers were
crumbling. The more liberal we became about assuming the social equality of all
Americans, the more tender became the susceptibilities of every ethnic group.
As an old jazz man, I noticed that the lyrics of a lot of famous songs were
being changed for public performance. Jerome Kern's noble hero in 'Showboat'
used to sing, 'The niggers all work on the Mississippi, the niggers all work
while white folks play' but then, and now, he sings, 'Some folk work on the
Mississippi, while some folk play.' And Basin Street is no longer the place
where 'the dark and the white folks meet' but the place where all the 'elite'
meet. 

This seemed silly and trivial at the time but just how far it was going didn't
strike me until my daughter applied for a part in her school play. She didn't
expect to get very far but she got the main part. The school was about 95 per
cent Jewish and the play was 'The Merchant of Venice'. Plainly the school
decided it would be offensive to have a Jewish girl play Shylock, but someone
named Cooke was just right. 

Well, as I said at the beginning and in spite of the fact that New York must
have many thousands of Jews who are non-practising in a religious sense, there
are after all two million Jews in this city and for the week of meditation and
prayer and up to the Day of Atonement, I should guess that most of them, maybe
for the only time in the year, go to the synagogue and much of the time they
don't flaunt their disbelief on the streets.

And, for the rest of us, the splendid music comes pouring in over the radio and
from the synagogues and while there are fewer Jewish jokes on the radio or on
the stage, there are no buildings in New York defaced by the short, steely word
'restricted.' 

And it doesn't seem too much of a price to pay for a new convention of public
decency.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP