Murder of Lord Mountbatten

What is there to say about Northern Ireland except that the atrocious incident
in Donegal Bay blotted out most other foreign news as nothing, I can recall,
since the Arab guerrillas descended on the Israeli dormitory and defiled the
Olympic Games seven years ago?

In the shockwave that followed on the murder of Lord Mountbatten, it must seem
tasteless for outsiders to express anything but sympathy and outrage, but I
dare to say that, in the following days, a couple of essential things have been
printed here which have been obscured or denied in the general press treatment
of Ulster in this country. 

The most non-Catholics, I should guess, who live in American cities with large
Catholic populations shy away from any set-to about the Ulster problem because
they tend to assume that it's primarily a Catholic-Protestant conflict and then
go on to make the bigger assumption that an American Catholic, especially one
of Irish origins, is bound to share the view of the Ulster Catholic minority
while yet deploring the terrorist tactics of the IRA. 

In the normal coverage, the television coverage, especially of Ulster, in
documentaries, special features tagged on to the evening news and so on, two
simple but important things never seem to get said. One is that the Irish
Republic, through many governments, has been, if anything, more severe than
perhaps any British government dare be against the IRA. And the other is the
even simpler point that the British Army is not there to subjugate a population
which yearns for unity but to protect a population which has voted
overwhelmingly to remain in the United Kingdom. 

Now, I'm sure, to most people, this is so elementary that it seems almost gross
to bring it up. But, the other evening, I asked a friend of mine, I should've
thought a reasonably knowledgeable man, if he would take a guess at saying how
many of the people of Ulster would vote in a referendum for, or against,
joining the Irish Republic. He said, 'Well, judging from the deadlock which
seems to go on and on, I should guess it would be about 50/50.' What he did not
know was the elementary fact that the vast majority of Ulstermen want neither a
united Ireland nor want to run Northern Ireland, with the Catholic minority, as
an independent kingdom. 

On the first point, the attitude of the Irish Republic, the New York Times the
other day, had this passage: 'The age-old dream of achieving a united Ireland
through blood is a nightmare vision that has no encouragement from the Irish
Republic. Ireland has enacted draconian laws aimed at the IRA, more than 300
terrorists are in Irish jails, no IRA spokesman can appear on Irish television
or radio, if anything, the Irish Republic has dealt more firmly with the IRA
than the British Crown.' And the Times goes on to say that 'a partnership
between London and Dublin is feasible in a fresh initiative' and thinks it's
'the only consolation that could come out of the present carnage'. 

The other strong voice comes out of Boston and is that of a distinguished
American lawyer, of, er... of Irish origins, who published in the Times a
short, but shrewd, history of Ireland's troubles from the end of the reign of
Queen Elizabeth I to the present. Mr William Shaw McDermott by no means glosses
over the cruelty of the early colonial efforts in the north, the scattering of
the clans in the seventeenth century, the parcelling out of their lands to the
lowland Scots and the Crown's strategy of using Protestant freeholders to
dispossess and subjugate Catholic peasants in the north. Then, he says, 'from
this history developed the current legend that six counties of Ulster remain
under John Bull's tyranny. 

'The legend,' he says, 'ignores the crucial fact of modern Irish history that
once British policy had unloosed the goblin of loyal Ulster it could not be
returned to the bottle. Since 1920, Ulster's Protestants have clutched the
British connection as their security against the imagined dissolution of their
prosperity and liberties. Their intransigence brought the British Army into
Ulster in 1970 and made Britain the bewildered arbiter in the events that have
claimed some 2,000 lives. American Irish Catholics,' he winds up, 'who
understand the grim determination of Ulster's Protestants, must not succumb to
sentimental proposals for a united Ireland. 

'Such talk invites the spectacle, with like results, of the brutal sectarian
civil war that Lord Mountbatten struggled in vain to forestall in India in
1947. They must also resist the temptation to bait British governments for
evident imperfections of policy and, above all, they must learn from Ireland's
history the supremely ironic truth that the British connection is Ireland's
only present hope for peace. With it, Ireland may yet achieve reconciliation of
its religious communities.' 

Well, it's very rare indeed to read this sort of argument in this country.
Let's hope that some of it will percolate down to the television networks who,
responding to the very nature of television, tend to show fire and smoke. And,
as they did a night or two before Lord Mountbatten's murder, simplify the
conflict into a street brawl between British soldiers hiding behind tanks and a
gang of Catholic boys throwing rocks at them. 

Well, before this tragedy the topic that engrossed the government and
fascinated almost everybody was the holding for three days at Kennedy Airport,
along with a plane-load of Soviet citizens, the Bolshoi ballet dancer, Vlasova,
the wife of Alexander Godunov, who had defected the day before and then
mysteriously vanished, or isolated himself, or otherwise couldn't be reached.
This strange incident mixed elements of diplomacy, international law and human
rights into an episode that might well have served, might well come to serve,
as the opening sequence of a James Bond movie. 

When it was over, the acting secretary of state said that the American effort
had established the principle that foreigners in the United States have a right
to choose freely whether to remain or leave. But the chairman of a House
sub-committee called for a congressional investigation of the State Department
and the immigration service into what he called 'their outrageously clumsy
handling' of the affair. 

The Russians had no such conflict of opinion about it, partly because they
don't allow conflict of opinion, but mainly because by suppressing all mention
in their media that Vlasova's husband had defected to the United States, they
were able to present it to their people as an outrageous invasion of her Soviet
citizenship. It must have seemed absurd, at least to Russian readers, and
paranoid, at worst. Why would the American authorities suddenly pick on a
harmless ballet dancer just because she wanted to go home? 

Of course, to the Americans, there would have been no motive, no cause, to
ground her plane if her husband had not made a public declaration that he was
defecting. From his wife's point of view, he declared himself uncomfortably too
soon, leaving her to go on tour with the Bolshoi either confessing to an open
break with her husband or pretending to an airy indifference to his politics
and his future. What prompted the American action was a James Bond performance
on the part of eight Soviet security men. 

The day after Godunov announced his defection, these men told his wife she was
leaving the Bolshoi troupe. They told her to pack her bags and they hustled her
off to the next jet home. There's been no mention here of who, in the American
government, was tipped off to this move, but somebody learned about it. And, in
no time, the State Department got in touch with the immigration service and
they both agreed that it looked like a case of forced departure, something
that's covered by international law. The first notion was to get hold of her
husband, learn if she, too, had meant to defect – he did say they'd discussed
it at length in the weeks before he declared – and see if she was being bungled
off before she, too, could break away. 

The protesting congressman who says the immigration service 'bungled the job'
says they could easily have got to her while she was still on terra firma, or
American soil, but there's no legal immigration procedure for demanding to know
of any passenger taking an overseas flight whether or not you're leaving of
your own free will. That's properly presumed in the fact that you show up at
the airport with a valid ticket, with a passport and a visa, and you go through
the body and luggage check. 

It appears that the immigration service didn't know the identity of the
36-year-old Russian woman until she was aboard the plane and, it's been
reasonably pointed out, neither they nor any other outsider had cause to think
she was leaving the troupe since a day or two later it was to finish its run in
New York and then move on to open in Chicago, where it's playing now. But once
the Americans stopped the plane, the Soviet authorities lodged a formal
protest. The Americans asked to take her off the plane and question her in the
presence of the Russians. The Russians said 'no.' They went on saying 'no' for
two more days. 

What made the Americans suspicious was the fact that she had not strolled into
the airport on her own and gone aboard and sat where she chose, as you and I
would. She was taken to the airport by eight Russian security men. The
checking-in procedure was waived and she was seated in a separate compartment
on the plane and flanked by guards. 

Well, at last, the two sides agreed to move a mobile van up to the plane and in
the privacy, you might say, in the privacy of it, she was questioned by the
Americans. There seems no doubt that she wanted to go home and there was no way
the Americans could know whether or not she'd been intimidated. They came to
the conclusion on what they saw and heard that she had not. 

So this leaves the puzzle of motive, I think, with the husband who,
unfortunately, chose to stay in seclusion. Was he terrified to come out of it?
Had he urged her to defect with him? Had she agreed and then been threatened
with reprisals against her family, say, by the Soviet officials? Had she had
enough of Godunov? Did she want out? 

In any case, she got it. It was, said the chief Soviet negotiator, 'a victory
for proletarian justice'. And the Soviet news agency, Tass, saw an irony in it,
'How ironical that brigandage against a group of perfectly innocent people
should have taken place in a country where certain circles keep holding forth
on freedom and the defence of human rights!'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP