The rat race

Americans, successful Americans especially, in any line of business, are always
talking about getting out of the rat race.

The rat race can mean any working routine that has started to bore you. I've
heard this craving voiced bitterly, wistfully, by big businessmen, plumbers,
lawyers, big-time golfers, small-time grocers, university lecturers,
journalists, farmers... once, I remember – a refreshing novelty – by a parson.
He was a Southerner and he said, 'I've had my fill of saving souls. I'd just
like to hole up in some dog patch and nurse my own.' 

Englishmen, in my experience, go about it in a far less irascible way. They
assume, or maybe they are taught from birth, that any job carries with it daily
stretches of boredom, so they jog along for 30, 40 years and patter off sweetly
into a pension and then are galvanised into doing what they've secretly wanted
to do, catching butterflies, collecting stamps, growing turnips. Or, like an
old lady who wrote to me a year or so ago, a very treasured letter, from
England, 'My retirement which came in my 65th year made it possible for me at
last to pursue my hobby, to jog off and catch 'The Sound of Music' wherever it
was being shown. Sometimes I sit through all three performances when there are
three. So far I've seen it 79 times and the end is not yet.' 

We English, I guess, live a life of boredom and then switch to mania. With
Americans it's the other way round. They're paranoid about the grind and horror
of their jobs till they get to the pension. And then they mope and putter and
confront their wives with a new ordeal – the job of having to provide these
hangers-on with a daily lunch. 

These solemn thoughts came to me when I recalled the pleasure this summer of
visiting an old friend, an American newspaper man, who got out of the rat race
with a bang one day. No notice given. He had never seemed to complain about the
grind even though he was the head of the Washington bureau of a distinguished
paper, even though he hated the fetid heat of Washington, which was odd in a
boy born on the blistering prairie. It blisters in summer and petrifies you in
winter. I suppose we all have a picture in our minds of how and where our
friends will retire, the kind of set-up they've been used to, the kind of
retreat they yearn for. And of course I had a sharp picture in my mind of this
man's ideal life in retirement. 

I'd known him best in the Kennedy days and it was a time when the White House
press corps was more eager to be at the president's side than at any time
since. Not, I'm convinced, because Kennedy had loads of charm, which he did,
but because he chose Palm Beach, Florida as his winter White House and the
moment it was known that he would use his father's mansion in Palm Beach as the
winter White House and would be down there frequently, the rush to become a
White House correspondent was as indecent as a one-day sale at a department
store. 

I myself remember writing a fast note to my editor who was a cagey Scot,
painfully capable of distinguishing between a call to pleasure disguised as a
call to duty. I said that I'd been worried for some time that we never covered
the president except when he was in Washington and I felt that I ought to
attach myself to the White House press corps on a fairly permanent basis even
though it would entail the inconvenience of flying thousands of miles sometimes
on the spur of the moment. 

Now Kennedy, you remember, said his administration was going to tackle
something called 'the new frontier.' Well, they had some pretty splendid shacks
on the new frontier which to all intents and purposes I could figure began and
ended at Palm Beach. We used to be put up in a glittering but medium-size hotel
overlooking a lagoon and that's where I first met the man I've been talking
about, the chief of the Washington bureau, but then the White House
correspondent of the Chicago Sun Times. He was tall and he was dapper.
White-haired, good looking in a wry, un-fooled way. If it hadn't been for his
absolutely slack, unhurried manner, you might have thought he was a navy man.
He bore, in fact, a striking resemblance to a Riviera admiral in an old Jerome
Kern musical. 

Well, if you'd ask me then which sort of place he'd retire to, I'd have said
he'd get himself a handsome, large, comfortable bungalow or ranch-style house
overlooking the golf course because he was an addicted golfer of the maddest
sort and he was good enough or agreeable enough to play with Kennedy. 

One day, around 1970 I guess, I'd heard that he'd decided to quit. He came
home, he saw a two-line ad in a magazine for a cottage in Ireland and he said
to his wife, 'That's it!' They thought they'd use this unseen cottage as a base
for roving trips around Europe. They packed up everything, the furniture, the
clothes, the TV, gramophone, golf clubs, the lot. Well sir, the family
possessions are still in a Washington store house. They went to that cottage
and they've been there ever since. 

It's what they'd call in Scotland a crofter's cottage, one door, one
combination living room, dining room, kitchen, playpen, the whole about as big
as a postage stamp. Upstairs two bedrooms, a sort of partitioned alleyway with
a hole in the ceiling through which drips a dribble of water – that's the
shower. From the downstairs room they look out on a seven-foot high whitewashed
wall. From their bedroom they look out on dropping headlands and a bay and the
sweeping Atlantic and beyond that – on a clear day and if you'll have something
like the Mount Palomar telescope on hand – you can see clear to the Antarctic. 

And that's what they do. They look towards the Antarctic and at intervals they
read a paperback, bake the gritty, chewy Irish bread, take it according to my
Irish doctor's prescription with refreshing swigs of the poteen and they
breathe in and out. And if they occasionally infringe the law like parking
their old boneshaker near a hydrant or picking up a pint ten minutes after
closing, they are not apprehended. As my friend says, the great thing about
this country is 'there's always somebody who doesn't care'. 

Well I don't need to tell chronic listeners to these talks that I had not at
first meant to talk about the rat race and retirement, but I got into it and I
hope it has been an improving sermon and a lesson to all of us who fret about
retirement and the upkeep of the mortgage payment and how to stretch the pound
and, most especially, how to maintain on half-pay the lifestyle – as we now
preposterously call any way of life whether it has a style or not. 

The moral, my friends, is something an old schoolmaster told me, 'Never,' he
said to me, 'let your wants outstrip your needs.' Now, this is no sort of
advice to give to a 15-year-old who's lusting after a new cricket bat or the
latest Venuti Lang record or ... not to mention the contribution to whipping
the local blonde off to the cinema, or whatever. But it's a fine line to say to
fretful oldsters on the verge of a pension. 

My handsome, high-living, Jerome Kern admiral with, I suspect a firm push from
his beguiling wife, is one of the few people I ever knew who got out of the rat
race and managed with obvious serenity to reduce his wants to his needs. And
it's all the more remarkable in that it happened to an American couple who, the
whole world knows, are harried and cushioned from the womb with the urge for
every brand of material comfort. Not, I hasten to say, like the English or the
Indians who, as we all know, want only to sit by a broken teapot and meditate
and grow a flower. 

I think what got me off on to this highly moral theme was the fact that the day
I first met Jerome Kern's admiral, I was invited to dinner in Palm Beach by a
new United States' senator who was celebrating his victory at the polls with a
holiday down there. He was an old friend of mine, he'd been governor of his
state twice and because he'd jumped aboard the Kennedy bandwagon about four
years before anybody else, he was the first man appointed to the Kennedy
cabinet. 

This Palm Beach dinner was the first time I'd see him since his translation
from Cabinet officer into senator and I asked him why he'd made the switch. Why
quit the Kennedy administration in which he might go onwards and upwards – he'd
actually had an offer of a seat on the Supreme Court – to have to start the
appalling 16-hour-a-day grind of being a United States' senator? 

He was very clear about it. 'You know why?' he said, 'you know why?' – sounding
for the moment like Jackie Gleason about to browbeat Alice – 'Because now I'm
my own man.' 'Go on!' I said. 'Well,' he said, 'let me put it this way! When
you become a Cabinet officer you think you'll have the president's ear every
day. I had great plans for a health and welfare bill. I drafted it, I sent it
up to the president. Hell! I didn't see him in two months. Finally I got a call
from the real President of the United States.' 'Who dat?' I drawled. 'The
Director of the Bureau of the Budget, that's who. He told me they'd looked over
the bill, it was great, but they decided they'd cut the appropriation suggested
down from, I don't know, 20 millions to one million. And that was it! Never
forget, my friend, the effective President of the United States is the Director
of the Budget. He's the guy you have to watch out for.' 

Well, it sometimes takes the wheel a long time to come full circle and, in this
case, 17 years. The Director of the Budget has changed his title, now he's the
Director of the Office of Management and Budget but he's the same, quietly
dictatorial figure who decides what the president's budget is to be. 

As I write, the big man is one Bert Lance, an old, dear friend of the president
and he's now accused of all sorts of shenanigans with his own bank and his
securities and investments. Four government agencies, three congressional
committees, are looking in to these dark matters. The key committee is the
Senate's Governmental Affairs Committee and its chairman had enough evidence by
midweek to urge Mr Lance to resign. In any case, that chairman's judgement
would be decisive. He's the key man in the investigations and that chairman of
the Senate committee is that senator who, in Palm Beach, discovered to his
chagrin who was the real President of the United States. 

That senator is the handsome, the very able, the honourable senior senator from
Connecticut, Abraham Ribicoff.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP