Farewell to stereotypes

Not long after the commercial jet plane ceased to be a miracle and became the
usual means of crossing the Atlantic, the New Yorker – the magazine – published
a long piece about a day in the life of a jet pilot.

It followed him from breakfast time in his house in Queens, a New York City
borough, through the whole day of his flight to his arrival in Rome. He
mentioned that the drive in his car from his home to Kennedy Airport was the
most dangerous part of the whole journey. He then went into the weather
briefing, the assembling of the crew and a long section on the checking of the
instrument panel.

About the actual flight, from take-off to touch-down, he said, 'It's seven
hours of boredom enclosed by two minutes of panic, one at each end'. For then,
as now, the main hazards of air travel were the ascent to cruising altitude and
the descent to the landing. In between, there's always the chance of manageable
turbulence and a very, very slight possibility of hitting an air pocket which
can trigger an alarming lead-balloon drop of several thousand feet, but on 99
per cent, perhaps more, of all transatlantic flights, the boredom for the
flight crew sets in as soon as the plane has reached its 26, 30, 32,000 or
whatever prescribed altitude. 'Then,' the man said, 'you are more than less on
automatic pilot.'

Well, it seems to me generally agreed that the Reagan administration is back on
automatic pilot after one terrifying plunge and a period of bouncing
turbulence. Most, I think, of the aides in the White House hope for no more
trouble ahead and are busy, like the stewardesses after such scares, telling
the passengers to lean back and please tell us if there's anything we can do to
make your flight more comfortable – thank you again for flying with Reagan
All-American Airways.

What is not forgotten, though, is the lead-balloon drop and the following
scramble to gain altitude was due not to an act of God but to pilot error, to
the captain's dozing at the command or not knowing what the co-pilot and the
navigator were up to. And while we're all reassured, even impressed, by the new
crew that happen to be on the flight and has been brought up front to the
cockpit – former Senator Baker as chief of staff, Mr Webster as head of the
CIA, Mr Carlucci as the new head of the National Security Council – there are
plenty of people among the passengers who are still keeping their fingers
crossed about the potential stamina of the captain.

Most serious newspapers and the TV networks have at least one reporter assigned
to trying to find out what the joint congressional select committee is
privately finding out. Most of us are content to wait for the official,
neutral, investigation of the accident that begins in May.

In the meantime, there is one initiative of the Reagan administration and, for
once, I think the word 'initiative' is right, that has taken on a very vigorous
life of its own. It's the carrying out of the agreement Mr Gorbachev and Mr
Reagan signed late last year to revive and enliven what we've come to call
'cultural exchange' between the Soviet Union and the United States. It's been
practised in a very wary form under previous administrations. The Bolshoi
Ballet would come here, Leonard Bernstein would take the New York Philharmonic
to Moscow. We've seen troupes of Russian acrobats, they've seen the Harlem
dance troupe and so on.

In the early Sixties, the Kremlin even decided that classical or old-time jazz
was, if not a good thing, at least not a bourgeois diversionary activity and, I
remember the shock and delight with which the father of jazz piano, old Earl
Hines, told me that he was going to be rescued from an obscure dive in San
Francisco and dispatched – under the auspices of the State Department no less –
to bring the 'St James Infirmary' and 'Blues in Thirds' to previously benighted
audiences in Leningrad and the Crimea.

But it's fair to say that until now, cultural exchange between the United
States and the Soviet Union has trodden a narrow and circumspect path. Under
Khrushchev and Brezhnev and Andropov and Chernenko, from 1958 to 1985, there
were a few cultural institutions, musical mostly, that both sides considered
safe for export, not likely to seduce the other side, although down those
years, there were enough Soviet ballet dancers ready to make the leap to
freedom, to defect, for the Politburo to bring constant, though unsuccessful,
pressure on the general secretary to stop these troupes from touring.

When defections happened, the Americans made a point of stressing the fact that
no Americans touring in the Soviet Union ever defected. Recently this point has
been dropped as we saw, I think, as many as 50 Soviet citizens who had
emigrated to the United States and decided that American life was too hard or
turbulent for them and they went back home. It was time, then, for the Russians
to publicise these changes of heart while nothing, of course, was said about
the many thousands of Russian immigrants who chose America and stayed.

So for over a quarter of a century, straightforward emigration and cultural
exchanges have been riddled with suspicion on both sides or used as debating
points in the unending argument over which is the superior society. Well, with
the 1985 changing of the guard in the Kremlin, there has been the most dramatic
change and it must not be put down alone to Mr Gorbachev.

Under the prodding of Mr Charles Wick, head of the United States Information
Agency, President Reagan has acted, you might say, way out of character. By
that I mean you have to remember that this is the president who condemned the
evil empire, who once tried to picture the confining darkness of the Russians'
life by telling us that they have no word for freedom.

The White House, so far as I recall, never issued a correction, as it so often
does, saying that the president had been misunderstood. There is, of course, an
old and perfectly familiar Russian word 'svoboda' – freedom. Now we've learned
to parrot the new word – new to us – 'glasnost', Mr Gorbachev's label for his
new policy of openness. The literal meaning to Russians is even more of a
novelty. It means 'available for public knowledge'.

So, it appears that with the unqualified blessing of both leaders, cultural
exchange has gone far beyond the swapping of your ballet company for our
orchestra. The striking innovation in the past six months or so has been the
trekking between both countries of legions of scholars, scientists, doctors
and, most surprisingly, a delegation of Russian nuclear scientists to
California to visit an American missile site and to stay there and practise and
discuss the means of verifying each other's arsenals. This is a move – not very
widely reported here – that's impossible to imagine happening at any time since
the Second World War. Of course, sooner or later it was bound to happen if both
sides ache, as they say they do, for an agreement that will once for all safely
contain those arsenals.

And now, there came out of Hollywood even more heartening news for those of us
who believe that the actual knowledge that Russians hold of American life and
Americans of Russian life is on the whole pitiable. So that no Englishman or
German or Australian shall preen himself on his superior insight or character,
make that, that the pitiable knowledge of Russians about the West, and
Westerners about Russia.

Last week then, in Hollywood, an unofficial delegation of Soviet film directors
and writers sat down with their American opposites not to exchange polite hopes
or mumble pious wishes, or better, not to parrot official dogma, they met to
look at and discuss for one week the sort of films that each makes about the
other's life. Nothing could have been less like a Soviet-American friendship
seminar.

They showed each other, for instance, a 1984 American film, 'Invasion USA', in
which Russian soldiers watch a little girl decorate a Christmas tree and then
blow up the child, the family and the house. And the 1953 Russian film, 'Silver
Dust', in which former Nazi scientists now working for the United States
manufacture a radioactive powder to poison Russians. They saw Russians torture
the saintly Sylvester Stallone in 'Rambo'. They saw a Russian film that showed
American military leaders on the golf course with sinister industrialists
decide to work against arms control because it would disastrously reduce
profits.

They saw a Soviet film which represented the famous U2 flight over the Soviet
Union not as an exposed reconnaissance mission, but as a deliberate plot of the
CIA to stimulate a crisis in Soviet-American relations. They screened films
about each other covering 40 years from Lubitsch's clownish 'Ninotchka' to the
brutal 'Invasion USA'.

What they were doing was to reveal – and be embarrassed by – a 40-year habit of
trading stereotypes. Of course, we all live by accepting stereotypes of other
countries for our self-respect. If we didn't, if we came to see that we are all
variations of human types and that the same variations exist in all countries,
we'd be in danger of losing our patriotism, which would never do, would it?

I think the best practical thing that came out of it was the news that an
American company is doing a feature film on the Chernobyl nuclear accident and
that it is to be co-produced with the Russians. The producer concluded the best
thing you can do now is to create a climate in which you can achieve a positive
picture of a Russian.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP