Bishops call for nuclear ban

I think I must have told you about an old friend of mine who never ceased to
amuse, if not amaze, me by his habit, at the end of an evening's meal out on
the town, of picking up the early edition of tomorrow's New York Times at the
nearest newsstand and flipping over the pages with an expert gesture to arrive
at the obituary page. He would scan it with great concentration for a minute or
so and then say aloud, 'I see old so and so's had it' and then fold the paper,
call a cab and read the headlines on his way home.

I once hinted to him that this was a rather bizarre habit. 'Wait, my dear boy!'
he said, 'Wait till you're 60!' He was quite right. I have to confess a
shameful truth. Unless the deceased is somebody near and dear, there is a
furtive and, I admit, a detestable pleasure in reflecting not so much that so
and so has had it, as that you, with your fingers newly crossed, have not.

There's another morbid pleasure which appeals, however, to New Yorkers of all
ages and I'm sure some people would say it's more of a civic duty than a morbid
habit. Whichever it is, I have to say that it's one I've indulged for years.
Once a week, the New York Times has a small but regular item printed in small
type – it's entitled 'Restaurants Violations'. It contains three lists of the
names and addresses of restaurants that have been closed by the city Department
of Health and Consumer Affairs for violations of the health and/or the sanitary
codes. The second list is of restaurants that have been warned. The third is of
restaurants that have had the ban lifted and are free to reopen.

You'd expect, and you'd be right to expect, that most of the violators are
quick lunch counters, snack bars and cafeterias with such names as Joe's Bite
and Run, The Elysian Fields, El Castro. If these names sound wild, believe me
they're not as wild as the actual names you'll find in the classified directory
of a city that contains 30 or 40 ethnic groups much given, whenever they name a
baby or a restaurant, to flights of fancy.

I ought to reassure any friends of mine who fear for the legal consequences of
my own flight of fancy that, like a movie producer inventing the names of his
characters, the streets and shops and restaurants that they will be called on
to inhabit, I have patiently gone through the Yellow Pages to be quite sure
there is not, in fact, a Joe's Bite and Run or a restaurant called The Elysian
Fields. I ought to add that a couple of times I came perilously close to
slipping into an absurd name that is, in fact, a going and, I must assume, a
blameless restaurant.

But friends of mine have learned that not all the violations are discovered in
the little places around the corner that we used to call cheap and dirty. A
year ago, I called two friends and told them to meet me at 8.30 at the
expensive favourite. Luckily I got there early. It is the restaurant of a hotel
of sumptuous, of impeccable, elegance. Well, it was peccable. It was closed
and, after we'd eaten somewhere else, I went home and found the reason. It was
listed, along with Joe's Bite and Run, as a violator of the health code in the
kitchen – something to do with the stacking of empty boxes on the floor which
is forbidden by the New York health code as an invitation to rodents to play
house. It took only a couple of days to whisk the floors clean of all trash and
stack the boxes on shelves, but the deed had been done and throughout the
following weeks the maître d' had a terrible time assuring favourite guests
that, no, the restaurant had not been closed for the more usual violations of
dirty restrooms, ants in and around the vegetable washing area or what is
gravely called 'rodent faecal matter' in odd corners of the kitchen.

New York has one of the strictest codes of health inspection both for
restaurants and produce centres and food shops and supermarkets of any city in
the country. It all began about 70 years ago when the city health commissioner,
a demon of a Puritan with the good Puritan name of Emerson who was appointed
during an administration benevolently and loosely run by Tammany Hall, the
reigning Democratic political machine. Since the good doctor was a Democrat,
they assumed he would play ball.

He was, however, a singularly honest man and an almost maniacal crusader too
busy to play any kind of ball. He threw the city government into paroxysms of
alarm when he went down to the docks, examined an incoming liner and a
freighter or two and announced that from a certain days, say, a year or more
from then, ships' bottoms must not be planked in random horizontals but must be
tilted at two sharp opposing angles so that any rats aboard would fall into the
trough and could be counted. It was a radical step in eliminating cholera.

It did affect, however, every shipping line that used the port of New York, but
it was done and soon became, I believe, an international requirement.

Then, this missionary went after the restaurants. He made himself equally
unpopular by publishing, at the end of a three-month survey of his inspectors,
a report announcing that the cleanest, the healthiest restaurants were being
run by the Chinese and that the most insanitary were run by the Irish. I need
hardly tell you that, considering the ethnic make-up of Tammany Hall, he was
not reappointed.

If this doughty old man were alive today, he would rejoice at the daily work of
the Health and Consumer Affairs departments which, between them, patrol 16,000
bakeries, delicatessens, fish markets, restaurants, catering services, produce
markets, all retail stores and pounce on this restaurant for listing on its
menu 'bay scallops' when they are, in fact, sliced ocean scallops, fine a
grocery for selling milk after the date imprinted on the carton, inspect the
restrooms and the towels used by employees, crawl around basements looking for
insects, punish one butcher for carrying packaged beef which has been dyed to
look red and juicy and another butcher for using light bulbs on meat which,
similarly, redden it up.

The staff of the departments, like the staff of practically every other
enterprise in the country, from the steel industry to the internal revenue,
have been cut for budgetary reasons, which has had a surprising, salutary
effect.

An old city health inspector put it this way and he was talking about ten years
ago, 'In those days we had what you might call an educational approach. We'd
find violations and make suggestions and issue warnings. Now we don't have the
manpower for education. Bam! We hit 'em with a fine.' This is the only case I
know where a reduced workforce has appeared in a cloudy economy as a silver
lining.

Well, there are precious few silver linings in the thunder clouds that are
piling up over the administration. Can there ever be any agreement to get the
Israelis and the Syrians and so, ultimately, allow the Americans out of
Lebanon? Is a revolution in Nicaragua exportable to her neighbours?

And is Central America in ferment a threat now or later to the security of the
United States? There's a tense and bitter debate growing up on this question
and whether the threat is as dangerous as President Reagan says it is, it is
not a question to be taken lightly or wearily pooh-poohed and when a European
author asks, 'How would the Americans feel if, like the Russians, they had
missile bases on their northern and southern borders?' I think the answer is
that no administration one can imagine taking office in this country, in the
near future, would allow it to happen.

Which brings us, inevitably, and unhappily to the unending nuclear debate and
to the action, this week, of the Roman Catholic bishops of the United States in
ratifying – by the stunning majority of 238 to nine – of a pastoral letter
which goes far beyond all previous statements of the church in denouncing
nuclear war and saying that, 'Good ends – defending one's country, protecting
freedom – cannot justify immoral means, the use of weapons which kill
indiscriminately and threaten whole societies'.

Last time they met, the bishops urged a 'curb' on nuclear arms. Now they're
asking for a 'halt', even after the administration had exercised powerful
pressures to have them retain the softer noun.

'We are the first generation,' the letter declares, 'since Genesis, with the
power virtually to destroy God's creation. We cannot remain silent in the face
of such danger. The whole world must summon the moral courage and the technical
means (that could be the snag)... and the technical means to say no to an arms
race which robs the poor and the vulnerable, and to say no to the moral danger
of a nuclear age which places, before humankind, indefensible choices of
constant terror or surrender.'

This is the first time, so far as I can recall, that any church in this country
has faced the true Western alternative in such sharp language. 'Constant terror
or surrender'. It's impossible to guess what the effect on the Reagan policy
will be of spreading this letter around the country, by which I mean its
purpose of disseminating it in Catholic churches and schools and study groups.

One thing you can say is that it's bound to be a more effective shock to the
administration than any protesting action of the Democrats in Congress. They,
after all, are looked on and expected to be the president's political
opposition. The Catholic bishops have ripped the ground out from under the
administration's contention that nuclear freezers and other advocates of a halt
are, at best, the dupes of Communism.

Why should the vote of 238 bishops matter? Well, in this country there are
three million Episcopalians, as close as any other group to the beliefs and
liturgy of the Church of England. There are nine million Methodists. There are
14 million Baptists, but there are 52 million Roman Catholics – practically one
American in four.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP