Carter ratings lowest ever

It would be nice, it would be a sort of summer shower of relief from New York's
suffocating heat, if I could settle down and talk about something non
political, like, say, the young man, one Jay Birmingham, who limped into
Manhattan the other day having run the 2,950 miles from Los Angeles to New York
City, a long-distance hero, if ever there was one.

It took him just under 73 days and the most fascinating thing about his
marathon jog was his confession of what hampered him most along the way. Put in
the form of a question, it might instigate some interesting bets. What, then,
do you suppose was his greatest difficulty? He mentioned pains in his shins,
which you might guess at, apocalyptic thunder and lightning storms and – what
we'd all think of today – the paralysing heatwave that hit him all the way from
West Texas through the Upper South and Midwest and on to New York. New York, in
fact, in 90 degrees, was almost a relief. He said that most of the last 1500
miles had been like jogging in an oven.

But I'd be surprised if any listener had guessed the main hazard. It was
hecklers along the way who tossed beer cans at him. Possibly I imagine, from
people who objected to the president's boycott of the Olympics and thought he
ought to be doing his stuff in Moscow.

Anyway, let us raise a glass to Jay Birmingham before we move on to topic A. Or
rather, I ought to make a short bypass of topic A before we backtrack and
mention a little Anglo-American hassle which at any other time might have been
the subject of a whole talk.

You surely know that, since the development of trade unions among actors and
other show business people, a British actor, an American band leader, cannot
automatically book himself into a tour of the other country. In the old days,
if the manager of an American vaudevillian, say, got a booking for him in
London, he simply sent over and performed.

I remember the first shock of the incoming system way back in the early 1930s
when Duke Ellington decided to take his band to London. Paul Whiteman and his
large band had done it six or seven years before and taken England by storm
with something called symphonic jazz, but when Ellington first tried it he was
told that he, as a unique irreplaceable talent, would be very welcome if he
agreed to leave his band behind and hire British jazz men to fill in for them.
Since, however, what was unique and irreplaceable about Duke Ellington's band
was Duke Ellington's band, the entirely new sound that he'd created with it,
the tour had to be abandoned.

Well, since then the unions on both sides of the Atlantic have been very
watchful of any incoming foreigner – British artists coming into America,
Americans going into England – the general principle which governs letting them
in or keeping them out is well understood. You have to prove that the talent
that you're importing is unique or at least not one that could be matched by a
native.

A year or two ago, I found myself appearing before a tribunal of Actors' Equity
in New York to give evidence as – if you please won't laugh out loud – as an
expert witness. An American producer wanted to put on, in America, a revival of
'My Fair Lady'. He'd been over to London, soon found his Henry Higgins in the
person of a well-known British actor and, after auditioning over 30 English
actresses, had picked his Eliza.

Actors' Equity in New York said the producer could have one of them but not
both The actor was accepted as being unique and irreplaceable but, they said,
the Eliza was not. Equity maintained that they should either find an English
woman in the United States who was an American citizen or give the part to an
American girl.

Several Americans were auditioned and the producer was dissatisfied. Something
was wrong with them and I was called in to say what. I made what the producer
and his lawyer assured me was an unanswerable case for having an English woman.
No American girl, I maintained, could possible speak natural and easy-going
Cockney and then switch to natural and easy-going Mayfair.

The tribunal started to heckle me by mentioning American actresses who, on the
stage or on the screen, had played English women. 'How about', they said,
'Katharine Hepburn as Mary Queen of Scots?' 'Awful!" I said. 'She only went to
show that the daughter of a New England doctor who'd gone to Bryn Mawr should
play nothing but the daughters of New England doctors who'd gone to Bryn Mawr.'
I also added that the chosen Henry Higgins was dispensable. Lots of naturalised
Englishmen living in America could play the part, but Eliza had to be English.

When the hearing was over, the producer and his lawyer took me off to a
celebration lunch. They said I had made an overwhelming case. Well, the
tribunal was underwhelmed. They decided to let in the Englishman and give Eliza
to an American girl. She proved my point, but not before the show had run for
three months.

Now there's a new row. In the current recession, Actors' Equity is under fire
for letting in English performers while Americans go unemployed – and I think I
ought to mention, by way of dissuading stage-struck youngsters, that more than
85 per cent of all professional actors and actresses earn less than £1,000 a
year.

Well, today, Actors' Equity is getting tougher than ever and the equivalent
union in Britain is understandably reciprocating, but not vigorously enough for
some Britons.

A correspondent in a London newspaper bemoaned this trend the other day and to
demonstrate how desperate, how absurd, things have got he wrote, at least the
paper printed, this immortal sentence: 'And now an Englishman is being passed
over and an American is being given the intensely English part of Sydney Carton
in Lord Grade's "A Tale of Two Cities".'

It just goes to show, among other things, that we can't write anything about
America these days without committing a Freudian slip that involves the woeful
figure of the President of the United States. And so we come reluctantly to
him.

Last week I remarked that presidential nominating conventions have a way of
getting out of hand. Not usually with the Republicans but the Democrats... the
Democrats have a habit, practically a tradition, of starting out of hand and
winding up at dawn on Friday morning all with – hours after the convention is
supposed to have ended – with three candidates, one winner and two losers,
disguising from the assembled mob their loathing of each other, by clasping
their hands and raising their arms high like boxers and showing the convention
how wonderfully they're all of one mind.

Whenever, if memory serves, whenever the Democrats have fought in the
convention, they've always said that a healthy battle showed how unfettered the
party was by the party bosses. But what it showed to the country was that the
Democrats were a divided party and they regularly lost.

These habits are worth bearing in mind when we come, as we will on Monday 11th,
to the Democratic convention in New York. Less than two weeks away from the
nominating convention which is meant to show a united party, another and better
way of life than any the Republicans can offer, the Democrats are, as one sad
senator put it the other day, 'Running for the lifeboats'.

I don't remember, from my own experience or from the books, any time when a
party has approached its convention in such a shambles of despair and disunity.
The latest poll shows Ronald Reagan with 51 per cent popular approval, John
Anderson, the maverick independent, with 23 per cent and President Carter with
only 20 per cent. Not Truman, at his lowest ebb, not Nixon, in the pit of
Watergate, ever sank so low in public esteem and this is the man who has to
keep up a traditional front and pretend that on Thursday week he will
handsomely take a majority of the votes once the balloting gets under way.

I think a great deal will turn on the day that the Democrats' Rules Committee
puts its new rules to the floor. The Carter men are in a majority on the Rules
Committee and this year, only a week or two ago, they resisted the promised
belligerency of Senator Kennedy's crusade for an open convention by writing in
a rule which says that if any delegate refuses to vote the way he was
instructed to vote when he was chosen in the primary elections he will be
replaced by a so-called 'alternate' who will then obediently vote the way the
primary said he should.

If this rule carries when it goes to the convention floor, then Carter will
have the comfortable majority the primaries gave him, but there is the
embarrassment of brother Billy's shenanigans with Libya. This looked to be no
more than an embarrassment until it came out on Thursday that the president
had, in fact, discussed with his brother, at one time, classified State
Department cables about Billy's first trip to Libya.

This new shock, along with Carter's truly appalling plunge in the polls, has
caused the Democrats in the Senate to meet in private twice and wonder what to
do. The key figure here is Senator Robert Byrd, the president's leader in the
Senate. An astute and sober majority leader, he's not so far committed himself
to any candidate, not from... not from weakness or indecision, but from the
healthy recognition that the Senate majority leader is going to have to get
along with the next Democratic president, if there is one, whoever he is –
Carter or Kennedy or Muskie or Mondale or some unknown Lochinvar.

But Senator Byrd, we now know, has given serious consideration to a proposal of
several leading Democrats that he should ask the president, even at this late
date, to step down, at the very least, not to fight for the new rule but
magnanimously to suggest its abolition, to be in fact the proposer of an open
convention where all the delegates could start again and vote for the man who,
today, not last March, seems most likely to beat Reagan.

It might be the shrewdest thing the president could do but, as you know,
shrewdness does not seem to be his strong point. He knows that most of the
delegates who don't want him want Kennedy less. In a word, the Democrats are
running round in circles looking for that elusive, that God-sent third man.
Next week we'll have a better idea whether they've found him. Maybe.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP