Reagan budget defeated

It used to be Gary Cooper who responded to a threat from the local bad man with
a phrase so simple, yet so menacing that it rang, or rather crept, first around
America and then around the world. Cooper looked the man square down in the eye
and said, 'Smile, when you say that!'.

Well this famous cliché has finally expired with the arrival on the scene of a
more cynical, but equally idealistic variation on the Cooper character, in the
person of Clint Eastwood. Who will forget that moment in the movie 'Sudden
Impac't, except, of course, the people who never saw it, when a gunman makes a
threatening move towards our all-American good guy who says, 'Go ahead and make
my day!'.

There was a time, I once read, when the not-very secret ambition of Ronald
Reagan was to be the next Gary Cooper. For various reasons, having to do mainly
with acting ability or disability, but also, I think, because you couldn't have
two Gary Coopers, Reagan never made it. Until last Wednesday. The president was
talking to a meeting of big businessmen, corporation presidents and the like,
and when he came in to talk to them, he'd just received a bitter pill from the
Senate, or rather from the Senate budget committee whose job it is to go over
the budget for 1986 that the president submitted in January and revise it,
allow this, disallow that.

Since the Republicans are in a majority in the Senate, they have a majority on
all the committees and the chairmen of those committees are, you might say, the
president's men. There are 12 Republicans on the budget committee and 10
Democrats. You could expect, therefore, that any accommodation the whole
committee would make in its budget recommendations would lean in the
president's favour.

Well, the committee went over the president's budget line by line – cut so much
from welfare, from student loans, peg social security, eliminate all subsidies
for mass transportation, allow a healthy increase in defence spending, so on!
The committee didn't even soften its blows. Most of the Republicans, including
the chairman, joined all the Democrats and by an overwhelming vote rejected the
president's budget, the whole caboodle. Mr Reagan had had wind of this coming
humiliation before he talked to the businessmen and, for once, he dropped his
perpetual affability, the look he maintains in good times and bad, of the most
happy fella. He was bristling with frustration.

The budget committee had let him know that not only was it going to maintain or
freeze social programmes that the president wanted to trim or eliminate, it was
going – in fact, later in the day, it did – reduce military spending and
increase it next year only enough to stay in step with the three, four, per
cent inflation that's expected. All in all, the committee means to cut $55
billion from the deficit and, nastiest word of all, they let it be known that
to to this, they would begin to dream up new taxes.

Now you may remember that the president had said during the campaign and time
and again afterwards that he would allow new taxes 'over my dead body'. Well,
he stood before the businessmen and denounced the Senate committee, accused it
of planning to squander the people's money and then he said, 'I have only one
thing to say to the tax increasers, go ahead and make my day!'. It got an
immediate roaring response. If it was a triumph of a sort it will be
short-lived.

This whole session of the Senate budget committee highlights, yet again, the
folly we all indulge of headlining any president's proposals when they're made
as if they were edicts. For at least two months now, the papers and the
television commentators have been talking about the president's budget as a
settled policy of the second Reagan administration. We always do it. LBJ will
do this, Carter will raise defence budget, Reagan to slash social spending and
maintain big arms build up.

Well, the president's budget, like any other proposal that must be legislated
by the Congress before it can ever become a policy, is no more than a
suggestion, a plea, a cry for help. Two weeks ago, when the members of the
Senate budget committee were being sounded out about the prospects of the
president getting all he wanted or a half or less, one of his own men said,
'The day the budget lands on the committee table, it will be a dead duck'.

Before we move on to other matters, let me just remind you of the process in
the American system, so different from a parliamentary system, the process of
passing, or rather reshaping and then passing, a national budget.

First, the president goes to work with his advisers, especially with his
director of the budget and the secretary of the treasury. He finds out what his
Cabinet officers want – defence, agriculture, so on. He puts together his
budget and sends it first to the Senate's budget committee which has now
rejected it in toto, but has then put together its own budget in the form of a
resolution which will now go to the Senate floor and can, of course, be
drastically amended there.

Whatever comes out of the Senate debate then goes to a conference of Senate and
House leaders and they reshape and rewrite it. And when that's done, there will
be a resolution expressing the sense of the Congress. It does not break down
its recommendations into detailed amounts for this and that. It sets general
targets, limits on spending for defence, say, for social programmes, so on.

The president cannot veto that resolution, those spending limits but, after
that, the thing goes to the House of Representatives which is the keeper of the
purse. Once so much money has been authorised for anything, the House has the
last word on appropriations, on who gets how much, for what.

Now, once the final budget has been passed into law, then a president can veto
it and toss the whole problem back to the Senate committee, the full Senate,
the Senate House conference, the floor of the House. In theory, the president
can go on doing this – in fact, he simply cannot – put the telescope up to his
blind eye and see no sign of defeat.

Somewhere along the way, he's going to have to do what every president does and
hates to do. He has to accept the best the Congress will give him. So, please,
let's have no more talk about Reagan's horrendous budget! It has already been
buried.

Only two things, at this stage, seem to be clear. There is going to be a
drastic reduction in the rate of increase of military spending, something close
to a freeze and, as Senator Dole, the Republican majority leader, the
president's leader in the Senate, put it, 'There are going to be new taxes,
sure as you're born'. It will then remain to be seen what famous idiom the
president will recall to excuse himself from keeping his promise to lie down
and die before any new tax is raised. If anybody in Washington still reads
Dickens these days, the president might say, 'When I said you could raise taxes
over my dead body, I meant it only in a Pickwickian sense'.

So, you can see how sincere the president was when mentioning the other night
that he would not be going to Mr Chernenko's funeral. He said, 'I have a lot on
my plate right here'. And that's true, but nobody doubts that if the dead
leader had been the head of an allied government, he would have been there. His
trip would have entailed appalling security problems and the White House
dropped a hint that he was not disposed to stand out in the Moscow cold with
colleagues of the stripe of Colonel Gaddafi.

The death of Mr Chernenko, so long anticipated, raised one, small, morbid
question about the Russians' acute sensitivity to the idea that their leaders
are mortal up to the very last moment when you have to admit the fact. The last
pictures we saw of Mr Chernenko, taken from Russian television, showed him
about to vote in the general election and, much later, he was seen receiving
congratulations on his election to his district. About nine hours had
transpired between his visit to the polling booth and his reception of his
admirers, but the curtains he was standing against in both pictures were the
same. Of course, you could say that since he had no opponent in his district,
there'd be no point in carting television gear all round Moscow against the
breathless moment when the word of his victory came in wherever he was. So why
not film him voting and then bring on the congratulators right away and film
the celebration at the same time?

However it was done, it was meant to show him – on the edge of death – as hale
and ready for a new term. I suppose we all knew it was coming once the news was
out that a Soviet trade delegation in San Francisco had abruptly turned round
and headed for home. And then the Soviet radio followed its usual practice of
killing the regular programmes and playing only sombre classical music.

One curious slip made here led to a quite different guess at what had happened.
I caught the news around midnight the day before the death was announced. It
was a swift bulletin mentioning the arrival of the Soviet arms control experts
in Geneva and then, after an interruption, a statement that the delegation had
no sooner arrived than it had gone home.

At that point, the natural inference was that the delegation was the Russian's
Geneva delegation. This led to a quick search for Russian experts, with which
Washington and various research institutes abound, to explain why the arms
controllers had come and gone.

Could it be that since the Americans had arrived in Geneva with instructions
from the president on no account to discuss even negotiating the Star Wars
plan, could it be that the Russians were demonstrating in the most dramatic and
disheartening way that, for them, the talks would have no point at all?

Well, very soon the mistake was corrected. The right delegation was identified
and, mercifully, the Kremlinologists were gagged and we were left with the
knowledge that, at the beginning of the talks, anyway, the Russians have a
solid propaganda advantage. They have successfully bemoaned the American
initiative in planning research into a space defence and somehow managed to
keep from the world the knowledge that for three or four years, at least, they
have been the pioneer researchers in that very field.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP