Street crime fears

Those of you who hear this talk in the morning may have been thrown into a
seizure by this sudden burst of cordiality. Well, I'm simply ridding myself of
a very small feeling of guilt that came over me several years ago when a father
wrote to me and quoted his nine-year-old son. The boy said, 'Why is Mr Cooke so
polite on Friday evenings and so rude on Sunday mornings?'

Considering the ratio of people who – in Britain, anyway – catch this talk on
Sunday compared with those faithful old retainers who forego the tube and tune
in on Friday evenings, I decided that the boy was right. From now on, I mean to
be polite all the time.

I've just done a short, flying visit to England and, picking up the news where
most people pick it up, on television, I was struck this time by how many of
what I'd taken to be American problems, I mean social problems, how many of
them are the common problems of Western society, of Britain and France and
Holland and Sweden and West Germany and, lately in an acute form, of Denmark.

First and foremost, and apparently insoluble of course, is unemployment. Time
and again in Europe and America governments of all parties have come in and
told us, with the greatest conviction and goodwill, that their main aim was
prosperity with full employment. Nobody has made it. They all found out, in
turn, that high employment, which means most people having the money to buy
lots of goods, goes with high inflation and then we're all battling with the
problem of productivity and welfare.

That's putting it in a form of shorthand that must puzzle a lot of people. What
I'm saying is that in some countries, certainly in the United States, I think
in Britain, also, I suspect in New Zealand, most of all in the Netherlands, the
care of the unemployed, the wholly admirable system of seeing that nobody must
be poverty stricken has made it possible, for young people especially, to have
free museums, free dancing, free music, free skating, free food, free medicine
and live frugally and cheerfully without work.

Now, don't misunderstand! Long ago I had the experience for one year of not
having enough coming in to maintain a wife and child. It's an experience I
recommend only to people who have never been less than comfortable. It happened
to me at a time when there was no dole in the United States, no way of picking
up the weekly cheque and, to those people who were once known as the labouring
poor, whose jobs, for whatever reason, were gone, who had to scrape and grit
their teeth and hold on, to be unemployed and see nothing ahead is the most
crushing, the most demeaning social experience a man and woman can go through.

But a government has to look at the whole picture of employment and we ought to
recall a forgotten sentence in the original Beveridge Plan. He didn't create
the welfare state but he gave us the blueprint and he wrote into it one warning
that nobody today ever mentions. 'Make work' he said, 'and see that there is
food and shelter, but do not hand out actual money beyond their barest needs
or, in the young, the impulse to get out and make some sort of a living will be
quashed.' With the greatest reluctance, I have to say, to recognise, that
there's a lot in it.

I know today, and I'm sure lots of you do too, young people who are out of a
job, have been for a long time, who manage to get by with unemployment cheques.
I'm not thinking of the heart-rending plight of Knowsley and such places, or of
chronic drifters, but of intelligent people and, in the United States, just out
of college with a good degree.

The really shocking news is that about six in ten of them see no job in sight.
Nobody can begrudge the fact that unlike such people 50 years ago in the Great
Depression, they are not, generally, in despair and close to starvation. Today,
I see them in droves every weekday now that we're getting bursts of warm days
and the blossom out. I see them sunning in the parks, frolicking or reclining
on the steps of the Metropolitan Museum. It is good that they're not hungry.
It's bad that many of them are content.

Well, I didn't mean to stay so long with this perpetual problem of high
unemployment in a healthy economy – a problem that no politician of any stripe,
any party, should be sure he can solve. I noticed, also, a growing and
continuing debate in Britain which is just as ding-dong in the United States
about teenage pregnancies. In America, it's about twice as common per thousand
of the population, but in both countries the same two antagonists square off
against each other.

One saying that widespread sex education and easy availability of
contraceptives will reduce the unwanted children, and the other group saying
that these measure lead to promiscuity and that the only solution is chastity
before marriage, which, I humbly suggest, is a fine recipe but no solution for
reality for the way things are.

Then there's the battle of working people for housing they can afford. Exactly
the same grudge in the cities, especially the big cities, of Britain as America
– two decades of building skyscraper offices and a blithe indifference to
building low-cost housing. Not indifference exactly, and I don't know how it is
with you wherever you live, but in New York the trend for the past 30 years is
glaringly obvious and depressing.

More and more high-rise apartments for the fairly rich and more and more
towering monoliths of skyscrapers of office buildings which will be rented by
corporations at as much as 45, 50, 60 dollars a foot. And, here and there, a
modest, bleak housing project, usually christened with great fanfare and the
mayor hailing the arrival of the millennium.

Then, I had recently spent a little time in Boston with a good friend of mine,
a woman in her thirties who goes around the high schools of the city warning
the 16-, 15-, 14-year-olds – from her own experience – of the dangers of moving
on from marijuana, or hash, to cocaine. This is not a peril only among the
children of the upper or middle classes. Very artful synthetic cocaine is now
flooding the country and is cheap enough to be bought by the children of modest
families and it's a problem not only in the big cities, it's in the Southern
back country, in Midwestern farming towns, out West, in the lovely villages of
New England – everywhere.

So I go to England and the first thing I see on television is a piece on the
efforts of the British customs authorities, drug enforcement division, to try
and stop huge shipments of cocaine, and of its new, cheaper variant, coming
into Britain.

Incidentally, this young American woman I mentioned, a cured addict, told me
that even eight, nine years ago in England – she was at a university there and
graduated with honours – she told me that, even then, in the university towns
of Britain, as in the cities of the North and Midlands, it took her never more
than 48 hours to make the easy connections and go off on weekend highs with
congenial groups of nice, educated junkies. It cannot help but be worse now,
though I find, both in this country and in Britain, that nice parents of nice
children are quite blind to the idea that their precious offspring could be
next.

And, more obvious, more depressing than anything as a social sickness, there is
crime, especially what is called street crime or random crime. I haven't heard
of any Western country in which it is not rising, though I suddenly realise
that if I'd made that remark out loud in America, the administration would have
come out quickly with the true statistic that in the United States crime, of
most kinds, declined in 1984.

It's true, but you have to say, declined how much and from what horrendous
peaks? There are still about as many homicides in New York City in a week as in
Denmark in a year. I can't put my hands on the figure for London but I'm pretty
sure that it's no more than one-tenth of the New York rate and New York is not
alone in this sorry championship race. The figures for Los Angeles, Miami,
Phoenix, Detroit are appalling too. Of course, New York has the reputation
around the world of being at all times the most dangerous city just to walk
around in – a reputation about as accurate as the Americans belief that
everybody in London subscribes to the London Times and takes crumpets for tea.

I'm always surprised by even intelligent and you'd guess fairly well-informed
visitors who ask if it's safe to walk in the parks. The answer is that by day
it's about as risky to play or sit or stroll around Central Park or the Bronx
Botanical Gardens as it is to do the same thing in Hyde Park or Regent Park or
St James's. At night you'd be foolish, though since the former mayor Lindsay
installed about a thousand sodium lights, muggers and other desperadoes have
retreated to other well-known districts of the city. You don't go strolling the
streets after dark in the South Bronx or the East Village.

And, most scary and in the news, just now, is the problem of crime at night on
the subways, in the underground. And that brings up the controversy still
raging over Bernhard Goetz, the slim, thoughtful, educated young man who, three
months ago, was approached by four youths and asked for five dollars, who then
drew a pistol and fired and wounded all four of them as they turned and ran.

Goetz immediately evoked a huge wave of sympathy from fretful subway riders who
feel that enough is enough. He aroused a solid body of criticism from people
who see chaos in any society that lets the ordinary citizen carry a gun and
take the law into his own hands.

One grand jury indicted him only for illegal possession of a handgun. A second
grand jury, confronted with new evidence, has indicted him with four counts of
attempted murder and assault and criminal possession of a weapon. The trial is
a month or two away and it will then be time to go into the question which now
boggles the ordinary American in his frustration over crime on the streets:

How far does the right of self-defence go for anyone who is mugged or about to
be mugged or fears the approach of a beggar?

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP