Congress vote on MX missile

This is the time of the year when anyone from abroad, asking how are things in
America, should require you to say, 'Which part?' or when December comes in,
you're made to realise that you're dealing with a continent more than a
country.

The climates begin to pull far apart so that, as I speak, it's 79 degrees
Fahrenheit in New Orleans, in northern New England it's well below freezing and
out on the Great Plains in Montana, 22 below zero, which means 54 degrees of
frost if you're out counting and all the old passes through the Rockies in the
High Sierra are closed for the winter.

Here in New York and along the north-eastern seaboard, we've just had the first
authentic nip of winter – a day bright as an icicle and sharp as a knife –
after a freak of week in which golf and even sunning were very much on the
menu. Last Saturday in the city here it was 72 degrees, the highest temperature
ever recorded for a December day, but now we're back to normal, which is to say
using the outdoors as a necessary interval of bundling up and going from one
warm place to another, to unbundle and think vaguely about the MX missile and
unemployment and our other general woes and to think precisely about the price
of heating oil and whether something hadn't better be done now about the leak
in the barn roof or the water tower.

The whole debate about whether to begin producing the MX missile – outside
Congress it's not been so much of a debate as a public brawl – was given a mad
touch on Wednesday when in mid-morning a man drove a white van up to the
entrance to the great white pinnacle that soars over Washington, the Washington
Monument. He was suspect the moment he got out of the van. He was wearing a
full-body ski suit and a motorcycle helmet with its dark visor down. He had a
backpack over his shoulders and a radio gadget in his hand that he identified
in warning shouts as a detonator. He said the van was full of explosives and
that it would take no more than the pressure of his thumb to blow up the famous
monument.

For those of you who've never seen it, I ought to say something about the most
successful and beautiful piece of architecture in a capital city that has a
great deal of impressive architecture of various styles. It's a memorial to the
nation's first president and when it was first mooted, there was a flurry of,
in the main, awful designs. The thing was argued about throughout the
nineteenth century. There was no Commission of Fine Arts as there is now to
agree on a plan and it was due to the tireless lobbying and rhetoric for 37
years of one congressman that eventually Congress agreed to fall back on what
this one man, Robert Winthrop, pleaded for – namely, a simple shaft, free from
anything of tinsel or tawdry. It was to be a simple obelisk.

In 1888, it was finished and opened to the public. It's a shaft of stone
blocks, 15 feet at the base, tapering to 18 inches at the top. It is, in fact,
a beautiful, white needle built on a grassy knoll. It's 555 feet high, five
times the height permitted by city ordinance to any buildings in the city's
skyline. Of all American monuments, it is the one most sacred to the founding
of the republic. It is all, and more, of what the Eiffel Tower is to Paris or
Big Ben to London.

Through all the stormy days and nights of the 1960s, the riots, the race riots,
the Vietnam protest marches and the like, it never occurred to anyone to defile
or threaten the Washington Monument. So, you can imagine, the Washington police
hotfooted it to the scene on Wednesday morning, heard the threats of the man in
the ski suit and picked up a message that he gave to them through a reporter.
It said: 'As an act of sanity, ban nuclear weapons or have a nice Doomsday!'

Well, he stayed there all day and he held nine persons hostage in the needle
top of the monument and released them five hours later. The police settled in
for a siege when, around 7.30 in the evening, he got into the van, disappeared
for a moment into the shadow of the monument and then drove off down a slope
and headed in the direction of the White House. The police had been ordered to
hold their fire so long as the van stayed on the open grounds that surround the
monument. They opened fire.

The van swerved and banged into a flag pole and keeled over on its side and, in
the end, it was a mortally wounded man they dragged from the cab of the van.
Identified later as 66 years old, once a tool- and die-maker from Miami Beach,
a veteran of the Second World War with a criminal record of some misdemeanours
and convictions for trafficking in drugs, but openly known to the neighbours
and to the keeper of a hotel he once lived in as the head of a local
anti-nuclear organisation.

It seems to me that there's a likelihood, at least, of his becoming sooner or
later a martyr to the cause of... the cause of what? I don't know how to put
it! – anti-nuclear, pro-nuclear freeze? – one of his pamphlets or messages
carried the same slogan that many peaceable groups of protesters from Stockholm
to San Francisco and Tokyo have carried, 'Ban Nuclear Weapons!'

Yes, indeed, it would be wonderful if we, they, all of us, did it, but how?
Both the Soviet and the American governments say, over and over, that our side
will never be the first to use a nuclear weapon. Both of them swear that they
share the aim of destroying all nuclear weapons at some time in the future.
When? When... when each side trusts the other to reduce its forces to those
required for conventional warfare.

The assumption of so many fervently sincere protesters is that they are alone,
bravely alone, in wanting no nuclear war and even the most knowledgable and
most temperate advocates of a freeze of all nuclear weapons now say that
nuclear plants and installations must be open to verification, that is, to
inspection. Of course, they must but who is going to enforce the 'must'.

I was present in 1946 at the first session of the United Nations Atomic Energy
Commission meeting here in New York when the chief American delegate, Mr
Bernard Baruch, got up and started his speech and his proposals with the crisp
sentence, 'We face a choice between the quick and the dead'. The Americans'
main proposal was that atomic energy, as it was then called, should be place at
once under the authority of the United Nations and that United Nations
inspectors would be appointed to go freely and report independently into any
country possessing the materials for making atomic weapons. At that time, only
the United States had the materials or had set off a bomb.

The proposal, the crucial idea of inspection by an international body, indeed
by any outsider, was turned down flat by the Soviet Union and they've been
against inspection or verification ever since.

Nobody who's followed Soviet-American relations in the nearly 40 years since
then can see how the United States and the Soviet Union, not to extend the hope
to Western Europe and the Soviet Union, can come to trust each other, which is
the one and only condition for any control of armaments leading to their
abolition. So that all these billboard and placard imperatives, 'Ban the Bomb',
'Stop Nuclear War', are expressions of a desperate hope with no slightest
indication of who is going to have the power to say 'Stop!' and 'You Must!'.

Well, on Tuesday, the public hassle or brawl left the streets and the marches
and turned into a debate in the House of Representatives. The issue about which
there's been for many months so much hot and angry partisanship was whether the
administration is to be given, to be voted, the funds it has asked for to begin
producing the MX missile in 1983.

I listened to this debate for several hours and I can say that it was one of
the best I've ever heard. All the arguments we've heard anywhere, four or five
sides of the nuclear argument, were aired. There was, as there always is, some
sarcasm and blustering rhetoric but there was also a very great deal of cogent,
informed and driving argument.

The ordinary citizen, the intelligentsia most of all, often talks about
Congress as if it were a body of big mouths that won't ever get down to hard
and honest facts. On the contrary, I'd say that nowhere in the United States is
there a body of men and women who are so primed with knowledge, with enough
expertise in the fields of nuclear planning and nuclear weapons and who have
the gift of articulating their knowledge and their conflicting opinions with
brisker intelligence.

The nub of the debate on which, in the end, the vote was bound to turn was
simply this. Is there any point in voting money to begin producing the MX
missile if there is yet no foolproof way of basing it on land? In the past few
years, successive administrations have suggested scattering the MXs all over
the continental United States. President Carter had the idea of putting them on
trains always in motion so that the location of this one or this cluster could
never be pinpointed by an enemy.

The Reagan plan is to put them all together in one part of Wyoming. It is known
as 'dense pack' and the congressmen against the plan made some sharp play with
the analogy that in December 1941 the United States air force had its own
precursor of a dense pack plan by crowding all its airplanes on one airfield in
Honolulu. 'If you want another Pearl Harbor', one congressman said, 'then dense
pack is the plan you must vote for.'

Before the vote and before it got into the papers, a day later, the word got to
the House that three out of five of the joint chiefs of staff have no trust in
the dense pack plan so the House voted by a big majority against starting
production of MX until there's a better plan for basing it. But that's not the
end of the missile. Next day, the House voted two and a half billion dollars
for further research into it but, just now, no production.

Only when the bill has been voted on by the Senate shall we know whether the
Congress wants a better, foolproof MX missile or is inclined to think that the
country can't afford it or doesn't need it.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP