America's Electoral College

I suppose back to 'normal' is the word for the American patient after the
frenzy of the political conventions and the fever of the atrocious heatwave
that blanketed about two-thirds of the entire country since the end of June.

'Normal' in terms of comfort means now that Texas, Oklahoma and the Deep South
are stewing in their normal 85 to 90 degrees a day instead of frying in 105 and
110. Even New Yorkers are blithe again with the weather boys saying, 'Looks
like a very pleasant weekend with seasonable temperatures in the low 80s'. Most
people who've managed to get away to the lakes or the mountains or the
seashore, though much good it did them, are now beginning to get out the cheque
book and tot up the renters' rent and wondering how to explain the broken
washing machine and the hole in the blanket.

A week or ten days from now it will be Labor Day, the last big holiday before
Thanksgiving and since the American calendar stubbornly follows the English
prototype, summer is officially declared at an end, though in about
three-quarters of the country you can swim and sweat till the end of October.

The main relief, though it's going to be very short, is of course a break in
the election campaign. Come September and Carter and Reagan and their running
mates will be off again on the cold chicken and coleslaw circuit, stepping up
with ever-increasing passion the warning that if one or the other is elected in
November, the American republic will be plunged into a pit of despair from
which it will never rise again.

There remains the third man not mentioned for these many months in these
reports, the dogged little owl-like man with the snowball head of hair who, it
seems an age ago, looked like a threat to the weary Carter and the genial, flip
Reagan – John Anderson, a relapsed Republican, gone independent. He did have
the sense, as many another heretic has not, not to set himself as leader of
some third party called 'Progressive' or 'New America' or whatever. Independent
means he's willing to accept converts from any faith and, for a time, it did
seem that he was going to do fatal damage to Carter, since the rebels who
joined him were disappointed Democrats more than liberal Republicans. What
happened to John Anderson?

Well, the latest word is that his campaign is in trouble. He must look back
with the last flicker of fire in his eyes if he thinks of the gaudy days when
he actually outdrew Carter in the public polls, but now the public, to the
extent that the public's whims can be measured by the polls, has done a sudden
and dramatic switch of faith, or fatalism or what you will. Dr Gallup has just
declared that the Reagan/Carter duel, which only two weeks ago had Reagan with
a dizzy 61 per cent of public approval and Carter with a woeful 38 per cent, Dr
Gallup says it's just about a dead heat – Reagan 39 per cent, Carter 38 and Mr
Anderson with a lagging 14 per cent.

The main interest of Mr Anderson to callow students on the outside is the
possibility, or was the possibility, of his taking enough votes away from both
the big boys that neither of them would, in the result, get a majority of the
electoral votes. May I patiently explain again for non experts what the
electoral vote is?

There is, there has been since the start of the republic, an institution called
the Electoral College and it's almost English in its perversity, I mean just as
everybody celebrates the Queen's birthday not on the Queen's birthday and at
Cambridge they all dance and frisk in June at what are called the May balls and
while the Earl of Leicester lives in Norfolk and the Duke of Norfolk lives in
Sussex, so the Electoral College does not exist as anything you can touch and
see.

In the very early days of the republic, before there was universal suffrage;
before, indeed, anyone could vote who wasn't a considerable landowner – the
Americans, remember, set up a republic, not a democracy – in those far off
days, each state appointed, and the governor was usually the appointer,
substantial men who were required, after the popular vote was counted in the
presidential election, to go off in a corner, usually to the state capital, and
decided whether the man the voters of that state had chosen as president was,
in their opinion, the best man for the job. They were under no compulsion to
follow the popular choice. Theoretically, they still aren't.

The Electoral College assigned to each state on the basis of population so many
votes. Each state is still assigned so many electoral votes. Let's say that in
New York State, for example, just for convenience, one million people vote and
600,000 votes go to Carter and 400,000 go to Reagan. New York, in the Electoral
College, is assigned, say – I'm far away from the books – 96 electoral votes,
the popular winner takes all 96 even if Carter gets 500,001 votes and Reagan
gets 499,999 and, on a day in January, after the November election, the
so-called 'electors' meet in their state capitals and officially record that
their electoral vote went for this man or that, the man who got the popular
majority.

The president is not officially elected until that January day. We needn't
trouble ourselves at this late date with the alarming fact that, in the distant
past, the electors actually exercised their power to ignore the popular
preference and choose the minority candidate. Now, it's a pure formality. The
point is that the total of the popular vote has no direct bearing on who is the
winner. It's happened over and over that a man who got less than a majority of
all the popular votes in the country became president because he got enough in
the big populous states to give him a majority of the electoral vote. These are
called 'minority' presidents – Woodrow Wilson was one, Harry Truman was
another.

So you can see that a man might carry, say, 30 states in the popular vote but
if they were all small states with small electoral votes, if his opponent got
New York and Pennsylvania and California, Illinois, Texas, Michigan, the
opponent would win, since the big totals of the most populous states would
outweigh the accumulated totals of many less populous states. And this is why,
from now on, you're going to hear the politicians saying it's essential for the
winner in November to take California, the most populous state and New York
and, at least, two or three of the other giants.

Well now, John Anderson. When he was outrunning Carter, people began to do a
little arithmetic and while nobody has ever given him a chance of being elected
president in his own right, a lot of people suspected that he might get enough
votes in the right places to deny either Carter or Reagan a majority of the
electoral votes. If that happened, then what?

Well, then, the election is declared null and void and the decision goes to the
House of Representatives. An Englishman expressed surprise at this device,
'Why,' he asked, 'to the Lower House? Why not to the Senate?' For the simple
reason that the House of Representatives is chosen on the basis of population.
A big state has a lot of congressmen, a small state has few. So it's a fairer
copy of the popular will than the Senate, which was deliberately set up to give
every state an equal say in great national affairs, irrespective of size of
population. Huge California has two senators, tiny Rhode Island has two
senators.

Well, I hope that now all is clear. The day after former President Ford
discovered, rather late in the day, that he couldn't be a sort of co-president,
he confidently predicted that neither Reagan nor Carter would win enough enough
electoral votes and that it would go to the House. He was impressed by the
strength of John Anderson. John Anderson was to be the spoiler.

I must say that in the rather unsatisfactory choice with which we're faced it
would be a fascinating result, but now Mr Anderson is down to 14 per cent and
this is one percentage point away from the possibility of his making his mark
because the debates we expect to take place between Carter and Reagan are
sponsored by a highly civic-minded group called the League of Women Voters.
They've said that if Mr Anderson, by 1 September, stands at 15 per cent or
higher in the polls, he, too, will be invited to debate with the two big shots.
That might produce interesting dogfights, boggle people's convictions and throw
him enough support to take votes away from both Carter and Reagan.

The reaction of the two main teams to the dramatic shift in the polls is simple
and predictable. The Reagan people are saying, 'Sure, Carter got a lift from
the conventions, so did we from ours'. The Carter people say, 'The convention
only reminded people that the president is a responsible man'.

In the meantime, Reagan appears before the veterans of old wars and warns them
that we are woefully behind in defending ourselves against the might,
especially the missile might, of the Russians. What's more to the point, and
more to Carter's advantage, is that the Senate budget committee the other day
overrode the objection of Kennedy men in the Senate and voted to raise the
swollen defence budget by another five and a half billion dollars.

In other words, Carter can say, 'See! The Senate is acting on MY warnings, not
Reagan's and is, at last, following my lead, just as it followed my lead at
long last on an energy programme!'

At this point, I would simply take the risk of saying, of defining, a return to
normality as a return to the only true barometer of American election
sentiment. When in doubt, and as a presidential election draws near, the
American people, year after year, decade after decade, seem to follow a
stabilising needle that moves toward the centre. They come to distrust both the
left and the right. Until September that's all I'm going to say about the
political future of the republic.

Meanwhile, Arnold Palmer, the grizzled veteran of 51, has won a golf
tournament. Bjorn Borg is out with a bad knee. Chris Evert goes on winning
everything in sight, except Wimbledon.

Anita Bryant, the Florida lady who sold orange juice through television
commercials and who campaigns so fearlessly against homosexuals, swearing that
marriage was the proper and blessed state, has just got divorced. Her mother
says, 'Right now, she's off of men and I don't blame her!'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP