Politicising the dictionary

'When April with his showers sweet' – there spoke an Englishman, not far from
his native Kent.

If Chaucer had been an American and alive today, he'd be writing about 'April
with his piercing cold' – 41 below zero in a place with the appropriate name of
Lonely, Alaska. Next line, 'April with his searing heat' – 101 degrees in
Havazu City, Arizona, and in between these extremes, just about everything you
could hope for, or fear.

A day or two ago, when I was to meet my wife at the airport on her way back
from Paris, I was wakened in the middle of the night, well, 7am, by what my
dream told me was the Russians coming – a shower of missiles drilling against
the windowpane and bending it. It turned out to be just a mad, windy rain and
the radio told me it was the fringe of a tornado that had whirled through
northern New Jersey, knocked down trees, scooped up roofing and clobbered a
church. An hour later, dazzling sun and a balmy breeze and the apple and cherry
blossom blazing in Central Park.

The baseball season opened last Monday after a short delay in Boston while
three inches of overnight snow melted and the resulting slush had been
squeegeed from the diamond. I take it that you have no trouble with 'squeegee',
the implement with a long handle going down into a horizontal rubber brush
that, for such necessities as drying off a skating rink or a putting green or a
baseball diamond, can look as long as a city block.

The diamond, for the innocent, is, the Oxford Dictionary correctly says, 'the
large, diamond-shaped space enclosed by the four bases'. I hope this is clear
and I hope the Russians in their new edition of the Oxford Dictionary have been
given the correct definition of these things, which cannot be said for the
Oxford University Dictionary prepared in all goodwill for Russian students
learning English.

Imagine the wonderful boost that has just been given to the Soviet view of life
by the definitions a young Russian will find in this new Oxford Dictionary when
he looks up 'capitalism'. It says, 'An economic and social system based on
private ownership of the means of production, operated for private profit and
on the exploitation of man by man.'

What about 'socialism?' 'A social and economic system which is replacing
capitalism.' And how about 'Communism?' 'A theory revealing the historical
necessity for the revolutionary replacement of capitalism by Communism.'

It must be awfully tough these days to be an Englishman or an American working,
if they allow such, as a visiting professor in Russia, especially if he or she
is an economist. Hopeless to maintain that capitalism works in some places,
that a five per cent profit margin is about as high as you can expect after the
money gone for capital investment, raw materials and wages.

'But sir, it says here the exploitation of man by man, and it says, the
necessity of replacing capitalism by Communism and by revolution, too!' 'Well,
er... I'm afraid you've got hold of a Soviet textbook.' 'Oh no, sir! This is
your very own dictionary. It's the Oxford.'

Well, eventually, these howlers, faux-pas, boo-boos or clangers, came to be
spotted by British and American journalists. 'To what, Mr Editor, do you
attribute these highly subjective definitions? Computer error?' 'No,' the poor
fellow replied, identified as chief executive of the Oxford University Press,
'we have to adjust our dictionaries,' he said, 'to different markets.'

It's quite an adjustment when you accommodate a meaning to the prevailing
political theory of the reader. I doubt that the Russians, in a textbook
prepared for English students of Russian, define capitalism as a system of
private ownership of the means of production, most recently, of shared
management between owners and workers which has shown a remarkable capacity to
endure and even to prosper, in spite of Karl Marx's prediction in 1848 that
capitalism was on its last legs.

The Oxford official gave the limp excuse that just as British English and
American English are different in many ways, so, he was implying, you have to
allow for differences between British English and Russian English. In the
result, the Oxford boys seem, in these instances, anyway, to have transformed a
dictionary from a dictionary into a political or ideological weapon – as Dr
Johnson turned his monumental and entertaining work into a satirical weapon.

Look up the word 'patron' in Johnson's dictionary. He's defining it at a time
when the only way to get a learned work published was to get some rich man,
some patron, to advance the money to float it. Johnson, himself, had begged and
pleaded for seven years with Lord Chesterfield, while he, Johnson, was ruining
his eyesight and scraping a living in an attic. So it's hardly surprising that
when he came to define 'patron' he was in no mood to be strictly fair and
objective. 'A patron,' he said, 'one who countenances, supports or protects,
commonly a wretch who supports with insolence and is paid with flattery.'

At least he signed his work, Samuel Johnson. I ought to say, in mitigation of
the sins of the Oxford University Press, that they didn't provide these
definitions to the Russians. The Russians bought the rights to this Oxford
students' dictionary years ago and they had the decency, or the gall, to
request these changes. We don't know who said, 'Well, yes.' Was it some mole
from neighbouring Cambridge? Or do they have moles at Oxford?

Anyway, permission was given and now that chief executive has to make a sorry
apology. 'We blundered,' he said, 'the political overtones should have been
thought more carefully about. I think we should have said, according to Marxist
doctrine, capitalism means such and such and not done it quite so badly.'

Well, what's done cannot be undone and I think it unlikely that Pravda or Tass
will publish the apology or the explanation. As far as they're concerned, they
can say, in all honesty, 'These are the official definitions of capitalism,
socialism and Communism, given in the most distinguished of English
dictionaries.' Chalk up one for their side.

While we're on the Russians, something must be said about Mr Gorbachev's latest
proposal to freeze the deployment of Soviet medium-range missiles in Europe. On
Monday, Moscow radio put out this bulletin which, in a deadpan way, is
factually correct: 'Worldwide interest is being paid to a major new peace
initiative outlined by Mr Gorbachev, but official Washington has been quick to
give it a cold shoulder to the Soviet peace proposal in order to blunt its
impact on world opinion.'

There's no question there is worldwide interest. The major new peace
initiative, however, is not new and opinions vary widely throughout the world
whether the initiative is a peace proposal or a surrender proposal. Certainly
Washington gave it a cold shoulder.

For once, the facts and why the Americans and America's allies differ so
sharply with the Russians in interpreting them are not hard to establish. The
Russians have deployed 414 of these medium-range missiles, each with three
warheads. NATO has 134 missiles with single warheads – plans to have another
438. So a freeze now would leave the Russians with – not even counting their
triple warheads – a superiority of three to one. The American, the
administration, position is exactly that of Mrs Thatcher who said the
consequences of such a freeze would not be balance which we seek, but enormous
Soviet superiority.

For their part, and certainly to all the peoples behind the Iron Curtain, the
Russians do not accept this arithmetic. In measuring the opposing missile
forces in Europe, the Russians count in the British and the French missiles
which several neutral and strategic experts believe go some way, not all the
way, to establishing a balance or parity. This dispute is old and continuous.
In reviving it in public and calling it a new offer of peace and stability, Mr
Gorbachev is making a powerful play for the peace marchers who failed last
spring to stop the latest deployment of American Pershing and cruise missiles
in Europe.

Mr Gorbachev has made it all the harder to convince these passionate and
sincere marchers and demonstrators that a truer balance of missile strength in
Europe would require first a colossal reduction of the Russians' 800 warheads
on the SS-20s that are aimed at Europe.

Put quite bluntly, and rightly or wrongly, the central conviction of American
and NATO policy is the belief that the first, grand aim of Soviet policy is the
neutralising or subjection of Western Europe, preferably by words, by a
drumbeat of appeals for peace and the renunciation of nuclear war, but if that
fails, by the demonstration of overwhelming military power which it would be
foolish and useless to plan to oppose.

It doesn't offer much cheer for the months ahead in Geneva. And that brings up
the prospects – if any – of the summit that President Reagan has said he seeks.
Mr Gorbachev replied promptly that a positive attitude to such a meeting was
expressed on both sides. I think this means, yes, he'd like one.

But since Mr Gorbachev's freeze ploy, the administration has thought again.
Not... not to back away, but both the White House and the State Department are
talking now about much serious work and careful preparation before. One
official recalled the abortive 1961 summit between Kennedy and Khrushchev which
achieved a tense, personal quarrel over Berlin and President Kennedy departing
for home, with the grim remark, 'It's going to be a long, cold spring.'

What there is not going to be is the genial, 'let's get acquainted' meeting
that Mr Reagan proposed, which is perhaps as well. The official picture of the
two genial giants, Mr Reagan and, for a change, an affable and smiling Russian
chief, could only excite us with fond and foolish hopes for a condition
noticeably absent from the earth – peace and goodwill toward men.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP