No comment

There was a time – I suppose it's long gone – when schoolchildren in
English-speaking schools were given short passages from famous orators to
memorise, just so they'd get the swing of the language in their minds.

Usually they were bits from Shakespeare, like Mark Antony's expression of
crocodile tears over Caesar's corpse. Sometimes they were from actual speeches,
the most famous, I guess, being that of John Bright, the great, if forgotten,
Victoria radical when he stood up to oppose Britain's involvement in the
Crimean War. Bright raised in the house what he called 'a solitary voice amid,'
as he put it, 'amid the din of arms and the clamours of a venal press'.

Well, I certainly wouldn't accuse the press, the media, in the past two weeks
of being venal – that's to say of being bribed or flouting its principles – but
if ever the din of arms was matched by the din of the press, the last fortnight
has been unequalled in my experience. I don't think it would be an exaggeration
to say that, throughout the country, at least a thousand television news
reporters, anchor people, commentators, Middle East exiles, professors, have
been bustled into the studio and milked dry of every drop of expertise, of
rumour, of speculation, mostly by the anchormen and women, of rapid appeals not
to go away, to stay tuned for the latest news, the up-to-the-minute
interpretation of the hijacking crisis, and this has gone on not only through
the days, but through the nights.

What turns this orgy of talk into an unbearable din is the dreadful, simple
fact that they know nothing, that they cannot know anything much, anyway, about
what's going on. I don't mean to demean the intelligence of many shrewd
commentators or the energy, even the courage, of American reporters who've been
hustled into Beirut, into Syria, as well as into Paris and London and, so help
us, into every home of every relation of every hostage who has been released or
not released.

Meanwhile, the government leaders of the West swear that they must get together
and mount a concerted and ruthless campaign of retaliation against
international terrorism. It's all praiseworthy, it's all understandable, but it
is all so much as, who was it said, 'piffle before the wind'. Nobody can
identify or retaliate against an abstraction called international terrorism and
in the hijacking case, we don't know who did it, where they live. There is, as
President Reagan said, quite rightly, at the only press conference he's held
about the horror, and I imagine the only one he will hold till he can announce
that it's all over, 'This time there is no nation that you can hold
responsible, no target to go for'.

There's no question that the president and every conceivably useful adviser
were tapped, every source in the world that might help but, for once, in the
only time in this administration and maybe in several previous administrations,
we heard from the president the old door-slamming phrase, 'No comment'. For
once, at last, a president has dared to imply, if not to say out loud, that
everybody in America does not have a right to know everything that's going on.

Now this used to be taken for granted until, I guess the fateful day, when for
the first time, a president's press conference was thrown open to television.
Eisenhower was the one who did it and that was 30 years ago. I remember it
well. It was a revolutionary move. Until then, no citizen who did not have
White House press credentials had ever seen or heard a presidential press
conference and I recall going in there with some old reporters and we were all
wondering what Ike would say when a question came up about some trouble that
was brewing, some diplomatic problem that needed delicate and private handling,
some presidential policy not quite yet ready for public exposure.

In short, problems whose solutions would be defeated if the press got wind of
part of the story and unwittingly distorted it or misrepresented one of the
party's attitudes. It all comes down to the opposing theories of diplomacy best
expressed in this century by President Woodrow Wilson after the First World War
and, about 30 years later, by the last, bold and brilliant, Secretary-General
of the United Nations, Dag Hammarskjöld.

I think I ought to say that since every member nation has regularly put its own
interests above the general interest and since the Russians, more than anybody,
got alarmed at Hammarskjöld's independence, the role of secretary-general has
been stripped down to that of a tactful flunky, no matter how fine, how
incorruptible, how brilliant the secretary-general may be as a man.

Well, what Woodrow Wilson said in the pious glow of becoming the midwife at the
birth of the League of Nations is that we should from then on have open
agreements, openly arrived at. It sounds fine and forthright and just what any
decent democracy deserves. We discovered down the decades what old, good
diplomats had known from the beginning – that it's a hopeless, essentially
sentimental prescription.

Apply it to your own private life. Suppose... suppose a couple were having
trouble with their marriage. They don't go around advertising it, though,
maybe, the wife confides in her mother and/or her closest friend. The man makes
cynical remarks to a crony or two, but suppose the couple, while thinking of
divorce, has a genuine desire to make the marriage work again. I think anybody
who's ever been married knows how much the chance of coming through the bad
time depends on private discussion, on trying not to nurse grievances, of
working through the ups and downs in private.

Imagine their prospects of success if they put bulletins every night saying,
'Today he did this, today, she said that...'. I think this is plain to anyone
who has ever read much diplomatic history and been close to men whose job is to
negotiate international troubles that might lead to trade embargoes, to
suspending diplomatic relations, at worst, to war.

Often I, as an outsider, occasionally given the opportunity to be on the
inside, on the understanding, though, that I kept my mouth shut and didn't talk
or write about it, I have seen how, if the contending parties can get together
in private and talk and argue in confidence and not reveal to anyone but their
governments the different moving stages of agreement, disagreement, bad faith,
good feeling, this is the only method with a chance of success. In the end, of
course, there may be no way out. Neville Chamberlain was under the pathetic
delusion that Hitler was a reasonable man who liked him.

But when there is a way out, when the private negotiations succeed, it doesn't
make news. There's the rub for the newshound.

So, Dag Hammarskjöld, when Woodrow Wilson's noble prescription was put to him –
open agreements openly arrived at – said, whatever is the Swedish word for
'rubbish'. Diplomacy, he said, can only work when you have open agreements
secretly arrived at.

In our time, in the time of anyone who's read newspapers and watched television
during the past 40 years, the main driving impulse of the media has been to get
to the bottom of everything at once, to air the secrets, to write and talk on
the bold and mischievous principle that the public, everybody, has the right to
know everything while it's going on.

Mr Reagan's blessed use of the phrase, 'No comment' and saying, time and again,
'I'll take no more questions about that' sent me back to the journalistic code
which was never violated in the days when I covered the White House. I've just
looked back to the transcript of a presidential press conference in 1937
published in one of the eight volumes entitled, 'The Public Papers and
Addresses of President Franklin Roosevelt' – published, of course, after his
death.

Throughout Roosevelt's 13 years in the presidency, throughout the 998 press
conferences he gave – for years, he held two a week – there was a firm,
well-understood relationship between the press and the president about what
could be printed and what could not. Four categories of news. One, very rarely
allowed, statements you could quote from the president's own lips. Two, news
for attribution to the White House but not the president. Third what was called
background, to help you understand but strictly off the record, not to be
printed. Fourth, news you had no right to be in on just yet. No comment.

In this conference I'm looking at, the president started by saying, 'There
isn't much news but I want to tell you a story off the record, wholly off the
record because it does affect the press of this country.' He then quoted two
stories picked up by a news syndicate and sent confidentially to their regional
editors. One said, 'Towards the end of last month, Mr Roosevelt was found in a
coma at his desk. Immediate treatment resulted in the president's being sent
off to Southern waters, ostensibly on a fishing trip.' The editor of the
syndicate called the White House and said he wouldn't print the story if the
White House would issue an official denial. The White House refused.

Another confidential note to the same syndicate quoted an American businessman
as saying at a private dinner that 'we have a paranoiac in the White House'.
That was printed.

Of course, both stories were perniciously untrue and Mr Roosevelt said to the
press conference, 'As you know, I'm in favour of legitimate news reporting,
whether friendly or hostile, but this is not news reporting, this is not a news
service and I thought you ought to know about it'. Question: 'Mr President, how
much of this is off the record?' The president: 'It's all off the record. All
strictly in the family. Now...' And then he turned to news he had to give on
the record. Nothing of this ever appeared.

So, give, for a moment, a sympathetic thought to the president, to any head of
government today who dares say that nothing is off the record, who only has to
venture the passing thought that coffee upsets his stomach, to have every
newshound in the world crackling the evening air with the news that coffee
shares have slumped and the Colombian ambassador has lodged an official protest
with the White House.

Nothing, any more, is 'strictly in the family' of responsible reporters.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP