UN vote condemns Soviets

There seems to be a belief, both in the United Nations and out of it, that the
enormous majority vote in the Assembly - 104 to 18 - condemning the Soviet
Union for going into Afghanistan is something that has surprised the Russians
and could change whatever plans they had for further incursions, to use the
diplomatic word, in the Middle East.

Now that's a sentence which we could have said quite blandly and sincerely 30
years ago without a second thought. Some grizzled veterans may recall that the
first United Nations setback to Russian plans to go south was a condemning vote
against a move they made over 30 years ago against Azerbaijan in northern Iran.
The Russians never again tried anything in Azerbaijan.

The point I want to make is that 30 years ago, and for many years later, United
Nations votes in the Assembly did carry weight. We thought at the time that
this was due to the actual prestige of the United Nations itself. It only
occurred to us later, looking back on those early years, that the Russians were
restrained because America alone had the bomb and because America could always
rely on the support of Western Europe and of the Latin American republics and
everybody else who scuttled for protection under the umbrella of the American
nuclear monopoly.

The Russians used to complain in those days that the United Nations was run by
the United States, Britain, France, the Scandinavian countries and what they
called America's 'satellites' in Latin America. And, in fact, the Russians were
right. We had the votes, we always had the votes, to defeat them in the General
Assembly and when really serious matters came up and were brought before the
Security Council, the only body that can order action, the Russians
automatically shuffled down from their sleeve their ace, the veto, which the
big five powers, the United States, Britain, France, Russia and China – in
those days it was the China exiled on Formosa – these five could veto any
action they disapproved of and the Russians, through the indomitable Mr
Gromyko, went on vetoing everything in sight. In fact, 'pulling a Gromyko'
became an idiom, so that the United Nations was in danger of permanent
paralysis.

By 1950 the Security Council was so frustrated that the American Secretary of
State, Dean Acheson, proposed that when something important was constantly
smothered in the council, it could be moved for discussion into the General
Assembly and this was passed by a resolution known as the 'Uniting for Peace'
resolution. The Russians were furious over this bypassing procedure but their
fury was very soon softened by the thought that while the General Assembly
might pass resolution after resolution condemning the Russians, the Assembly
has no power to do anything but register an opinion.

And so, from then on down the years, we saw time and again that the big powers,
when there were five of them, had nothing seriously to fear from the United
Nations, they could use the veto in the Security Council and shrug their
shoulders at a scolding resolution from the Assembly. And when there came to be
only two big powers, the so-called superpowers, the same indifference to UN
resolutions applied.

Once the Russians had their bomb, the many smaller nations that were being born
in the breakdown of the colonial empires were able to choose up sides, to have
a choice between two atomic umbrellas. And so the alliance of the Western world
and Latin America lost its grip on the UN. The so-called 'Third World' nations
appeared and for a time scorned either umbrella and called themselves
'unaligned'.

Then through the Sixties and Seventies a general move started which, in the
happy days of San Francisco and the birth of the United Nations, we were naive
enough to believe that the United Nations had been born to prevent, namely war
and the making of war: conventional wars, we now call them. For the past
quarter-century there have been more wars in more places than in all the years
between the American Civil War and the First World War. The United Nations was
able to arrest one or two and, by a freakish accident, actually waged one war,
in Korea, but that was only because, when a vote came in the Security Council
to go into Korea, the Russians were boycotting the council. They wanted
Communist China to be the only Chinese representative and they didn't have a
first-rate foreign office man in New York.

Moreover, the jet plane hadn't been invented – wasn't flying, anyway – and
there wasn't time for Mr Gromyko to fly to New York in time to veto, to stop, a
unanimous vote of the council to defend South Korea. Ever since then, by the
way, the Russians have always had a top man in New York.

Well, what I'm saying in more brutal terms is that for, say, 20 years, the
power of the United Nations to stop wars anywhere has declined to the vanishing
point and the power of the Western nations to carry even their judgement of
things has declined disastrously. So much so that on most issues that come up
before the assembly and its committees we find that the Communist nations and
their satellites and most of the Africans and Asians now form a majority which
condemns or opposes us, the old masters of the United Nations.

We've got to the point where power, what used to be called 'realpolitik', goes
its own way and the United Nations deplores or condemns one way or the other
and nobody need care. I believe that when the Russians vetoed the overwhelming
vote against them on Afghanistan in the council and the debate was moved into
the assembly, I believe it would have been hard to find anyone among the
cynics, even among the secretariat whose jobs depend on believing in the United
Nations in the face of the facts, I don't believe anyone would have guessed at
anything like the final Assembly vote – 104 to condemn, 18 to support the
Soviet Union.

What happened to all those African and Asian nations who have almost
automatically got up, echoed the Soviet lamentations about imperialism – ours –
and automatically voted with the Soviets? Well, what happened was that there
was a troop of Asians and Africans and Latin Americans, the very people who,
while calling themselves 'unaligned' have regularly lined up on the Russian
side. They came up to the rostrum and they spared no anger, no eloquence in
turning on the Soviet Union.

A steady observer of the United Nations down many years said it in a nutshell:
'These nations now feel endangered by the superpower they had regarded as their
champion and in private their diplomats say so frankly.'

I ought to say that the actual resolution that went before the assembly was
drawn up not by the United States or Britain, but by 17 Muslim and Third World
nations and it said that 'The United Nations strongly deplores the recent armed
intervention in Afghanistan and calls for the immediate unconditional and total
withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan.'

The Russians parried this motion by simply saying, 'Not we, but you are the
aggressors'. Their United Nations' ambassador, Mr Troyanovsky, said, 'The
Soviet Union vigorously condemns the attempts of the American politicians
artificially to heat up the so-called "Afghan situation" so that under cover of
this they can turn the wheel of international affairs backward to the time when
enmity between countries and military hysteria are instigated and whipped up.'

Well, with their colossal army always at the ready, the Russians don't need to
do any instigating or whipping up. Of course, the assembly vote doesn't do
anything to stop the Russians but, as a mere expression of opinion, of fear,
there has not been anything so downright, so one-sided in our memory. If you
talked to these Third World delegates, once so dependably on the Russian side,
you can gather that they are scared and that for once they are looking to the
United States to do what? That's the question and it has been for President
Carter an obsessive question.

I'm at the moment, once again, in that sunny birthplace of the United Nations,
in San Francisco and when I'm so far away from London – 6,000 miles – I find
I'm always moved to go to the news stand of a hotel that carries the London
papers. What are they saying about Afghanistan? Well, I bought one of last
Saturday's issues, one of the serious London papers, and Afghanistan and Mr
Carter's ordeal about it were not on the front page, the topic was tucked away
inside and was presented as something – a Russian threat – that we might have
to meet sometime in the 1980s. This was a shocker.

I'd lately heard from two or three old Washington reporters who've been digging
for a week or more into White House doings and White House attitudes. Quite
rightly, they all agreed that Mr Carter was airing no rhetoric when he said
that the 85,000 Russian troops in Afghanistan were the most serious and
immediate threat to the general peace than anything since the Japanese on Pearl
Harbor.

The proof of his seriousness was the fact that he did something which no
president I can recall has done in our time. He called to a private meeting in
the White House 50 men of all sorts and stripes of opinion and experience with
the Russians – Republicans, Democrats, old hawks and doves, friends, opponents
and such old retired diplomats as Averell Harriman and Henry Cabot Lodge,
Eisenhower's ambassador to the UN.

The question was, 'What do we do?' The consensus was that sooner than later the
Soviets would have to be stopped. What is on the minds of the men in the
Kremlin? Does Brezhnev still have the last word? Do they want to ensure a
leftist Afghanistan and a Communist Iran? Are they headed for Pakistan? Will
they move into Yugoslavia if Tito dies?

This meeting went far beyond talk of the Olympics, the grain embargo, cultural
exchanges. The United States obviously cannot think of deterring the Russians
with a conventional war. What then? Where can they be stopped and how?

At that moment the dread, the obvious word came up – nuclear. I don't know how
that meeting broke up. The hope of it was that the massive vote in the UN might
convince the Russians that they'd moved too soon and too frighteningly and
mobilised most of the world against them. And would somehow bluster their way
back.

But if they don't, the president is still faced with the timing, the wisdom, of
the ultimate warning.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP