Inflation fuels alarm over policies

/???/for two days, maybe you should try him at home.' 'Poor fellow,' you say,
'he must have this pestiferous flu.'

For the past two months, we here on the northeastern seaboard have been
suffering from what the health department defines as 'a true epidemic' of a
particularly virulent form of flu – exhaustion, hacking cough, depression –
lasting anywhere from three weeks to a month.

So I called my most eminent golfing buddy, a distinguished sports writer, to
hear about his plans for Augusta, Georgia a month from now and the great spring
festival of the game. I was told by his magazine office that he had better be
called at home, but it wasn't the flu. 'I just had to get away,' he said, 'I'm
sweating away at these damn taxes.' We're all sweating away at these damn
taxes.

When I came to put down expenses on a business trip to London, my eyes bulged
at the cost of meals, hotels – out of sight – and, just to be sure I wasn't the
victim of thinking that the good old days were good old days, I fished out my
diary for 1972. So I find Sunday February 27 1972, an American lawyer visiting
London on my business had to be entertained at dinner. I took him to one of the
two or three most expensive hotels in London because the food was renowned and
he's fond of fine food. I note in my record that, with tip, this three-course
Lucullan meal cost £16.80, £3.40 per person. After this figure I had put an
exclamation point to point up the outrage of such extravagance.

Now, in morbid curiosity, I turned to my diary for 1979. Same restaurant, same
three-course meal but this time £18.25 per person. Can you believe it? Some
simpletons who stay whole and healthy by first of all not shopping or going out
and secondly, by not bothering their heads with the dismal science of economics
say, 'But how can it be?' In the early Seventies, inflation in England was
running at 18, then 22 per cent – I think it went to 25 – and then it started
to go down.

There are two things that such people forget, or don't figure out. One is that
inflation is cumulative, in other words, we are now reaping the whirlwind of,
say, 18 per cent in 1971 plus 15 per cent in '72 plus 20 per cent in '74 and so
on, which means even if inflation did go down to nine per cent in 1978, you
have to add all the percentages from the previous years. And the other fact,
even more sinister, is that inflation is not a matter of simple arithmetic. It
compounds itself. In other words, say something cost a pound in 1972 and in
1973 inflation was at ten per cent, well it then costs £1.10, right? Next year
in '74, inflation goes to 20 per cent and that adds 20 per cent not of one
hundred but of 110. Tack that on and it's easy to see why prices in England
doubled in five years and are well on their way to tripling.

Well, suddenly and appallingly, inflation in this country has started to take a
giant step. We used to boast with ill-concealed smugness that while Britain was
having 20 per cent inflation, we were having five and six per cent. And even
today American tourist agencies in London will advise visiting Americans that
the simplest way to handle the exchange value is to forget the dollar and the
pound sign.

Certainly, last summer, the handiest rule of thumb was to say if a shirt costs
$22 in New York, it'll almost certainly cost £22 in London and this became so
reliable a standard that I knew – and know – youngish couples who, for the
first time in their lives, planned a quick week's charter trip to New York to
go on a shopping binge – an undreamed of change from the days, from the
decades, when Americans regarded Europe, London more than anywhere, as a
gorgeous bargain basement. No more.

I have in front of me two newspapers, one is from San Francisco and prints a
despatch from London headlined, 'The Yanks Aren't Coming'. The other is
published in Fleet Street and advises or warns American tourists of the same
general rule. Roughly, it says, double the American price.

Well, this may soon change. President Ford could boast of leaving office with
an inflation rate of six per cent. It's now running at 18 per cent and even the
Carter administration can see no end to the vicious spiral which starts with
higher prices, provokes strikes for higher wages, increases the cost of
producing everything which provokes higher prices, then higher wages and so on
and on in a dizzy snake dance with which I should guess most of you are all too
familiar. In Israel at the moment the inflation rate is, I believe, at 110 per
cent. Count your blessings.

The obvious answer is wage and price controls and Senator Kennedy is going all
out for it as the only sensible and humane policy, but however obvious it may
be as a remedy, the American experience of it has been grim. Richard Nixon is
the only president who tried it in peace time, in 1972. It stopped inflation
dead in its tracks for about six months, then it was seen that the millions of
dollars that had to be poured into the new bureaucracy that would make it work
were being taken out of the federal treasury and could not go into such
necessities as welfare, housing and so on.

So, less housing, less goods for a lot of people and more money still chasing
fewer goods. So prices went up anyway. And then it was seen – a little late and
a little ruefully – that the moment you have a compulsory law on such things as
prices, a whole new industry arises, or rather flourishes, underground. It is
the industry of the black market which draws money away by very vigorously
setting up its own higher prices, taking more money away from the money
available to most people to buy goods. So legitimate prices then rise.

Within the year, the noble experiment was abandoned. Senator Kennedy does not
naturally, in an election year in which he wants to be president, trace the
melancholy history of wage and price control, he just makes out that the
administration is helpless and callous. But inflation is starting to rage so
uncontrollably and the premium lending rate for the big banks to their best
customers – other banks – has gone to an unprecedented 18 per cent which means
that the ordinary borrower is going to pay quite a bit more, so that you now
see new housing – and I mean small houses as well as blocks of flats – on which
all work has stopped overnight. Very few people, it seems, young marrieds as
well as big builders, can afford the new stratospheric mortgages.

All this is stimulating an atmosphere of not panic, but alarm, so new that a
great many Americans are getting the fuzzy feeling that the government has lost
control of the two departments which today are the main concerns of government
– domestic inflation and foreign policy. So you'd think by now that President
Carter would be taking a brutal beating in the presidential primaries, but he's
not. He has just won a great batch of delegates to the convention in the
primaries last Tuesday in Georgia, Alabama and Florida.

His victory in Florida may seem to be puzzling, to say the least, for Florida
is not really a southern state in anything but geography. About 70 per cent of
the Florida population was not born there, it's the Mecca or Shangri-La of
retired northerners, farmers, small businessmen, just old folks and, now, of
two generations of young northern people who've discovered there is no natural
obligation to fight out the Arctic winters in Chicago or Vermont or Minnesota
or wherever the west wind blows. Population of Florida has doubled in 15 years.
It's a highly conservative population and the Republicans gave Governor Reagan
a smashing victory.

Not, however, so smashing as the Democrats gave Mr Carter, for in spite of the
arrival in plane loads of old conservatives from the north, there are still
more registered Democrats in Florida than Republicans. And let's add that the
so-called Jewish vote of Florida is Miami Beach, a pinprick in a state larger
than England and crowded with Midwestern WASPS, old and new.

What we've noticed, however, in the earlier primaries is that though Democrats
throughout the United States out-register Republicans by almost two to one, the
ratio is shrinking. In Massachusetts, a stubbornly Democratic state, the only
state in the union that didn't go for Nixon in 1972, in Massachusetts this time
40 per cent of the voters claimed to be independent. It seems there are more
and more people slipping away from the old parties and waiting to see what the
choice will be in November, or rather after July, when each party will have
chosen its man.

At the moment, it's beginning to look like Carter versus Reagan but the moment
is a long way off from midsummer. It looks, at the moment, as if Senator
Kennedy were going to have a hard time maintaining his campaign and, on the
other side, it looks as if Mr Reagan were racking up a load of delegates who
could swamp the Republican convention.

Yet there now appears a poll whose reputation for accuracy is unmatched – the
Lou Harris poll. It says that now – as Americans say 'as of now' – Mr Carter
can beat Reagan handsomely but Mr Ford could beat Mr Carter. Mr Ford's hope
must be that at the Republican convention there'll be enough votes for George
Bush and for Congressman Anderson ,who took the whacking independent vote in
Massachusetts, to pile up sufficient delegates to stall the nomination of
Reagan, at which point Ford might be the irresistible compromise.

Well, we'll know more about the possibilities of Mr Anderson as a stalking
horse for Ford this time next week after the crucial coming primary in
Illinois, a big state that belongs neither to Carter, nor Kennedy, nor Reagan,
nor Bush.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP