Making assumptions

Many, many years ago, I persuaded the late Dr Gallup to do a national survey of
a kind which, if it was not unique, was all too rare among pollsters. They
spent their time then and do now, I think, almost exclusively on finding out
how people feel or think about political issues – do you approve or disapprove
of the so-called Star Wars plan or abortion, of taxing social security
benefits, did the Geneva summit improve the climate of relation between the
United States and the Soviet Union, ought there to be a legal limit on cash
contributions to political candidates? And so on and so forth.

I, myself, some of you may have noticed, am on the whole more interested in
what used to be called social history, that is, not on what most people are
supposed to think about the great, big issues of the day, but how they think,
how they live from day to day.

In other words, I suggested that we all think we know, without ever finding
out, at what time most people eat dinner, what are their favourite foods, how
long they spend watching television, is it true that most Britons drink tea for
breakfast whereas most Americans drink coffee, what time do most people go to
bed?

This idea came to me shortly after a famous English novelist had visited New
York and written a head-shaking regretful piece about the city. He was
saddened, he said, to see only skyscrapers dedicated to buying and selling
dividends. He meant they were all inhabited by the money changers, which made
me wonder at the time if he'd not noticed the skyscrapers which house the
American Bible Society, the New York Medical Center, not to mention the offices
and studio of the BBC.

New York, the man said, was Babylon piled on imperial Rome. Shocking! How come
Babylon? Well, he wrote, New Yorkers spent their lives pursuing money by day
and crooners by night. They're obsessed, he said, with movies, jazz and a
hectic pace, soothed or checked by alcohol. They crowd together out of anxiety,
he said, because, I quote, 'the lonely heart of man cannot come home here'.

Dear, dear! This was serious. There were, of course, such people. There are and
always will be, except, I ought to note, 30-odd years later that of all the
minority interests by way of entertainment, jazz is the most minuscule. From a
recent survey of the sort I so long ago urged on Dr Gallup I see that, whereas,
of all music records and tapes bought by Americans, 58 per cent are rock music
of one sort or another, 24 per cent classical and 2.9 per cent jazz.

An interest in traditional jazz is now about on a par with an interest in the
Dead Sea scrolls. Only in the past three months, two of the, say, half a dozen
clubs, saloons or what have you devoted to this antiquarian interest have
closed down. No more Eddie Condons, nor more Carnegie Tavern and the rare,
charming piano of Ellis Larkins. But I'm getting ahead of myself.

So, the man said, the trouble with New Yorkers – at one time I used to collect
visitors' sentences that began, 'The trouble with America is' – the trouble
with New Yorkers was that they lived too fast, drank too much, built temples to
money and wasted their nights and their health in nightclubs. It was after this
Jeremiad was published that I suggested to Dr Gallup it would be nice,
interesting anyway, to find out exactly what proportion of the city population
suffered from these afflictions. He did his survey and the results astonished
even me who was then inclined to fear that the great visiting novelist had
touched a nerve.

Well, it came out that New Yorkers, a big majority, liked beef, Italian pasta,
baked or hash brown potatoes, pies, ice cream, lots of salad, soup with matzo
balls or chicken and rice soup, that the overwhelming majority eat at about six
pm or thereabouts, that whatever their job, their evenings were spent listening
to the radio, then, and a spot of television.

They went to the movies once a week, once a week, too, the men played poker or
pinochle with their buddies, they watched over the children's homework and, on
Sundays, they took them off to the park or the Bronx zoo or a game of softball,
or to a city museum – the Museum of Natural History was a great favourite with
its dioramas of exotic landscapes and its planetarium.

About three in ten New Yorkers went to concerts and there were more people
through any given year who subscribed to symphony concerts than subscribed to
the baseball season. The most glaring fact of all which gave pause to me, if
not to the famous novelist, was that only one New Yorker in 15 had ever been in
a nightclub and that 92 in a hundred began to get ready for bed around ten,
ten-thirty.

About ten years later, I nudged another pollster into going into the tea/coffee
business, I mean finding out what the British and the Americans really do drink
or drank for breakfast. The legend, the preconception, then, was pretty true
for middle-aged and especially old folks, but it was startling to hear that
while a majority of the British young – young being in the late teens and
twenties – now drank coffee.

About half of the American young swill down their breakfast with fizzy, sugary
soft drinks with names like Mo, Blab, Fuzz, Gurgle. I do believe this has
changed drastically and from my own galloping poll at the corner luncheonette
where I often lope off to breakfast, coffee seems back in place and a tea bag
drooping in warm water a poor second.

However, please don't believe a word I say because the whole point of having
these surveys done was to question, or explode, what, on no evidence but that
of our senses, what we think must be so.

All this was on my mind dropping in as I do, once a week at least, on my oldest
friend who shares my scepticism about what must be true to the extent, in his
case, of keeping up a continuous correspondence with the government printing
office and collecting all its surveys of American life and labour. Over our
wine of Scotland, we go into some of these findings by way of playing a game,
tossing challenging questions at each other which have to do with the
difference between what we assume is the truth and what government surveys have
discovered is the truth.

The other evening, I had a blockbuster of a teaser for him. 'What', I asked
him, 'do you suppose is the percentage of WASPs in New York City?' Not the
stinging kind, but the humans – white Anglo-Saxon Protestants. I have to admit
that if I'd been asked this question when I first landed on these shores, I
would have said, 'Oh, I suppose 70, 80 per cent?'

I knew, of course, even then, that New York had a lot of Irish and a lot of
Jews and it was obvious from the restaurant that could be spotted on every four
or five blocks, a lot of Italians. I didn't know then about the immigrant or
children of immigrant Russians and Germans and Greeks and Latvians and
Armenians and Czechs and Poles and on and on.

So, but today, how many white Anglo Saxon Protestants, like me, to every
hundred New Yorkers? My friend, who is a Jew of Hungarian origins, thought,
thoughtfully, and said, 'Forty per cent?' 'Come, come!' I said, 'Remember all
the Irish and Italian and Puerto Rican Catholics?' 'Oh!' he said, in a masterly
moment of amnesia, 'I was counting in the Catholics.' I stressed the P in WASP
– Protestant! 'All right!' he said, 'I should say then 30, maybe as low as 25
per cent.'

I took him off the rack with a bombshell. The answer is 6.5 per cent White
Anglo-Saxon Protestants, including, that is, heathens who claim no religious
affiliation. My friend jumped in his chair. 'Yes,' I said, 'we are a very tiny
minority, subject to discrimination.' 'That's terrible!' he said, 'You ought to
get food stamps.'

Well, it is a shocker. Leaving just over 93 per cent of everybody else. As a
religious group, of course, the Jews and the Catholics compete in pride of
numbers. I don't know truthfully how those numbers compare, but when you
consider that one American in four is a Roman Catholic, and when you consider
that as the national figure, you can imagine the weight the Catholic vote
carries in New York City.

I just scribbled a quick list of the mayors of New York City over the past 36
years. There have been three Irishmen, two Italians (one of them Italian
Jewish), one German, two Jews and one lone WASP, Mr John Lindsay. And when he
heard about this figure, he said, 'WASPs have become the only ethnic group in
the city that's called by a pejorative term.' That's a bright but true remark.

Nobody now dare use in public terms which were once the common vernacular on
the street, in the office, the saloons and, for a very long time, on the
vaudeville stage – terms like polak, wop, spick, canuck (for a Canadian),
mackerel snatcher (for all Catholics) – but the WASP is pointed out as such, a
pale, placid citizen who is not expected to take offence. 'It's as if', Mr
Lindsay said, 'we didn't bleed.'

And, today, with close to 1.1 million Puerto Ricans and other Hispanics in New
York City, alone – the entire population of New Zealand outside Auckland – it
cannot be long before we have a Puerto Rican or, like six of the eight largest
cities in America, a black mayor.

If you recall that surprising, to most of us tight little island immigrants,
surprising figure of 55 million American Catholics – nearly a quarter of the
population – perhaps you'll understand why on the covers of two national
magazines and nightly on the television news, the main, burning topic this week
was the meeting in Rome of 165 bishops assembled to celebrate and argue over
the 20th anniversary of the first Vatican council in almost a century.

Bearing in mind the strong split between traditionalists and reformers of
various sorts and the lively voices of American women in those reforms, the
headline for that story was, inevitably, 'A Church In Crisis'.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP