Argentina bailed out

Another glittering San Francisco day reminds me that it's more years ago than I
care to remember that a doctor told me to throw away the sunglasses that I
regularly wore outdoors in the blazing New York summers. Now if anybody had
wanted to make an issue of this habit at the time, the time being the late
1930s, I would have maintained that I practised it out of respect for my
eyesight, what else? But, at this safe distance of time, I can now manfully
admit that, of course, I wore dark sunglasses because they were just becoming
chic. Only just, except among the top Hollywood film stars.

So there was always the secret hope that you might be mistaken for Ronald
Coleman or, at least, Bella Lugosi. However, I was just then at the turn of one
of those seven-year periods when, I'm reliably told, changes in ones vision are
most marked. So I went off to an eye doctor. He examined the glasses I'd worn
for reading. He held them up and he wobbled them back and forth like a see-saw.
'Land's sake!' he cried – he was from Utah – 'How do you manage to find your
way along the streets? Do you have headaches?' he asked me. I said I'd heard of
headaches but never had one.

'Well,' he said, 'you don't squinny, you don't look like somebody who ought to
be wearing glasses, so go on as you are!' he said, but he prescribed another
pair for long distance. 'What games do you play?' was the next question.
'Tennis,' I said, 'and squash and I bowl, at least once a week.' I throw in
quickly that I'm talking about the game that is now the most popular indoor
game in the United States, played in bowling alleys – tenpins, I suppose you
could quaintly describe it. 'Ever play golf?' he asked. 'No.' 'Pity!' he said.
How so?

'Well, like all astigmatics,' he said, 'and you are a monster of astigmatism,
your trouble is muscle laziness. The great thing about golf is that you
constantly have to switch focus from five feet to maybe a couple of hundred
yards. Think about it!' he said. I didn't. I was not merely unmoved. He might
as well have recommended that I take up polo or knitting. 'Well,' said the
doctor, 'at least you could throw away those ridiculous sunglasses. All they do
is encourage more muscle laziness by inhibiting the eyes' marvellous ability to
respond in a fraction of a second to changes in light.' I obediently threw away
my sunglasses and have never worn any since.

By the way, I see from the marvellous, fat annual the government has just put
out known as the United States Statistical Abstract, a massive 1600-page
compendium of every conceivable kind of national statistic, I see that bowling
is played or watched on the tube regularly by 65 million Americans. That's
almost one in three. Every shop, factory, office, political party, lodge,
union, collection of buddies from every sort of trade has its bowling team and
every Saturday afternoon, it seems that about a quarter of the population is
either out clattering the pins or watching the touring champs do it.

One of the fascinating related statistics was compiled from a national study
asking people which games they played, watched or read about. The result is
certainly a blow to some of us. Baseball in summer is at the top and football –
American football, of course – in winter, followed very closely by basketball
whose stars garner almost as many millions of dollars in contracts as the young
giants of baseball and football. After that comes racing and hockey –
ice-hockey that is – and wrestling and then boxing and down to harness racing
and, almost at the bottom, along with lacrosse – lacrosse? – tennis and golf.
Just barely over five per cent of the population ever watches, plays or reads
about golf. A fact of life which must, at all costs, be kept from the lively
egos the big golfing stars, who are under the delusion that they're not only
household names, but familiar faces.

The only pleasure I take from the shocking statistic about bowling is the
memory of an old man I knew, I believe he's still alive, in Chicago, who
struggled for years with his own very small advertising company. Some time
around the turn of the 1950s, '60s, a young associate of his said, 'Walter,
we'll never get anywhere if we restrict ourselves to print advertising'. Walter
looked puzzled, almost to the point of insult. 'What other sort of advertising
was there?' 'Television! That's what!' said his assistant. Walter, I think,
demurred, is what a novelist would have said, 'Television!' he snorted, 'I
don't know anything about drama and news and ballet and such.'

They let it drop till one day, Walter called into his office his very small
staff, 'We're going,' he said, 'into television.' 'Good!' they cried. 'Not
television advertising', he said, 'but television production.' How's that?'
they asked. 'Well,' said Walter, 'I've been looking at the stuff and I've
decided that what people want to see on television is somebody doing very well
what they do badly.'

And what would that be, pray? 'Bowling,' he said, 'is what.' They thought, of
course, he was insane but he approached some team that had won a local city
contest and matched them with another regional winner. He incorporated himself
as a television production company. He was the first man to put bowling on
television and he stayed with it. Today, he must savour more than most of us
that staggering figure of 65 million Americans. Walter's retired now and
chuckling as the banks come to him to bail out Argentina or Brazil or whoever.

Incidentally, you must have seen that Argentina has just been bailed out or, at
least, her colossal debt has been put on hold. It seems to me to be only about
two years ago that you could make a smart joke about a new definition of
bankruptcy. Now you weren't bankrupt if you couldn't possibly repay a debt but
only if you couldn't pay the interest on it. It was no longer than two years
ago, certainly, that I asked a man in international banking how Argentina was
doing. He said, 'Oh, she's in great shape. We've stretched out the interest
payments and, given time, she'll be able to meet them.'

Well, a week ago, Argentina declared that she was about to default on several
hundreds of millions of dollars due in interest payments that suddenly gave a
new definition to 'default'. It made three or four of the top American banks
wonder how to write off these appalling losses which could no longer be
absorbed or redeemed by the World Bank or the International Monetary Fund. So a
new wrinkle was though up – a consortium led by Mexico and joined by the United
States, Colombia, Brazil, Venezuela and, guess who? – Argentina.

They managed to put together $500 million as what is described as an emergency
package. It doesn't solve the debt, the interest debt, problem, it allows a
breathing space of a sort which evidently nations may enjoy, but don't try it
on your local banker! This magic is all the more baffling to laymen when they
consider that the saviours of Argentina are made up, apart from the United
States, of at least four countries that are in dire financial straits
themselves.

Anyway, the United States, for one, is vastly relieved by this new formula of
postponement. I haven't been able to find out what happens when the
postponement has to be postponed. The United States government feels relieved
on two counts. First, when you publicise the members of the consortium, the
United States sheds its unfair, but evil, reputation as the solitary,
heartless, rich uncle pressing countries with much poverty to pay their bills
and it's surely no news to the initiated that Uncle Sam has, in the past decade
or so, for this reason and some others, considerably heightened his reputation
as the cruel Colossus of the North.

The second cause for relief is more statesmanlike in its intention and one that
will very much come to affect Great Britain. It's the idea, the notion, that
Argentina is now engaged in a tough and admirable attempt to establish
democracy in a country terrorised time and again by what Winston Churchill used
to call 'the jackboot and the prison house'. After all these years of the
Peronist régimes and successful military dictators, President Raul Alfonsin is
trying to unite his country and it's felt here that he must be given time to
restore not only the country's political health, but its collapsing economy.

Washington is also mentioning two other burdens that Alfonsin is bravely trying
to shed. One is the dreadful plight of 'the disappeared'. Alfonsin is
relentlessly going after the generals and the others who were responsible for
this routine cruelty and the other burden is what Washington can now
comfortably, or calmly, refer to as 'the Falklands' humiliation'.

To give a topical point to this feeling, we can now switch to a long cable
taking up most of a page in the San Francisco Chronicle a day or two ago, a
cable from Buenos Aires. It was the second anniversary of the beginning of the
war with Britain. It was celebrated, if that's the word, by a parade of 200
veterans of the Falklands episode leading over 10,000 people assembled in a
downtown plaza who marched to the so-called English tower that stands in front
of the railway station. It's a replica of Big Ben's clock tower and it was put
up there in 1910 by British residents.

Well, the veterans broke through the door of the tower, piled up wooden crates
and started a fire. It was quickly put out by two fire engines but the angry
gesture had been made.

Another band of demonstrators, meanwhile, went off to the 10-foot statue of
George Canning, the British foreign secretary who lobbied for European
recognition of the new countries of Latin America that had fought for and won
their independence from Spain. The crowd pulled down the statue.

At a memorial service for the more than 700 Argentines killed in the Falklands
war, President Alfonsin pledged himself to the 'firmness of our decision to
obtain a just and definitive solution, to secure our rights by negotiation,
dialogue and understanding'.

So the consortium we talked about, as I said, is meant to give the Argentine
president the chance to unite his people. One element on which they are already
united, which both their neighbours and the United States feel would be fatal
to deny or discourage, is their conviction that the Falklands defeat did not
solve the problem of the Malvinas and that the next move is up to Britain.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP