An unhappy Thanksgiving

There was a happy time when, without embarrassment or the feeling of recycling
old material, I used to enjoy sitting down in the third week in November to
ring a change or two on the most American of American festivals and the
pleasantest and the one least tarnished with marketing tinsel.

It is, of course, the annual celebration, observed by presidential proclamation
in all the states, of Thanksgiving, originally put on by the first pilgrims
who, the Yorkshireman William Bradford, wrote in his rather blood-curdling
diary, had suffered a long and frightful journey across the ocean and, by God's
grace, arrived on an inhospitable shore, the coast of Massachusetts, and there
found no lodging nor friend nor hope of sustenance.

But, pretty soon, they did find friendly Indians who taught them what to do
with a very succulent source of sustenance, namely maize – ever afterwards in
the Americas known as corn – who built themselves rude shacks and ploughed the
fields and were, at first, astonished and then delighted to find the cranberry
bogs and the pumpkins and, strutting through the brush, this extraordinary
strange bird, the turkey.

By the first fall, they had a harvest and they knew they would survive and did
fall on our knees and thank the Lord God Almighty who had brought us safely
across the perilous ocean into his keeping.

So, ever since, Thanksgiving has been the unique family festival, more so, in a
country of many religions, than Christmas. It's figured that something like 27
million Americans were flying home on Wednesday and the rest would be driving
there, a few miles or a few hundred miles, and there were a few million
covering a thousand miles or more by bus, but only six in a hundred going by
train – a form of transportation which, except for suburban commuters, and even
then only in the cities of the north-eastern seaboard, is becoming as obsolete
as the horse and buggy.

Our daughter, the baby daughter, is 37. I don't believe she has ever been on a
train in her life. To and from Vermont, it's been a plane or a car and now,
with five infants in tow, in a high-axled family car the size of a moving van.
In Vermont, it's the van for shopping, skis down the snow slopes and the horse
on level ground.

Well, this year, all these families will sit down to that traditional meal with
turkey, cranberry sauce, pumpkin pie, corn pudding as the staples, with
regional additions in different parts of the country; 47 million turkeys had
met their fate by Wednesday night at the latest.

The feast was always accompanied in the early days by a traditional prayer of
Thanksgiving and there's a very tuneful hymn to go with the words and, today, a
remarkable number, something like 60 million Americans, one in four, claim
enough religious affiliation to observe the old custom. On the eve of
Thanksgiving, the Wednesday night, it's usual for the president to give a
little radio homily. Franklin Roosevelt always did it and ended with a resonant
prayer in his soaring tenor and this time, I'm sure, Mr Reagan couldn't wait to
be able to do the same and urge on his countrymen and women a bout of
compassion and help for suffering or unfortunate neighbours.

It's a line at which he's very good since he's always believed – he's been most
comfortable with – the folksy form of social help, house to house, neighbour to
neighbour, practised in his boyhood in his home-town of Dixon, Illinois. Need I
say, this time he made no mention of politics and next day was winging off to
his ranch in California, there to feast too and ride and chop trees and, like
the exiled Kaiser Wilhelm II on his estate in Holland, try to put behind him
the calamities of his reign.

But Ronald Reagan has not abdicated. His reign is not over. And in the long
intervals between the horses and the wood chopping, he will be bombarded with
information and advice and, no doubt, living in dread of hearing yet worse news
to come.

Really the events of the past week have come at us – come at him – with such a
tumbling clatter that it would be pointless of me at this stage to try and
arrange their chronology. When I first heard about the incredible – every other
senator and congressman has been working the word 'incredible' overtime – when
I heard about the transfer of $30 million by Israel through a Swiss bank to be
passed on to the motley band of Nicaraguan democrats, mercenaries and the
relics of dictator Somoza's bully boys, whom the president insists on calling
freedom fighters, I found myself verbally paralysed – a very rare condition
with me – and falling back time and again on 'incredible', spoken like a
tolling bell.

The first thing that crossed my mind was that somebody over the phone was not
giving me the news but reading aloud a column by the Washington Post's resident
funny man, Art Buchwald. Or, more likely, since Buchwald is comic and
outrageous but never savage, reading the balloon captions of a particularly
mean comic strip of Doonesbury. That, I thought, is going too far. But, like
much else in this sorry story, the incredible turns out to be true and has to
be believed.

The second thought, not more comforting than the first, was that it took two
years with Watergate – two years of investigative reporting by two newspapers
and a Senate investigation and a prolonged hearing by the House Judiciary
Committee and a final, fatal order by the Supreme Court to release a
well-hidden tape – two years before the involvement of the White House could be
established.

Here, we had a spate of horrendous charges substantiated and the involvement of
the White House established within a few days. It's surely one of the most
galling ironies in recent American history that after the first explosion of
the scandal, when Mr Reagan was saying his only motive was to improve
American-Iranian relations and – surprise, surprise – the Iranians were
generous enough to return three hostages, the president received a telephone
call from the man who'd been there before, from Mr Nixon, himself, who urged
the president to come clean now. No manly denials, quibbling, protestations of
shocked innocence. Tell it all, before the harsh voice of the truth confounded
him.

Well, it very soon became irrelevant to know whether or not Mr Reagan had
decided to act on this advice. The hurtful truth, itself, anticipated him. The
president's protestations of honest bewilderment required him to reveal that if
he wasn't guilty of, at best, howling incompetence, somebody in his
administration was. And who should they be, but two people, two underlings with
no power sanctioned either by the voters or the State Department or Congress,
two men whom barely one American in a million had ever heard of.

Now their being anonymous is, in itself, immaterial. All governments have able
men doing quiet, important work – quite apart from the men who must guard their
anonymity in the intelligence services. President Roosevelt used to boast of
the passion for anonymity of some of his most intelligent and competent White
House staff, but such men did not handle, let alone initiate, crucial foreign
policy in secret without the knowledge of the president or the secretary of
state. They did not ship arms to an enemy state against the proclaimed policy
of their own chief, the president. They did not follow a policy which had been
enacted into law by Congress as a criminal act.

Because of undeniable intelligence coming out of Israel, and confirmed by the
staff of at least one congressional committee preparing for hearings on the
whole mess, it became impossible at the beginning of last week to stifle the
names of the three men who had, in fact, been conducting their own secret
American foreign policy.

Mr Robert McFarlane, ex-head of the National Security Council and the two
unknowns, an admiral and a marine colonel. Vice Admiral Poindexter, National
Security adviser, and Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North, a 43-year-old marine who
has handled many secret missions, but always with the permission of the
president. He got into trouble with Congress once before when he ran a private
supply network giving aid to the Contras, the Contra rebels in Nicaragua. He
was cleared of breaking the law.

When it was established beyond doubt that this trio, McFarlane, Poindexter and
North, had been negotiating for eighteen months in Iran, had arranged to ship
arms to Iran over the opposition of the secretary of state and defence and had
then gone on – and the president swears, without his knowledge – to transfer
the profits from the sale by Israel through a Swiss bank and give it to the
Contras, both actions kept quiet from the CIA, both acts for which American
citizens could be prosecuted, the president, all his affable defences down,
first swore that they would not be fired and next day fired them. Or, in the
usual fashion, saw to it that they resigned.

Two questions come up now, the answers to which will decide if the United
States is to regain any credibility with its allies, with the Arab world, not
to mention with any Soviet missions they have to deal with. One is the function
and the respectability of the National Security Council – an institution set up
only after the Second World War, which too often has quarrelled with the
secretaries of state and defence and, under this administration, actually
evaded and deceived them, and possibly the president, himself.

The other, more pressing, grave question turns on the honesty of the president,
himself. How much did he really know and sanction of these incredible
goings-on? It's the same question whose stony answer brought down President
Nixon and we shan't know the truth until the congressional hearings get really
underway. They have great powers to subpoena the highest officers of the
administration and get at the truth, as we saw with the Ervin Senate committee
that probed into Watergate.

In the meantime, the sauce that soured our appetite for the Thanksgiving turkey
was the knowledge that, for the moment, the United States has no declared
foreign policy that either friends or enemies can believe in.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP