Oklahoma ends liquor ban

The state of Oklahoma, known to the Western world from the Rogers-Hammerstein
musical as the place where the corn grows as high as an elephant's eye and
where the wind comes sweeping down the plain, Oklahoma went to the polls
yesterday and voted 'yes' on an issue that has divided its people for the past
25 years.

It voted by nearly half a million votes to 400,000 to allow you, anybody, to
buy a drink, an alcoholic drink, that is. Oklahoma was the last state to repeal
prohibition. It did it in 1959 and since then it's allowed liquor to be bought
at state licensed stores. It also allows private clubs where members may be
served drinks poured from the private bottles they keep in lockers, but now the
advocates of the new law say this flagrant hypocrisy can be done away with and
people will be able to buy liquor, buy the drink, in a restaurant or across a
bar, just like you and me.

It was done by voting for an amendment to the state's constitution which must
be adopted county by county and though only 17 of the 77 counties of Oklahoma
voted in favour, since these counties embrace 60 per cent of the population,
most Oklahomans will join the human race while many rural counties will
continue to support militant church groups and go on fighting the demon rum.

Well, folks, that's the big news from Oklahoma. And if that sounds like a bit
of trivia with which to begin a newsletter, let me quote to you the top story
the other morning on the New York Times's hourly radio bulletin. After a brief
look at what's happening around the world and the nation, the announcer gives
the weather forecast and then he said, 'To repeat the top story, Mr Chernenko
has again appeared in public for the second time in two weeks'.

This was not meant facetiously, it was written straight and it was read
straight and it did, indeed start another flurry of speculation in Washington
about Mr Chernenko's health and who is really in charge of the store. It also
inspired one network to trot out a brisk little television documentary, about a
minute long, matching on a split screen pictures of two 73-year-old men in
action, or at least in movement – Mr Chernenko, nodding and pattering and being
helped down steps and Mr Reagan, striding and waving and tripping neatly down
the steps of Air Force One.

Almost everything that happens these days seems incidentally to score yet
another point for the president. He is, indeed, as somebody once said about
Noel Coward, 'destiny's tot'. He's never seen in public to be glum or petulant
or irritable or put out and Mrs Reagan confessed the other day that he's never
that way in private either. Every time the Democrats toss some sharp arrow at
him, it goes over his shoulder.

They thought they'd unloosed a cannonade at him the other day when Mr Mondale
announced that he would see and talk to Mr Gromyko the day before the president
sees him. The president grinned and said, 'Fine. I have no problem with that!'
And, anyway, the thing backfired when Mr Mondale quickly assured everybody
that, 'I will make it clear to Mr Gromyko that I speak only for myself and that
there is only one President of the United States'. The White House must have
loved that for it implies that there isn't going to be another one.

This unfortunate implication, unfortunate for the Democrats, was even
reinforced by their own people the other night when they put out on a TV
network, at enormous cost, one of their party political commercials so
identified in a visual caption. It showed a carload of holidaymakers on a
rollercoaster watching the present landscape open up as they ascended the first
uphill grade. Mr Mondale's voiceover is saying something like, 'Everything
looks fine now in 1984, the economy rising, more jobs and all, but what lies
ahead in 1985?'

By that time, the car is at the crest of the grade and with a fearful crashing
chord is about to take the big plunge down. An advertising expert, called in to
give an objective criticism of this sliver of drama – he was, by the way,
himself a Democrat – said that as a bit of persuasive propaganda it was simply
awful. It practically conceded the election to Mr Reagan now. The message, he
said, is, 'OK, America's in great shape now, so go ahead and vote for Reagan
but you'll be sorry this time next year'.

So the polls still go on widening the gap between the two men, to the
discomfiture of Mr Mondale and the misery of his advisers, but for the first
time this week we heard a gambler's note of caution. It came from, of all
people, Mr William Safire, a saucy expert on the English and American
languages, once a speech writer for President Nixon, a fairly downright but
adroit conservative who's employed by the New York Times as a gadfly to bite
and harass their liberal editorial writers.

Mr Safire wrote the other day, 'Whenever I go to a racetrack, I bellow at the
horse bringing up the rear, "Come on Silky" ' Silky, it appears, an actual
horse, has been doddering away at pasture for years, may perhaps be no more, he
never won a big race and made a habit of lumbering along and sniffing the
flowers, but he also had the exhilarating habit, when the stretch came in view,
of putting on a blazing finish. Sometimes, rarely, catching the front runner.

Mr Safire yearns, not as a man of political principle, but as a man who enjoys
a horse race, yearns to see Mr Mondale emulate Silky. He goes so far as to
rationalise how it might happen by analysing what he calls 'two conflicting
itches' in the American psyche. One is landslidiitis, a cruel desire to hoot at
the ineptitude of the horse bringing up the rear and the opposite itch, to root
for the long shot. Mr Safire now sees us all in the full grip of landsliditis.
What can change this fevered condition?

He believes a drastic change can be triggered by the television pictures of Mr
Mondale being booed by an army of Hitlers, which has happened, by the arrogance
of the front runner, his refusal to expose himself to on-the-record press
encounters and by the continuous assault of some newspapers on Mrs Ferraro.
Maybe, Mr Safire surmises, voters in doubt will begin to think that too big a
win can be bad for a leader and worse for democracy. Then, he think, Silky
begins to move up along the rail.

Well, at that point, even Mr Safire seems to fear that not even a healthy
reaction of 'let's not be beastly to the rear runner' will be enough to stop
Destiny's Tot from tearing past the post. There could be, he muses, some gaffe
on the president's part, some sudden White House scandal. This is pretty
desperate guessing, but then he mentions the forthcoming debates, for finally
the two sides have agreed to debates between the President and Mr Mondale and
between Vice President Bush and Mrs Ferraro.

These set-tos, I should think, would offer the last possibility of Silky's
streak down the stretch. After all, in 1980, Mr Reagan came into the debates
with President Carter as a comparative novice. Mr Carter was possibly the most
intellectual president since Woodrow Wilson, certainly one of the most
articulate. Mr Reagan was tentative, engaging and maintained his cheerful habit
of quoting facts that are demonstrably false, but all it took to give Mr Reagan
the popular edge was the line he said, with almost a rueful look, when he
caught the president out in a couple of little slips. The line was delivered
with a sigh and split-second timing, 'Well, there he goes again!' It convulsed
the live audience and made the nation chuckle.

If something like that happens during one of the debates, Mr Safire sees the
voters caught in a bind. Harbouring both the landsliditis and the Silky
syndrome, they will root for the frontrunner and, at the same time, be cheering
the pounding hoofbeats of the runner-up.

Well, I think there might be a good chance of this happening if the election
were six months away. For, it's true, Americans don't like foregone conclusions
and if they had another six months of Mr Reagan's grin and happy talk, they
might grow bored to the point of anger and run and put their money on limping
Silky, but there are only six more weeks and even Democrats who don't care much
for the president don't care at all for Mr Mondale and as many as 30 per cent
of them say they're going to switch to Reagan.

I don't remember a time like this, any time before a presidential election when
issues had such a lacklustre appeal, when high-handed actions, even cruel
actions, by an administration roused so feeble a response. Like, for instance,
when this spring half a million disabled Americans found themselves suddenly
stripped of all social security benefits, without, in very many cases, any
medical review. The administration was cutting the budget.

New York city sued on behalf of these bereft victims of the budget axe. A
federal court ruled that the Reagan administration had been underhanded and
that its mass action was illegal. The administration grumbled and renewed the
benefits but kept the disabled cut off from federally-funded medical care – the
sort of care they needed most. Many federal judges ordered these funds
restored. The administration didn't give in. It fought the court rulings case
by case, but more often simply ignored the courts.

Well, now both Houses of Congress have passed a bill to put a stop to this mass
withholding of all federal aid to the disabled. In almost any other
administration I can recall, this would have been a thumping national scandal.
There are others, the Democrats go on about them, but the people don't recall
and Mr Reagan simply ignores them. No taint of illegality, let alone of
cruelty, adheres to him.

He waves at us in his engaging fashion from the sunny side of the street and
says to us what he's saying just now to all sorts of crowds, all over the
country, 'You are what America is all about!'

Certainly that is a true line, whether he's speaking to a Baptist congregation,
a football crowd, a collection of drug addicts, new citizens, old folks, the
good, the bad, the plain or the beautiful.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP