Carter steals rivals' thunder

'Quake Rocks City', it says here, which reminds me of the days when we read
such wartime headlines as 'London in Flames' and managed to wangle, through
channels, a transatlantic telephone call to some beloved friend and say, 'Are
you all right?' And the answer usually came back, 'Well, I'm fine but Mary's
rheumatism's acting up again.' There'll always be a headline writer until, that
is, an earthquake really rocks San Francisco.

I must say, though, that it's a particular feeling not quite like any other
form of panic, however mild. We're sitting there in mid-morning, my wife, as
usual, sewing briskly on a sweater or a cardigan or earmuff or something for
one of the grandchildren, I'm reading. Suddenly, the clack of the needles
stops. She looks at me. I say, 'What are you looking at?' And then there's no
need to answer. Your chair shivers, the window frames creak a little. The room
appears to be very slightly drunk. That's the eerie thing – not noise but the
absence of noise in a small perceptible movement of, of all things, the floor.
A petal from an azalea plant floats down and that's all.

I suppose it took five seconds, long enough for us to say 'earthquake' and to
wonder if this was the beginning or the end. Well, it was the end till the next
evening when I was typing and heard what I thought was somebody in the hotel
rattling keys against the outer door. I traced it to the bedroom and it was a
steady, quiet little rattle of the sliding panel to a closet or cupboard and
then it stopped. The seismologists told us that that was part of the same
disturbance called 'an aftershock' – the earth is settling down again.

This brief, quiet threat to your own personal safety – and you have time in
only five seconds to think of that and many things – was enough to make us
forget for an hour or more what was happening everywhere else, Afghanistan,
Iran, Iowa, Washington, till the evening news came on the tube and, of course,
the first item gravely reported from New York was the earthquake in San
Francisco.

Next day we were back in the political world with a vengeance. Across the bay
on the Berkeley campus which, during the roaring Sixties was the hotbed, or
focal centre, of student protests about university discipline and then about
the draft and then about Vietnam. There were, so far as I can hear myself
through the roar of the marchers, two separate rallies. One chanting, 'We won't
be drafted!' Another demanding that the Shah be sent back to Iran.

This new eruption of protest was prompted by President Carter's State of the
Union address to Congress in which he said, about as carefully as anyone could,
that he was not going to ask the Congress to reinstitute the draft
(conscription) but he would ask it to pass legislation to register young people
up to 26 to be on the books, to be on hand if the need arose for what he called
'future mobilisation'.

Now you'll notice I said 'young people' and not 'young men' because since there
are now young women doing full training at West Point and in the navy and,
even, in the marines, the question at once arose, 'Will or should women be
registered too?'

And that has already set off first spasms of protest and a new controversy that
could split the women's rights movement in interesting ways. For instance, some
women's libbers say that the mere suggestion of registering women for military
service is another and sickening sign of machismo, of the male impulse to have
women always at their beck and call. But other women's libbers find themselves
in a quandary, more accurately in a dilemma, that's to say faced with two
choices, neither of which is satisfactory. If they insist on equal rights, have
they not an equal responsibility to be drafted if the time comes? On the other
hand, if they resist registration, they will be accused of not acting on their
principles, of wanting only the more pleasant rights that would make them equal
with men? This argument has only just started and will, I have no doubt, go on
and on.

The president got the most heavy general applause from the Congress when he
appealed for an American boycott of the Moscow Olympic Games. He well knows
that this is not going to make the Russians apologise and pack up in
Afghanistan but he has set February 20, all the same, as the deadline for a
Russian withdrawal. He had sent off personal messages to more than 100 heads of
government. He was privately disappointed that, from Europe, the only head of
government to come out openly in support of him was Mrs Thatcher, but pretty
soon thereafter he was heartened by getting pledges of support from Canada,
Australia, the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia, China, Denmark, Sweden, Finland,
Belgium, Switzerland, Australia, Japan, Israel, Qatar, Djibouti and Fiji. And
now, from the Islam conference in Islamabad, 31 nations there voted for it.
Well, if they all came through with a boycott they could make quite a dent in
the majesty of the Moscow games and a large dent in the Soviet budget.

The president's State of the Union message used to be sent up to Congress as a
document and read by a clerk but Franklin Roosevelt, the first president to
appreciate the peculiar power of radio, started the custom of going up to
Capitol Hill and reciting the message aloud to a joint session of Congress and,
since television, there has not been a president who didn't rush to the hill to
make the most of the huge captive audience that any presidential appearance on
television can guarantee.

But President Carter did something new this time. He split his message into
two. One half of it, on domestic policy and what he would like the Congress to
do about it, he released to Congress as a 75-page document for them to read and
ponder. His dramatic instinct, not to say his political instinct, was sound.
The anxieties of the American people are running now towards foreign policy and
the impending crisis in the Middle East. Furthermore, his domestic message
included one or two suggestions not too palatable to the voters in an election
year. He said, or wrote, that so long as inflation went up and up and there was
no sign of a recession, he could not, would not, ask for what every politician
hopes for in an election year, namely a tax cut. The first thing to tackle on
the domestic front, he said, must be the current national deficit.

By the way, when he came to the presidency, he more or less promised no deficit
at all. Now, he calmly predicts that the current deficit will be something over
16 billion dollars. He's also asking for a standby petrol rationing plan to be
carried out if oil supplies are reduced by 20 per cent and he's asking for
another two billion dollars for a federal programme which teaches practical
skills to unemployed young people. He ended his written message by frankly
saying that he was not expecting Congress to enact much new or important
legislation this year.

Now all this, if he'd recited it before the joint session would undoubtedly
have produced gasps of astonishment in his audience and he must have figured
something between boredom and anger in the national audience. He sensed, quite
rightly, that what people would tune in to hear was a firm presidential
statement on foreign policy. He may, or he may not, have known that whenever
foreign affairs become the main anxiety of the people, a sitting president
always gains in prestige and popularity. As a diehard Republican said to me
this week when he made the amazing announcement that he thought, after all,
he'd most likely vote for Carter, 'Well, he's the only president we've got!'

So, as somebody said, the State of the Union address turned into a state of the
world address. It was what people wanted to hear and, in the performance, it
revealed a Carter very much in the guise of the president that his presidential
rivals have been saying the country needs. The loudest and longest applause of
all came for his saying that any Soviet attempt to take control of the Persian
Gulf will be repelled by the use of any means necessary, including military
force.

It sounded good. It sounded firm and manly. It sounded almost as if the United
States had the actual military power to do it. Only in the following days did
the armed services committees of Congress and the men in the Pentagon and the
national magazines get down to the very unpleasant business of detailing what
they already knew as a general fact: that, short of nuclear power, the United
States has only an aircraft carrier here, another there, another a thousand
miles away, that the Mediterranean fleet is inadequate for any large
enterprise, that activating many divisions takes a long time. Most of all, that
a war fought against the interior supply lines of the Russians would have to be
done by a force whose supply lines stretch over thousands of miles of water.

How is it possible for the United States to stabilise a part of the globe which
is so riven with religious and political differences of its own? Yet, in spite
of these unstated weaknesses, President Carter seems to have left the
impression with most people that he's wakened up to the real world, that he,
alone, has the confidential information from around the world and that he means
to do something.

Mr Ronald Reagan said rather weakly the other day when he was asked to comment
on the State of the Union address that he would know what to do if only he was
privy to the intelligence that the president gets and Mr Carter's presidential
rivals, the men already in the race and now running hard for the New Hampshire
primary, have all had to respond to what the papers already call 'the Carter
doctrine'.

Most of them take refuge in saying it was pure rhetoric – sound and fury – but
they know and they know we know, that the different things, the downright
things they swore they would do if they were in the White House – embargo
grain, impose economic sanctions, propose a stiffer military budget, give the
CIA a new mandate to gather intelligence – are exactly what the president has
now done. He has stolen their rhetoric and for the time being, at any rate,
left us with the implication that he, alone, knows how to live up to it.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP