Fear of Russia returns

I don't know how many years ago it was, but last Saturday brought back to me a
sharp picture of it. Last Saturday was Yom Kippur, the Jewish day of atonement,
on which fasting and prayer are prescribed for the atonement of sins.

The picture I have in mind was a full-page cartoon in the New Yorker, the
magazine, a long shot of Broadway looking down to Times Square which is usually
as crammed with people and taxis and trucks as Piccadilly Circus on a Saturday
night. In this cartoon, there was not a living soul. It had no need of a
caption. The issue of the magazine came out on Yom Kippur.

It certainly is a day when travel in and out of New York is easier than on any
other day of the year. For of the six million Jews in the United States, two
million live in New York which is five times the number in the whole of Great
Britain or, for that matter, in Tel Aviv.

I doubt the New Yorker would publish that cartoon today, for since the blacks
were liberated from discrimination to the extent that they were by the historic
Supreme Court ruling of 1954, all so-called minorities, even when they're
majorities, all of what we now call ethnic groups, have become increasingly
sensitive about remarks, whether frankly pejorative or jokey, which might
suggest that they are not mainstream Americans. There was a time, it was very
much in my time in the 1930s, when every vaudeville show and burlesque house
had its specifically Jewish comedians, black comedians, German and Italian and
Irish comedians – they have gone with the wind and the Supreme Court judgment.

Ethnic jokes are not published. In a recent administration, a Cabinet officer
was overheard on an airplane telling a funny, but positively ethnic joke. It
was reported – the incident, not the joke – and he was forced to resign and
he's not been heard of since. And still Jewish jokes in particular abound and
the most frequent, the best tellers of them, are Jews.

My lawyer, who has never, I believe, in his life, said, 'Have you heard this
one?' is an anthology of them and they come from him whenever you ask him about
his health, politics, family relations, some trouble he's having with one of
his clients. Instead of boring you with the subtleties of the actual facts, he
says, 'It's really the old Jewish story' and caps a complicated situation with
a short, wry, wise joke. Which only goes to show that what is enduring about
Jewish humour is that it's always about life situations, usually poignant.

Last week I heard a new one and tried to tell it to him. He's a courteous
listener and he let me get through the punchline and then gently nodded his
head. Of course he'd heard it, in many variations, long ago.

On the day of Yom Kippur, a friend of mine, a WASP – a white, Anglo-Saxon
Protestant – looking over the grievous and, I must say, occasionally
frightening news out of America as well as out of Lebanon, Moscow, the
Philippines, Korea, said, 'I think we ought to replace the slogan or text on
the dollar bill.' It says, 'In God we trust.' He suggested it ought to be
changed to, 'Mea Culpa'.

And it's true, it would be hard to find another country, so much devoted of
late to lamenting its sins, both past and present. There's yet another –
four-hour this time – documentary coming up reviewing the whole ghastly
experience of Vietnam. Hardly a month goes by without our being reminded of the
plight of thousands of the Haitian and Cuban boat people, held in camps in the
south. We don't lack other TV shows from time to time on the wretched fate of
some Indian tribe or other out West.

It's a rare evening TV news programme that does not show the despair of some
unemployed family in any one of a score of states and about every two weeks or
so, there are special news segments of six minutes which survey the various
ordeals of the unemployed in a coal-mining town in West Virginia, in the
depressed automobile capital of Detroit, copper miners in Nevada, farmers in
Kansas or Iowa who have seen as much as a half of their corn (that's maize)
crops burnt to unsaleable cinders in the appalling summer drought. All this,
when employment is rising and unemployment is dropping impressively.

It's got so that one American writer gave thanks that his family didn't arrive
in the United States till 1906, so that they needn't feel any guilt about the
treatment of the Indians or the massacre of the buffalo or any other of the
sins of American history that somebody's always writing a vast lamentation
about, by way of a novel, an historical exposé or a television documentary.

This man suggests that America has embarked on what he calls 'an all-year-round
Yom Kippur'. This orgy of atonement is not something that is much known about,
I find, among Europeans or other foreigners who still think of Americans as
being, in the main, either uncommonly proud of their history or defiant about
its excesses and shortcomings. On the contrary, even in the worst times of
jingoism – even such a wicked form of jingoism as that practised by the late
Senator McCarthy – I'd say that more Americans feel ashamed of such goings-on
than feel comfortable with them. This is sometimes depressing to live with but
it is, I think, no bad thing. It saves you from complacency about the good
things.

Well, it's not easy just now to ferret out the good things, apart from the
groaning bill that's now being presented, so to speak, for the ravages of the
freakish weather everywhere. The whirlwind of tornadoes in the South and
Midwest, the immense floods along the delta country of the Mississippi and
Missouri rivers, the brutal damage to the houses and the beaches along the
California coastline from the merciless rains of the last winter.

These disasters, it's always noticeable, Americans take in their stride. Acts
of God, if that's what they are, were always the humdrum experience of the
pioneers pushing west. And the assumption is still there in the heartland of
the country and it's still acted on that the neighbours are always on hand to
repair what God hath wrought and they do it with surprising speed and spirit.

That small town in California that was practically destroyed by an earthquake
is already well on the way to its resurrection. In Texas, where enumerable
small towns were pulverised by roving tornadoes, 30 old retired carpenters
banded together, surveyed an area of 3,000 square miles which had lost their
churches and decided to build new ones from scratch. They start and finish one
church every three days and in three months have put up 30 churches. For free!

'These people,' said one old gaffer, 'they don't have no money but we have the
labour, right? It's better 'n sitting around on the back porch just swappin'
stories.'

It's a cheerful note in a generally depressing landscape which, there's no
point in belittling, is dominated by the revived fear, not resentment of or
antagonism to, but fear of the Russians. The president has certainly lost his
old dependable backing from conservatives who want him to take far more drastic
sanctions against the Soviet Union than the international airline pilots have
managed to impose.

But then, if Mr Reagan is thinking about his political future – which he's
bound to be doing in the last year before a presidential election – he has, by
the same token, picked up a surprising amount of support from liberals while
blasting the Russians for an act which, when the Israelis and the Bulgarians
did it some years ago, they instantly apologised and offered prompt
compensation.

The president has put the question squarely to friends and critics alike. What
do you they expect me to do? Drop the bomb? Declare war? And, of course, that
is the galling nub of the question. However rigid, however brutal, however
impenitent the Russians may be in their public behaviour and however paranoid
in their suspicions of the United States, they cannot be challenged and defied,
as Churchill challenged and defied the Nazis.

Mr Reagan and Mr Shultz, the Secretary of State and Mr Clark, the National
Security Adviser, have had as frustrating a couple of weeks as they've known in
recognising that anger and rhetoric cannot any longer be acted on in the old
decisive way. Their ordeal cannot have been softened by the news of a national
poll which reports that 60 per cent of Americans think they have not been told
the whole story about the downing of the Korean airliner.

The general gloom was deepened by the brusque work from Moscow that Mr Gromyko,
for the first time in I don't know how many years, will not be attending the
annual meeting of the United Nations general assembly because, as the Russians
put it, the United States has failed to guarantee the security of their foreign
minister and to abide by international norms of behaviour. The irony of that
phrase, I imagine, will be lost on the Russian people who've had only one brisk
and self-righteous account of how the unscrupulous Americans used a civilian
plane to stand in for their illegal spying over the most secret installations
of a nuclear base.

There is, however – just to make life and righteousness harder for Mr Reagan
and Mr Shultz – an uncomfortable snag in the action of the governors of New
Jersey and New York in forbidding Mr Gromyko to land at a civilian airport in
Greater New York.

When the United States became the host of the United Nations, an agreement was
worked out between the city and the international body which said that neither
federal nor state nor city authorities would impose impediments to transit of
the delegates of a member nation AND that this freedom of transit should not be
suspended irrespective of the relations existing between governments.

So, if you want to be strictly legal about it, the two state governors, with
the consent of the federal government, are in violation of the United Nations
law. Maybe it's as well Mr Gromyko won't be on hand to bemoan, at dreadful
length, yet another international crime of the fascist imperialist beast known
as the United States of America.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP