Christmas in Vermont, 1976

I'm looking out high over Central Park, on a shining day watching the children
scudding down the little hills on their sledges, and what with their ear muffs
and parkas and bulging snow pants, they look like characters in a Bruegel
landscape seen through the wrong end of a telescope.

I must say that crisp snow and a cloudless day do wonders for New York, making
us believe for a little time that this is not a city wracked with problems and
might even be called, briefly, by the rather fatuous name the former Mayor
Lindsay tried to give to it, 'Fun City'. By the way, this delusion was helped,
a day or two after Christmas when the Mayor and the Governor of New York State
went down to the island retreat of President-elect Carter in Georgia and got
from him the forthright promise, I quote, 'Bankruptcy is not a viable
alternative for New York City and we have eliminated that as a possibility for
the future'. Mayor Beame and Governor Carey came bouncing back to New York as
jolly as the Bruegel Fathers of the Bruegel kids in the park.

Well, I myself spent a four-day Christmas with daughter in northern Vermont,
and New York, even with its fresh layer of snow, is still as strange to me as,
I suppose, London would be to a man just down from the Highlands of Scotland
or, maybe I should say, a man from Greenland.

When I flew out of here over a week ago, New York was bright but there wasn't a
smidgeon of snow. Yet, by the time we were flying 200 miles to the north, over
Boston, every lake and pond was a white rectangle and the trees were as stiff
and leafless as a forest of broomsticks. And the towns we flew over were
collections of little wooden boxes planted in a child's sandbox. And then the
snows came in, filling the valleys and fringing the mountains and then smearing
them, and by the time the pilot was banking over the snow-capped evergreens,
the only bare land you could see were the federal highways, these long, curving
ribbons of cement, snaking through a planet of snow.

And when you're not used to it, it's always a shock to get out of the plane up
there and feel that somebody's slapped you in the eyes with a towel. This is
simply the sudden adjustment to the blinding light. On my light meter, it
registered F-16, a little more, at one-hundredth of a second. Well, I went
padding toward the tiny airport, taking deep breaths of oxygen as sharp as
ammonia, and wondering how people in cities ever managed to keep their lungs
pumping. I was met by my daughter and son-in-law and grandson, another Bruegel
trio, almost a parody because it had been 14 below zero when they woke up and
though it was now practically suffocating in 20 degrees, their outlines were
thickened by all the snow boots and billowing pants and I don't know if you
know those blessed parkas which look like balloons but they weigh about an
ounce and are warmer than all the wool and sweaters in the world.

My family, in short, looked like the first family of spacemen out there to
greet me as I landed on some undiscovered planet imagined by Charles Dickens.
Very casually, my daughter told me to put my bag in the back of the station
wagon, or shooting brake, if you like, and when I got there, I found that was
impossible because rearing their rubber necks and honking away were two of the
fattest geese outside the Christmas Carol.

Well, about twenty minutes later, when we'd arrived at the graceful, little,
eighteenth-century wooden box my family calls home – a sign outside says
'Edgewood Farm, eggs, Tempwood stoves' – I should say not more than ten minutes
after we arrived, the two fat geese had departed this life having had their
necks wrung by my son who'd flown in from California, not for that reason, and
my son-in-law.

I didn't see these two for the next hour, which is just as well for a squeamish
city type like me, because they'd been plucking and butchering the birds
against the Christmas feast. Now, the kitchen, which in any working farm is the
centre of things, was dense with odours and piled with platters and bowls and
boards and knives, and my wife and daughter up to their elbows in onions and
chestnuts and forced meat and chanterelles, and pans bubbling with morels.

The only time I ever saw anything like it was one time in rural France, in one
of those country restaurants which have managed to snag three stars from the
Parisian dictators of such things. My daughter and son-in-law, I must say, lead
a hard life, but on these occasions it does look to an outsider an idyllic
life. The food is not everything, but growing it and cooking it happen to be my
daughter's passion. After all, she has a lot of time hanging on her hands. She
gets up sometimes as late as 6 a.m. She has two small children to take care of,
the chickens, and the vegetable and fruit planting in the summer and fall,
cleaning the house, shovelling the mountains of snow on winter mornings, or
clearing the barns, ferrying the four-year-old over ice and snow to school, not
to mention campaigning for the public, non-commercial television station in
Burlington, forty miles away. So this leaves her ages to prepare three meals a
day and, I don't why, they're never snacks at any time of the year.

The first night we started with a platter of smoked blue fish, one of a dozen
13-pounders her husband had caught in the summer off the end of Long Island. We
smoked them within hours of the catch and they froze beautifully. After that
came the irresistible 'piece of resistance', venison. Ten days before, my
son-in-law had shot a doe and I'm happy to say I was not on hand to watch him
and my daughter spend the next six hours skinning, de-gutting and butchering
it, before hanging it for a week or so.

Now I've had venison in lush restaurants in Paris and London and, more often,
in modest homes in Texas, and I can only say that they all wag their fingers
against their noses and confide to you their dark, secret recipes for hanging
and cooking, and having it come out just right. But it's always smelly and
gamey and a little tough. Of course, in a restaurant you can let the whole
thing go with a sickly nod at the waiter but the Texans are nothing if not
considerate and eager hosts and they always beg you to tell them if you've ever
eaten venison like that. The true answer is yes, unfortunately, always.
{Laughs}

But you think up some ambiguous variation on the line that old Sam Goldwyn used
to use. Whenever a film producer came pressing him for an opinion after he'd
given Goldwyn a preview of his latest masterpiece, 'Louis,' Goldwyn would say,
looking the producer square down in the eye, 'only you could have made a film
like that!'

Well, I want to tell you that that first evening, for some reason, I'd thought
the venison was to be the Christmas dinner, and it was two nights early, I
assumed as I started eating it that we were having a beautiful steak cut into
long thin slices – I mean of beef – it was so tender you could have eaten it
with a spoon but a round of 'mmm, mmms' alerted me, rather late, to the fact
that this was the venison, with a delicate chanterelle sauce, a salad with raw
mushrooms, then Susie's fat and creamy cheesecake with some of the fruit of the
200-odd strawberry beds that I'd seen her planting earlier in the year. But it
was the only delicious venison I've ever had. And, just to keep things in the
family, the wine was a remarkable claret from the vineyard my stepson farms in
the Alexander Valley way north of San Francisco.

Well, it went on like that and on Christmas Day we had the geese. Very serene
in death, but also, succulent. And a billowing cheese soufflé, and then the
kitchen wafted in the scent of the four sorts of bread my daughter had baked. I
once said to her, 'Any day now, Susie, you'll be making your own soap'. I was
too late, she'd done it.

At the Christmas feast, with old Thomas Beecham whipping his orchestra and
chorus into the most joyous rendering of The Messiah, I was asked to turn it
down a little while my son-in-law, who's a modest, self-sufficient New England
version of Gary Cooper, he wanted to propose a toast. And I should tell you
that he is not a gabby man and this extraordinary initiative must have been
inspired by those Alexander Valley grapes.

Anyway, he said he didn't know what a proper toast should be but all he could
think of, well, he said with pride I guess you can call it, was the fact that
everything we'd eaten in three days had lived or been grown right there, or
roamed in the woods that rise from the long meadow that goes up to the hills.
Nothing, as they say in New England, was store boughten. And, he ended, if it
doesn't sound pretentious, 'I think we should drink to the bounty of nature'.
It didn't sound pretentious at all, it sounded odd, but just right.

So, we drank to the bounty of nature, a very weird thing to toast in the last
quarter of the 20th century when you can hardly buy a loaf of bread that isn't
made of foam rubber, or buy a tomato that hasn't been squirted with a chemical
red, because this is an era when chickens are raised in little cages on gravel
and since they are practically immobile from birth, they are puny and must, for
our protection, be injected with antibiotics and god knows what. I know a very
knowledgeable food writer in France who says that he recalls that the last time
he'd tasted a chicken, a real range-free chicken, in a restaurant was in 1952.

Well, that evening we sang carols in close, if creaky, harmony with the
four-year-old, Adam, piping 'God Rest Ye Merry Gentlemen' right on pitch. Next
morning, I woke up and he was out on his skis. He got them a year ago when he
was three, and now he was plumping up the hills and skimming down them with the
poles helping him on the turns.

And I thought, what an extraordinary childhood. He was born in twenty below
zero – outside of course, he was born inside. Winter is about between 100 and
120 inches of snow, May is the squishy month when the thaw sets in, summer is
bang up in the 90s, the fall is a riot of scarlet and gold and the inky forests
of evergreens over the mountains, and here, at the age of four, he's skiing
over the deep and crisp and even, like a Disney doll and this is all the life
he knows. One day Adam will grow up and, I'm afraid, taste of the forbidden
fruit. One day he will read the New York Times and Adam will be out of the
Garden of Eden for ever.

In the meantime though, a Happy New Year to you.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP