Budget cuts continue

The most effective and courageous and certainly the most comically engaging
mayor that New York City has had in this century, and some people would say the
most typical New Yorker, was the son of an Italian bandmaster, a boy brought up
in Arizona, who moved with his mother back to Budapest in his teens and didn't
return to this country till he was in his mid twenties.

His eight years in Europe admirably qualified him as an interpreter for the
immigration services and it was down on the New York docks and shuttling from
there across to Ellis Island and trying to bring some order to the chaos of
invading immigrants that he picked up a sense of city government a good deal
more realistic than anything he might have learned from a college course in
political science.

He's all but forgotten now and remembered, if at all, by the young because he
gave his name, or rather we gave it for him, to an airport – LaGuardia.
Fiorello LaGuardia was a politician who never hedged his language, never called
a strike 'industrial action' and never called the Democratic leaders of New
York City 'the opposition'. He called them tin-horns and punks. Such
spontaneous talk obviously got him into trouble from which, or for which, he
rarely apologised, but he did say once, 'I don't often make a mistake, but when
I do, it's a beaut!'.

It would be wonderful if some of our more elevated leaders would remember
LaGuardia. For that matter, they might recall the line that an old Baltimore
newspaperman, another forgotten character, used when he was asked how he would
feel, as a lifelong atheist, if he found himself in heaven. He said, 'If I do
wind up with the twelve apostles, I shall say, Gentlemen, I was wrong.'

The faces of the cocky LaGuardia and the sassy Mencken floated in front of my
television screen last Wednesday evening as I watched the President of the
United States trying to slide and wriggle out of the most absolute, the most
uncompromising, promise he gave during the presidential campaign. He would
never, never, he'd said, touch the sacred trust fund known as social security,
which is dedicated to the livelihood, to the living expenses of American
citizens over 65.

Mr Mondale, another forgotten warrior, warned everybody in one of those
presidential debates that once Mr Reagan got elected he would start shaving
social security. The president was wounded to the quick and many times
afterwards on the road, he kept wondering, in that attractive, baffled way of
his, why people kept on bringing up this bugaboo. Never meant never, didn't it?
And as for increasing taxes – another outrageous accusation – he said that
would happen 'over my dead body'.

So, on Wednesday evening, a reporter got up and said, 'Mr President, haven't
you painted yourself into a corner with your campaign promises to raise taxes
only over your dead body, not to cut social security and to keep up defence
spending?' 'No!' the President replied. 'In the first few days of February,
we'll be submitting our budget to the Congress and I don't mind if they want to
do what they're doing and have some plans of their own or are suggesting some.
Maybe they've got some plans we haven't thought of.'

Now, this being translated means, 'I did my damnedest during the campaign to
say that I'd like not to touch social security payments and I dearly would like
not to raise taxes, but, after all, fellas, when you're running for president,
you have to pretend that you run the government. It's only after election you
remind the people that the best any president can do is to propose. Congress
disposes.

'The president – any president – is nothing like as almighty powerful as he
claims to be when he's out on the hustings. I wish you guys would stop
headlining things like, "President Will Not Touch Social Security" and "Reagan
Promises No Tax Increase". In our system, it's not up to me. The Congress, in
the end, the House of Representatives, writes the budget, and, by the way, men,
I hear from my own budget director that my precious budget will be strangled at
birth the moment after I deliver it.'

It would all have been much simpler, not to say heartwarming, if the president
on Wednesday evening had replied to that reminder of his campaign promises,
'Well, as LaGuardia used to say, I don't often make a mistake, but when I do,
it's a beaut!'.

The truth, the truth of things to come, is that the week before the president's
press conference, his budget director went up to Capitol Hill where Congress
lives and works and has its supreme being and Mr Stockman had with him more
than an armful, in fact, 53 notebooks. Why 53? That's the number of Republicans
in the Senate.

The notebooks, a conglomerate feat of proposals from every Republican senator,
were the raw material from which the president and Mr Stockman had manufactured
the president's budget, but this final, or rather provisional, document lumped
all the ideas – Republican ideas at that – politely listed as alternatives to
the president's ideas, but many of these alternatives were rank rejections of
what the president had in mind.

Mr Stockman, himself, revealed that that plaguey deficit will be $25 billion
more than the White House calculated only a month ago. What Mr Stockman was
doing in presenting this gloomy document was not so much slapping down a
single-minded budget, he was saying, 'It won't work'. Or, as one Republican put
it, 'He was ringing alarm bells'.

Now, probably, the key man, the man the president most depends on for getting
across his ideas and getting through the most of his budget, is always the
Senate majority leader, that's the leader of the president's own party in the
Senate. If there's one man on the legislative side of American government you'd
expect to be the president's field commander, it is that man. He is Senator
Robert Dole. So what had he to say to the fruit of those 53 black notebooks?

He said that the cost of living allowances paid for by the government – and
that would entail welfare costs, food stamps, school lunches, disabled pay,
unemployment cheques, the lot – the American people have to know that cost of
living allowances are going to have to be dealt with in a tough, gut-hard way.
And talking, in particular, about the president's sacred trust fund of social
security, Mr Dole said, with extraordinary blandness, 'I don't believe social
security is off limits'.

So the phrase that rose from Capitol Hill, after the budget director gave the
congressmen this preview of the president's budget, was a word appropriate to
the winter weather which has now descended all across this continent, the new
Ice Age – 'freeze' is the single word – to 'freeze' the present budget, which
could mean not only a freeze on the defence budget and on social security
payments, but increased taxes by whatever name to pay for the increased costs
which the current budget always allows for – inevitable increases due to, even
seven per cent inflation, to cost overruns for weapons, and so on.

This drastic move is already under way. Senator Dole, the president's man –
remember? theoretically –together with the Senate chairman of the budget
committee have already introduced a freezing bill which calls for $250 billion
worth of spending cuts over the next three years and that would take care of
the groaning deficit.

I don't suppose either of them expects it to happen, but it does remind
Americans and ought to acquaint foreign correspondents in this country with the
facts of American political life, especially in the second term of any
president. He will not be running again. Four years is the limit of any
patronage he can offer anybody. No personal ambition of any senator or
congressman is put at risk by defying the president now.

In other words, the second and last term of any president is a time when
Congress can exercise most confidently its superior power to dispose, in its
own way, of anything the president proposes, in nothing so much as composing
and stamping and sealing the national budget. So, if you think that these
commentaries, anyway, will register fewer alarms than usual about what the
president wants and urges in domestic matters, you'll be right.

Foreign affairs, foreign policy, is something else. For though the constitution
gives to the Congress the power to declare war at the president's bidding, to
raise and support armies and maintain a navy, the president is the one who
conducts foreign relations. He makes treaties, admittedly only with the advice
and consent of the Senate, and we have seen – to go no later than Woodrow
Wilson, who failed to get the United States to join the League of Nations –
we've seen how the Senate can cripple even the president's initiative in
foreign policy.

But such a crippling blow is rare. The present Senate may jib a little at more
money for El Salvador and the House may tighten the purse strings, but the
president has considerable independent executive power to promote relations
with other countries, to send Americans abroad if he decides that by so doing,
they'd protect the security of the United States.

Which leads to the thought, the correct thought, that Secretary Shultz and
Secretary Weinberger, being servants of the executive branch, are nobody's but
the president's envoys and that in such things as the arms control talks,
American policy stands or falls by the president's power and his convictions,
his wishes.

And that brings us to Geneva. We've all been bitten so often before previous
Russian-American sessions that this time everybody muzzled high hopes, warned
us gravely that nothing was to be expected, the old Carter and Ford Cabinet men
were brought in to say that these would probably be the talks to end future
talks.

So, once again, we were all wrong. For once, for the first time, the American
press and the White House were at one in seeing new hope after the talks, a new
dialogue and it's surely the first time that Moscow echoed these sweet
thoughts, even Izvestia, allowing itself a delirious headline – 'The Talks Are
On!' – this is no time to quibble or mutter.

Not when Tass begins its editorial, 'There is, there can be, no sensible
alternative to the policy of peaceful coexistence.' Amen.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP