Voting for equal rights

Some years ago, the New Yorker, the magazine, had a cartoon that, like so many
of the cartoons by James Thurber and Peter Arno – both of whom are long gone –
became a classic. This one was drawn by one of the magazine's stable of old
reliables, Whitney Darrow, a genial, bespectacled, gangling man with a small,
bright, wide-eyed wife. For many years, he peppered the magazines with cartoons
of a genial, bespectacled, gangling man making casual, but alarming remarks to
a small, bright, wide-eyed woman.

I mention the charm of this genial couple, in life, I mean, because Darrow
never drew a mean man or a mean couple and yet many of his subjects would,
today, be thought obnoxious, if not downright offensive, by women especially.
One of my favourites is, or maybe I'd better say used to be, was a scene in an
office. Three or four girls, secretaries or apprentice secretaries are
obediently taking notes from a brisk, bosomy manager of a woman. She's
indicating a remarkable act being performed by a middle-aged male who is in hot
pursuit of a girl secretary. They're whisking in something of a circle around
his desk and the bosomy lady is saying, 'You'll notice, girls, that Priscilla
always manages to keep the desk between them'.

Now this was the sort of thing that in reprint was thought suitable for framing
and hanging in the offices of waggish executives. I'm pretty sure that today in
any office it was hung, at least one of the female staff would register strong
objections and might even bring suit, for its subject is the theme, the actual
charge of a flock of suits being brought by female employees against their
bosses all over the United States. The sexual harassment – or 'har-assment' –
of women. There've been hearings before congressional committees, managers
compelled to rehire complaining women and compensate them with back pay.
Rumpuses in several universities, threats of rebellion among faculties. Damage
suits brought by female pupils who contended that the blandishments of some
male teacher went far beyond the instruction prescribed in the text book.

One girl I recall, in an eastern university, recently maintained that the C
mark she was given for her lecturer's course was given entirely to her refusal
to yield to his extra-curricula passion. The board of enquiry set up by the
president of the university, no less, concluded to the great relief of the men
on the faculty, that her C mark was due entirely to the simple fact that that's
what her work entitled her to.

More recently still, on a Sunday evening investigative television programme
that reaches about 30 million viewers, there was a whole feature about several
miners who brought suit for sexual harassment and by miners I don't mean girls
under age, I mean women underground complaining about being attacked in the
dark of the West Virginia pits. Female coal miners, while still in a minority,
are no more of a novelty these days than female jockeys. You may recall that a
couple of years ago, the frail but indestructible Fred Astaire married a
jockey.

And this brings vividly to mind a facetious remark of mine made four or five
years ago when the campaign for equal rights for women was really getting under
way. In fact, I just realise it's been over ten years since the crusade was
strong enough to introduce into Congress yet another – a 27th – amendment to
the constitution. Now the way to do this is straight but paved with 38
stumbling blocks. Let me explain!

Any proposed amendment to the Federal Constitution must first be passed by a
two-thirds vote in both the Senate and the House. Then it goes to the
legislatures of each of the 50 states and it must be ratified by three-quarters
of them which, today, means by 38. Well, in the end, by the deadline which was
June of this year, it fell short by three votes and five states which had been
all for it, changed their minds. What monstrosity did the amendment propose?
What awful threat to law and order?

Really the language of the amendment has a refreshing simplicity and directness
that you don't usually find even in simple laws, regulating the regulations,
governing the carry-over of voluntary tax exemptions not hitherto exempted in
property evaluation, exemptions referred to in clause 16, paragraph 32, see
above.

This is the text of the whole amendment: 'Equality of rights under the law
shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any state on account
of sex'. There's nothing sinister about that surely? The Congress didn't think
so and they passed it. But, as I say, as it was debated in the following ten
years throughout the states from Alaska to Florida, it never made it. It died
and what was not sufficiently noticed in the recent congressional elections,
women, more than any other group, came down hard on the president's party and
were responsible as much as anybody for the Republicans loss of 24 seats in the
House.

Well, now why should such a fair, such a sensible and long overdue proposal be
turned down? I remember maintaining once, in the teeth of some very hot breath
from women listeners who didn't wait long enough to hear me out, that there
really was no need for a special amendment about sexual equality before the
law, since the 14th amendment – ratified in 1868 – says firmly that no state
shall deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the
laws. Note that it doesn't say any man, not like the founding fathers who said
'all men are created equal' leaving women and, by the way, blacks of any
gender, out of the pronouncement. No, it said 'any person'.

A happy bit of foresight, because the urge in our time to insist that women,
too, are persons is so strong that no charity ball, no parent-teachers meeting,
dares be run by a chairman. It is always now a chairperson.

Well, I was told by learned lawyers that my point about the 14th amendment was
shrewd but irrelevant since the courts had never applied it in judging cases of
sexual discrimination. So a new law binding on all the states was necessary.
Why did it fail – and in the 1980s?

There was certainly a spate of dire warnings which appealed to morons, such as
that in any war women would be drafted wholesale for guerrilla warfare, but
there were canny and plausible arguments, too. This new amendment would have
overruled existing laws in many states which protect women from unscrupulous
husbands and harsh labour laws, tougher penalties against men and against women
for physical assault, prohibitions against forcing women into occupations which
may sound harmless enough but which are exhausting or in themselves actually
discriminating, abolishing the, on the whole, more humane conditions under
which women live in prisons and so on.

Looking into these things, I was surprised at one time to appreciate that if I
lived in any one of certain states, I, too, would have voted against the ERA
amendment. It was at that time that I committed the facetious remark I
mentioned earlier. I said, 'Imagine, the day cannot be too far away when idle
husbands will be living off alimony paid by working ex-wives and when women
will find themselves, in a time of conscription, having to endure the
impossibly tough training of the marines'.

Well, what do you know? That day is here. In a country in which more than half
of all wives have outside work – 20 years ago it was about a third – it's now
quite common for divorcing women to be paying out support to the feckless
ex-husband if he has proved in the divorce action that he was, as we say, 'the
innocent party'' and women are not only on active service in the army and navy,
but also in the marines and not just as typists or filing clerks.

In this whole study the most interesting trend is, however, one which shows
that male chauvinism may be cowering but has not yet expired. There's something
called the National Commission on Working Women and its spokesman –
spokesperson – is a woman. She says there's a lot of evidence to show that when
women enter any job category or profession in droves, that occupation loses
status. Men don't want it any more and the salaries drop. Since men are not
doing it, there's no cause to insist on equality of pay and this seems to be
especially true of insurance adjusters and examiners, bill collectors,
real-estate agents and brokers, checkers, inspectors and production-line
assemblers. The men move out and the usual salary for the job drops.

I'll end this deep study with one heartbreaking item that is not in the Bureau
of Labor Statistics' story. It concerns the fact that practically all the books
on the non-fiction bestseller list are what the publishers call 'non books' –
not biographies or histories or such – but 'how to' books. How to survive the
coming crash, how to keep your body in shape, how to plant delphiniums in
midwinter. One of these, which went soaring to the top of the list is called
'How to Make Love to a Woman'. Amazing that this work appeared like a comet,
blazing through the darkness of the blundering male – something that, frankly,
was news to me and must have been to Adam – it was written by a 30-year-old
lawyer with, as we say, a 22-year-old mate, a fashion model.

Well he came up the other day in Manhattan criminal court for – what do you
think? – for punching his girlfriend in the face. 'For one second', he
confessed, 'I lost control.' Something he'd warned us against when following
his instructions on how to make love. His book is, in fact, very strong on
telling men to show sensitivity to women.

He had to settle out of court for $30,000. A large sum. No more than was
necessary, her lawyer said, to get her teeth fixed.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP