Ferrero nominated

From time to time, my wife tells me, it becomes necessary to contemplate the
clothes closets with a view to ridding them of the bulky brown files of
cuttings that kept me informed about American farming policy [WORDS MISSING
HERE] what it is, as a magazine biography of William H. Woodin who was Franklin
Roosevelt's first secretary of the treasury – that would be Chancellor of the
Exchequer.

Mr Woodin was a songwriter in his spare time, which is certainly a first of
some kind and if he were still with us he would be something like 117. So, with
respect, I think I'm safe in throwing out his biography.

Once this house-cleaning passion seizes me it can last for as long as 20
minutes. Some day I'm going to get round to tossing out all the vital stuff
about Charles W. Bryan, Charles McNary, John J. Sparkman and William E. Miller
and, if you don't know who they were, not to worry, not one American in 10,000
knows either. They were their party's choice for vice president in a year their
party didn't make it. Few names in American history are so quickly forgotten as
those of vice presidential candidates who went down with their boss.

A ghoulish thought which we ought not to dwell on in the month that every
newspaper, every magazine, every television talk show and news programme is
deliriously filling us in on the origins, the life, the opinions, the hobbies,
the tastes, the daily routine, even the supermarket shopping habits of Mrs John
Zaccaro, better known, for the time being at least, as Geraldine Ferraro. Once
she decided to get into politics, she reverted to her maiden name because an
uncle of that name was a politician with some clout in and around New York
city.

So, just now I suppose everybody who pays even passing attention to America
knows that Geraldine Ferraro of the borough of Queens in New York City, an Alf
Garnett constituency, is the first woman seriously to be nominated for vice
president. I throw in the adverb to accommodate the nigglers. Two other women
in the past, the first in 1924 had their names put in nomination at their
convention but this was a... a gesture of courtesy or an expression of awe. In
one case, a tribute to a lady of surpassing beauty. There was never the
slightest possibility that they would go on to the ticket.

But here we have a presidential candidate, Walter Mondale, one vice president
whose name we're all familiar with so far, deliberately choosing a woman to
strengthen the Democratic ticket. When she was picked, no word from the large
treasury of the English vocabulary was so pronounced, so often, with such
ecstasy as the word 'historic'. There were commentators who boldly declared
that in the history of democracy no great nation had ever done so audacious, so
historic a thing – forgetting, in their frenzy, Mrs Thatcher and Golda Meir and
Mrs Gandhi.

Well, this too will pass and if the Mondale-Ferraro ticket goes down in
November, I promise you it will not be many years before it will also pass
quietly into oblivion. Ask even veteran observers of American politics who was
Adlai Stevenson's first running mate? Who was Thomas E. Dewey's second? The
response is usually silence or the wrong fella.

Well, I was starting to wade into a closet which has all the hat shelves
cluttered with books and rusty seven irons and abandoned putters, when I saw a
little file, not brown and tattered, but white and squeaky clean. I don't know
what it was doing there. It had been slipped in, I imagine, quickly and
guiltily, as the lady of the house was heard at the door.

Well, here it is in front of me, from a magazine, a very reputable and
far-seeing one, one page dated March 17, 1984. It's about the perils of
conventional wisdom. Conventional wisdom, in those far-off days, pronouncing
that Walter Mondale would be the Democrats' choice. The burden of the piece was
that the Democrats had just discovered a formidable threat to Mr Mondale in a
man who had obliterated the former vice president among blue-collar workers in
New England. This man, the piece suggested, was about to make history, again,
by offering not so much a ready-made crop of novel ideas as the notion that as
president he would open windows to let fresh minds ventilate American
government while Mr Mondale's windows could be stuck shut.

The name of this clean fresh breeze was Gary Hart, remember? Well, no need to
bone up on him any more, not for another four years, if ever. He has gone with
the fickle wind of politics, along with Alan Cranston, Senator Hollings, George
McGovern and John Glenn.

We're left, however, with the Reverend Jesse Jackson and I think it's
absolutely safe to say he has not gone. Never to be president maybe, but he did
represent the one really historic element of presidential politics in 1984. Not
just a black man experimenting in national politics or making a game try at the
impossible, he did something that not even the chosen couple, Mondale and
Ferraro, can claim to have done for certain. He acquired a national
constituency.

Wherever his name was on the ticket in the primary elections, the blacks voted
overwhelmingly for him and, more important, as a new development in American
politics, he did not merely corral a small constituency that was already there,
he tripled its size in the sense that there are, this year, three times as many
blacks registered to vote as there were in 1980. In that year, they would have
been the decisive counterweight to Reagan's Southern conservatives and old-time
macho whites and the large evangelical vote. They would have most likely won
the South or many states of it, even for Carter. For a long time to come, the
Democratic party and Mr Mondale in particular will owe dues to the Reverend
Jackson.

All personalities aside, the Democrats have come out of their convention making
a strong claim on two national constituencies – the blacks and the Roman
Catholics. Considering that one American in something more than four is a
Catholic, it is a constituency vital to any American political party. Mrs
Ferraro is a Catholic, but the cunning part in choosing her was that she's a
Catholic with a difference that appeals to Democrats, to most Protestants and
Jews and to many Catholics who don't come out shouting about it in public.
Namely, that Mrs Ferraro, while saying that she would not, herself, have an
abortion, is in favour of letting a woman decide for herself.

This, of course, is the precise opposite of the official Republican position.
It presents an immediate problem for Mr Reagan and he's wasting no time facing
it. Within days of the nomination of Mrs Ferraro, the White House had set up
for him a whole round of appearances in Catholic churches and Catholic
neighbourhoods and Hispanic communities. It's anybody's guess now, and maybe
until after the election, how much Mrs Ferraro will manage to draw the Reagan
anti-abortion vote away from him.

Some of you may think that I've overlooked the main constituency that Mrs
Ferraro's candidacy could capture, namely the women's vote. Of course, the
Democrats are cock-a-hoop at the moment claiming it, but many fewer women voted
for Reagan than for Carter and it's doubtful, to say the least, that Mrs
Ferraro will attract more than a Democratic ticket with two men would have
done.

This is a hotly debated question but the people who come up with the most
dogmatic answers are usually people who wish it terribly to happen – the
professional feminists most of all. The most skilful political analysts I know
are saying that Reagan wouldn't get a large women's vote anyway and is
certainly not going to reclaim any considerable number of women Democrats.

Well, now, one convention is over and one to go. By the way, the Democrats went
into euphoria yet again this week when a new Gallup poll came out that a poll
of the electorate now showed 48 per cent for Mr Mondale and 46 per cent for Mr
Reagan. It is, said Mr Mondale, from his fishing trip on the lakes of
Minnesota, a dead heat.

So it is but nobody should get excited or alarmed by any national poll taken
immediately after a convention. It is, as you saw, an institution like a circus
coming to town or a big, military parade. It warms the cockles, it rouses the
imagination, it boosts the blood pressure. Forty-five per cent of the people
polled admitted, in fact, that it was the sight and coverage of the Democratic
convention that made them think they would now be more likely to vote
Democratic than Republican. 'Now' is the operative and treacherous word.

Poll them again a month from now after the Republican convention in Dallas and
see if many of the same, impressionable people will not be re-impressed by
Ronald Reagan. A man who's helping to run the president's re-election campaign
said it best, 'You always have to expect that after a three-day television
commercial for a party, the nominee is going to have a surge of five to eight
points'. He expected a similar swing toward the president after the
Republicans' television commercial in Dallas. And when that's over, the
weather, both political and actual, will begin to cool.

The first week in September, the presidential campaign begins. That's what the
calendar always says and there was a time when it was so, when both conventions
were held in June, there was a momentary firestorm of political passion which
then burned out through the summer months while, in fact, the candidates took a
long, statutory rest. No more.

The campaign has been waged since the first presidential primary in the winter
and you will be appalled to hear that in September it will start to rage until
the first Tuesday in November. Those three months have always been a trying
time but they will feel worse, more deadening, this time because they will
constitute the last quarter of a year of incessant campaigning. It's too much
and 80 per cent of the American people think so, but nothing is done.

Even back 52 years ago, the din of the candidates' rhetoric, their
self-righteousness, their laments for the survival of the republic if the other
fella got in, all this drove Will Rogers to write in his nationally syndicated
column, 'Who do these fellas think they are? We can get along perfectly well
without either or both of them. Why don't they shut up and go fishing?'

Herbert Hoover took the hint and so, last Monday, did Mr Mondale.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP