The America's Cup

I'm always meaning to rearrange my books or, rather, arrange them in some
sensible way so that all the books about the First World War or sports or
whatever are bunched together. I've never done it. Some deep instinct makes me
resist doing it now and now I think I know why.

In a beautifully arranged library, there are few surprises. Things are where
they're supposed to be. In my library, I go looking for something on the
history of Poland and bang up against the right book are the letters of Groucho
Marx. Of course that means that my knowledge of the history of Poland is
indefinitely postponed. I was searching this week for a book which I knew must
be on a certain shelf but where it was supposed to be was a book so laden with
dust that you had to tilt the spine towards the light to read the title.

It has never been taken down since I first bought it, but its title as much as
anything else I can recall fanned in me the impulse to become a foreign
correspondent. It's called, 'We saw it happen'. It was a collection of
reminiscences of correspondents of the New York Times in the not-very-distant
past, but here were stories from the men who were there: following Gandhi on
his tour of Lancashire, writing up the funeral of the Empress Dowager of Japan,
accompanying Admiral Byrd on his expedition to the Antarctic, being – almost by
accident – in Vienna on the morning Hitler invaded Austria.

That seemed to me to be the life. To be there. And, of course, the editor of
every newspaper on earth is brought up to believe that nothing is credible
unless it's written by a reporter on the spot. Hence the more profitable the
newspaper, the prouder it is of the range, the exotic range of its datelines.
After all, the man or woman who's there is bound to write the truest story.
Right?

Well, no, as a matter of fact. Something happened 30 more years ago which, with
some stories, has turned the reporter on the spot into a mole trying to cover a
marathon. I think the first news event of international importance that was
covered by American television coast to coast was the Japanese peace treaty
conference held in San Francisco in September 1951. The State Department, which
was in charge of assigning press credentials and seats had put most of the
foreign press corps, certainly the British contingent, into the back two rows
of the upper balcony or gallery of the San Francisco opera house. This is the
sort of nest for which opera glasses were invented. I, for one, had no opera
glasses.

When this great plenary session opened, the British correspondents were
whispering and hissing between themselves, who's the little man second from the
left? Who's the man on Dean Acheson's right? There was a big man on the front
row of the dignitaries on the stage and he was a colourful character in the
literal sense that, as I recall, he was wearing a pale, sky-blue suit and brown
shoes. I don't know why I became so fussed about knowing his identity. I must
have had an approaching deadline.

Anyway, I remember that this session was the first big coast-to-coast
television transmission and I tumbled down the stairs of the balcony and went
out to a coin telephone box and put in a call to my wife in New York. She was
watching all right. Who's the big man in the sky-blue suit? She was shocked.
Governor Warren of California, of course! Hadn't I seen him mop his brow and
joke with secretary Acheson? 'How's Acheson looking?' I asked. She was
incredulous. She could have told me if I'd asked the tensile strength of the
whiskers in Acheson's moustache. 'You're there, aren't you?' she shouted. A
good question.

If you'd been a naive outsider in those days, I mean somebody not in the
business of reporting news, you might have thought that editors everywhere
would have a second and an economical thought – fewer deadlines, nothing like
so many trips abroad for special correspondents who could, and can, turn one
assignment into a junket. But it seems that through all those intervening
years, the pride in having a reporter there has overcome the editor's thrifty
impulse to send the man in the next room and set him in front of the box. Of
course, the theatre critic has to go to the play. A presidential press
conference had better be attended in person, but only, I think, if that person
intends to ask a question.

But in sporting events, especially, I'm amazed at the headlong way in which
newspaper men and women are despatched to the far corners of the earth to
cover, as the saying is, something that you and I, snug in our living room,
could describe far more accurately than the reporter on the spot. A golf
tournament, more than any other, paralyses the man who would try to cover it on
his legs. He can conscientiously go out and follow two players through many
holes or backtrack and dart around and catch this man for a half hour and then
after a long walk catch up with another champ, but there is no way, short of
sprouting wings, that he can follow or sense the drama or the non drama of a
play that is being acted out over 200 acres.

When I read the newspaper accounts of the final day of, say, the British Open,
I grieve for the brave tricks and evasions by which the man has to pretend he
saw it all. He wasn't there. I, three thousand miles away, was.

We had a splendid example this past week of how the best story can be written
by a man who wasn't there. I have in these talks mentioned once or twice the
great, and alas, the late, Red Smith, the most knowledgeable, graceful, natural
sports writer of our time – a man who till the day before he died at 75 wrote
like an angel, a very spry and comical angel. He's been succeeded by a younger
man, naturally, who turns out to be fit to fill his shoes. Dave Anderson knocks
all around the country. He's there all right for all the big sports events –
the Kentucky Derby, the US Tennis Open, the baseball World Series, the Super
Bowl – always on the spot. But the spot is rarely the tennis court, the press
box, and almost never, I think, a spot from which he could file a play-by-play
report.

He goes off into the locker room and he has a talk with the man who blew a
two-inch putt or the hero whose touchdown was disallowed or even with the
trainer of the man who didn't win the big horse race. I guess he'd been up at
Newport to soak in a little of the briny atmosphere of the America's Cup races
but on the final day last Monday, he had a better idea. He stayed in New York.
He went over to the New York Yacht Club, one of those very solid, very quiet,
very elegant club buildings that are planted in the forties, between Fifth and
Sixth Avenues. At first sight, the marble lobby and the thick red carpet, its
staircase might belong to any other club for downtown businessmen and mid-town
lawyers, but the staircase leads up to the America's Cup room – a large and
handsome room gleaming with model ships, models of every yacht that has sailed
in the America's Cup races.

The New York Yacht Club, as you can imagine, is not a haven for the
impoverished. It is so grand, so restrained, so confident of its standing among
the sports clubs of the world that is needs none of the conspicuous baubles
that show you're up to date. It can afford not to have a television set or even
a radio so that during the finest or the most excruciating final hours of this
year's races, the oldest members and the youngest and the fidgeting in between
were gathered, or rather scattered, in a seemly fashion through the bar and the
America's Cup room. Most of them would amble up to that room at least once to
take an anxious look at the cup itself, bolted all these years to its table and
giving off so much dazzle in the shafted sunlight as to make you sneeze.

All very impressive and quaint but what was Dave Anderson doing there? Well,
since he was from the New York Times, of course he'd been allowed in. I suppose
he wandered and then sat down and scribbled on a pad, not always openly and
coarsely, sometimes I imagine in his pocket. Anyway, he'd decided this was the
place to cover the fateful race and what he saw and reported was in the result
so much more memorable than even the beautiful shots of the yachts skimming and
tacking and leaving V-shaped fountains in their wake. Certainly, to be
remembered when the breathless commentators had ceased their panting and
explaining and even when the nervous and then the ecstatic multitudes in the
Royal Perth Yacht Club had vanished from the screen.

It turned out that the tension necessary to any sports story was provided for
Anderson by the very fact that there was no television or radio. First a little
steward came into the dining room and called for attention. The race had
started, he announced, Liberty was ahead by eight seconds. They waited another
three-quarters of an hour for the word that Liberty was now 18 seconds ahead.
The old members were beginning to fret. They mumbled sad meditations on the
risks of changing the boat at the last minute, of changing sails without
changing ballast and other technical laments.

As the hours crawled by, members went out to make phone calls. Even the doorman
thought it was a nerve-racking ordeal. The rest had better be told in
Anderson's words.

A reporter said, 'I just called my office, they say the lead is down to a
length and a half.' 'Only a length and a half?' a member said, blanching. 'Is
that close?' the reporter asked. 'That's a heart attack!' the member replied.
'I was in Newport last week',one member mused, 'and that boat just screams.'
Soon a red-coated doorman entered the bar, 'Australia by 21 seconds at the
fifth mark,' he said, 'only one leg to go.'

In a nearby wooden booth, a young executive was listening to his wife describe
what she was watching on cable TV at home. 'It's almost over,' he was saying,
'now. Australia's way ahead. Way ahead!' His four listeners shook their heads.
One began walking towards the bar. 'Get me a drink too,' another said. In a few
moments, the young man in the grey suit in the telephone booth gritted his
teeth and glanced up at his friends, 'Australia just crossed the line,' he said
softly. Suddenly a hush silenced the three dozen men and women in the bar.
'What?' somebody asked. 'Australia just crossed the line,' the man repeated.
'Damn!' somebody grumbled.

When it was all over, one man remembered the question Queen Victoria asked 132
years ago when America came in sight, 'Who is second?'.

Another member took up the famous bit of dialogue and said what the Queen's
attendant had said to her, 'Ma'am, there is no second.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP