Summer's end

Last Tuesday getting back to work in our village, or I should say township,
meant an election for the town supervisor and the select men and all the other
offices which retain their old colonial names.

Of course, like everybody else in reach of a television or a radio set, we
fretted about South Africa and the president's coming fight for a new tax
system and the alarmingly widespread use of drugs among the baseball stars and
other matters of chronic national interest.

But getting back to normal in this quiet part of Long Island, a hundred miles
from New York City, meant whether to increase the charge for overnight boats at
the marinas and the parlous low state during our long summer drought of the
aquifers which are the source of our water supply. But the most dramatic
difference between our summer life and life anytime after Labor Day is the
happy fact that the summer folks have gone.

Summer folks is an old American phrase that summer folks don't care to use. It
belittles or, as we now say, downgrades them. What are summer folks? Well,
first let's say what they're not. They're not the hoards of people who in most
temperate countries invade seaside resorts especially and spend a couple of
weeks there.

Summer folks are not the inhabitants of family holiday camps which are so much
more of a British institution than an American that I doubt they exist here at
all. Though I hasten to say the entire 3,000-miles stretch of this continent
abounds in summer in children's camps, the normal two-month summer habitat for
middle-class children whose parents can afford to buy the required outfits,
blankets, raincoats, shirts, swimming suits, play clothes, extra shoes,
underwear etc. etc. and then bundle them off to join their classmates at a bus
depot or an airport. Used to be the railway station, but today the railroad is
practically an anachronism as rare as the American soda fountain. We must talk
sometime about the sad disappearance of that splendid institution.

Well, to narrow the definition of summer folks down further to what they're
not, I ought to mention that this continent also abounds in summer camps for
special types of enthusiast – tennis camps for teenagers, for full-blown
adults, golf camps, swimming camps and what we rudely call fat farms, known in
other English-speaking countries as rest centres or the Meadows Retreat or some
other flutey euphemism for a place where you go or are sent by your mate to
lose the spare tyre round the middle.

All these determined holiday makers are not summer folks. I thought I'd look up
the origin of the phrase in the American equivalent of the great Oxford English
Dictionary. It is in four fat volumes, took 30 years to compile. It is a
dictionary of American-English on historical principles done on the same lines
as the Oxford with every entry noting its first, historically first, appearance
in print and on into our own time with any progressive or retrograde change in
meaning. I was quite confident that summer folks would be there.

Amazingly it isn't, but we see its origins in 'Summer Boarder', an 1872 entry,
'one who boards in a country place during the summer'. And, immediately
following, 'Summer Cottage, a cottage usually in the country occupied during
the summer'. A second quotation of 'summer boarder' brings us with a bang to
what we once called the nitty-gritty and now call the bottom line: '1887. The
summer boarder trade will yield the highest amount of profit'. That is a fact
attested to in thousands of small towns in the mountains, by the lakes, along
the coast shelf of America, especially on the east coast from Maine down
through the Carolinas.

Since a hundred years ago or a little more, it has been in such places that you
could find the summer folks. It was the railroad that drastically changed the
summer habits of the bourgeois middle class. They used to desert the
insufferable heat of the eastern cities by going off just before 4 July in
carriages to some cool valley outside town, where, when they were young, they
boarded in a guest house. When they got a little richer, they rented a cottage
and when they were richer still, they bought a cottage and the wife decamped
there for July and August and the husband commuted – another American word – at
the weekends.

The word 'cottage' covers a variety of shelters. To most people, a cottage
then, as now, was just that, a small nest, an abandoned farmhouse perhaps, a
simple place for simple summer pleasures, but the men who in the 1880s and '90s
made new fortunes in tin and copper and coke and iron and the railroads, they
also discovered the pleasure of having for themselves a summer house, a retreat
by the seashore. And they built them. Huge mansions in the English style, the
French style, at Newport in Rhode Island. They called them cottages. Cottages
with 37 bedrooms, stables, grand dining-rooms, small dining-rooms, ballrooms,
hothouses and spacious gardens.

The rather less wealthy, but wealthy enough, took the train out 90 miles along
the south shore of Long Island and there, by the Atlantic Ocean and the dunes,
they, too, built sturdy houses which they inhabited for the two months that
separate Independence Day from Labor Day. They were the first summer folks,
so-called subsequently and forever by the farmers, the builders, the
carpenters, the shopkeepers, the schoolteachers and so on who are the permanent
residents of such small towns as Southampton, Westhampton, Quogue – all towns
facing the Atlantic, along a fork of land that has the ocean on one side and
great Peconic Bay on the other.

By the way, it was here that three prosperous gentlemen had built summer homes
but, in the early spring of 1889, they were off in a holiday in France and at
Biarritz, they came on a very strange sight – a long, rolling stretch of land,
cropped along what looked like short parade grounds that led to small green
surfaces, cropped or mown more finely still. They ran into a young Scot, one
Willie Dunn, who was playing an odd sort of game across this land. He told them
it was called 'the gawf'. He took them to the edge of a chasm. He took a
remarkable implement in his hand, dropped a little white ball and struck the
ball over the chasm to a bright, green surface about 125 yards away.

The Messrs Vanderbilt, Meade and Cryder were enchanted. They promptly hired
Willie Dunn to come over, cross the Atlantic, come to the south shore of Long
Island and trim or shape or ravage or whatever was necessary to build a course
for the gawf. And Willie came in the late spring of 1891, surveyed the 4,000
acres that Mr Vanderbilt had quietly purchased and, with the help of 150
Indians from the nearby Shinnecock reservation, he cut down the blueberry
bushes, turned Indian burial grounds into obstacles or scooped them into
bunkers and, in less than three months, had created a 12-hole golf course which
became, a little later on, the first 18-hole golf course in America.

And nothing would do for Mr Vanderbilt than that this memento, or splendid
imitation of a Scottish links course, should have a clubhouse and it should be
designed, and was, by America's most fashionable architect of the time. None
other than the brilliant and dashing bachelor, Stanford White, who had designed
the great arch in New York's Washington Square but, more to the point, had
built the vast Vanderbilt cottage in Newport.

Veteran listeners may have their memories stirred and recall hazily a talk,
some years ago, in which I identified Stanford White as the lover of a
ravishingly beautiful young girl named Evelyn Nesbit. A year or two went by and
she married the heir to a railroad fortune, one Harry K.Thaw. Came a time when
Mr Stanford White designed a New York roof garden theatre and on the opening
night, Mr White went from his penthouse and sat at his own reserved table.

Present for the opening, too, were Mr and Mrs Harry K. Thaw and just as the
chorus was performing the last scene in a foam of petticoats, young Mr Thaw got
up, threaded his way to White's table, took out a pistol and fired three times
at Stanford White's head. That was the mortal end of him and whenever I pass
the Shinnecock course – the clubhouse rises on hill, fronting on the usual
two-lane road – I think of Stanford White. Next summer, about 20,000 other
people may think of him for Shinnecock is where the United States Open Golf
Championship is to be played.

Well, after the Vanderbilts and his cronies, lesser people followed and, on the
principle enunciated in that old tag about the enumerable French aristocracy,
little fleas have lesser fleas upon their backs to bite 'em and lesser fleas
have lesser fleas, and so, ad infinitum. The summer cottage of every size and
type became the thing. Where once financiers built their summer mansions, their
lawyers followed and then small businessmen and doctors and on and on, down or
up to actresses and theatrical agents, novelists and bankers and on and on.
People, I'm sure you've noticed, tend to follow like sheep the fashions of
their betters.

Today the south shore of Long Island, the southern fork at the very end, is
cluttered with more rich and beautiful and pretentious and successful smart
alecks in every line of business. Between 4 July and 2 September, the roads
were as cluttered as if Long Island's nuclear power plant had sprung a leak.

Well, last weekend, I drove round the bay, down from the comparative haven of
our north fork, the potato and the corn fields and our 32 vineyards, I drove
down and round and along the south shore and all was calm and still. The summer
folks had all gone and the year-round inhabitants could breathe again. Good
riddance, is what most of them seem to say from the new look on their faces,
but... but and alas, the summer folks, as the dictionary said, yield the
highest amount of profit.

'There's nothing,' said an old man to me, 'nothing as sweet as the other guy's
money. But, now, we can live by ourselves to ourselves.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP