Why the pollsters got it wrong

I'm talking from San Francisco, which is as good a place as any – and perhaps
better than most – to escape from the eastern view of the presidential
election. The view not so much of what happened, as of what was going to
happen, for the east, the north-east, is the headquarters of the four
television networks and the home of the pollsters and there's has rarely been
an election in which all the polls, including the ones undertaken by two TV
networks in association with two distinguished eastern newspapers, in which all
the polls were so much in agreement about the outcome.

It was going to be so tight that, on the eve of the election, they, with one
exception, announced that it was too close to call. The exception decided, at
the last moment, that there was a swing to Reagan that might give him as much
as four or even five per cent lead over Carter in the popular vote. In the
outcome, it was ten per cent and, even if you add John Anderson's vote to
Carter's, you still come out with an absolute Reagan majority of three millions
in over 83 millions.

Why were they all so disastrously wrong? It's a question that's going
charitably unanswered in the euphoria of the Republicans and the depression of
the Democrats.

It seems to me worth risking one answer which might persuade the pollsters next
time to change their tactics. They concentrate, to the point of obsession, on
the popular vote, that is on the totals likely to vote one way or another, but
the presidency is never decided by the total popular vote of the whole country.
It's decided by the majorities of the popular vote in each state and, since
that states have a vastly different apportionment of votes in the Electoral
College, it is the distribution of the popular vote, not its mass, which
chooses the president.

Let me simplify the working of the Electoral College by asking you to image
that ten boys, in the top form of a school, are going to vote for head prefect.
If every boy had one vote, then obviously whoever got six votes would win but
suppose that a different number of votes was assigned to each boy, through some
consideration of age, experience or length of stay in the school, so that one
boy has six votes, another four, four more have two votes and the rest one
each. This would add up to a total of 22 electoral votes. The winner would need
12 votes and he could get them from only three boys in the ten. That's the way
the Electoral College works.

Each state, according to its population, has so many congressmen, members of
the House of Representative, and each state, huge or tiny, has two senators.
The electoral vote of every state is the number of its congressman plus the two
senators. So that California, with 43 congressmen and two senators has 45
electoral votes. New York has 39 congressman, two senators, 41. Wyoming, a
physically large state but sparsely populated has only one congressman and two
senators, three electoral votes, and so on.

So, to begin with the pollsters' maps of the United States showing practically
the whole of the west painted blue, as going for Reagan, was deceptive. He won
Arizona, Nevada, Montana, Wyoming, Oregon, Utah, Idaho and the state of
Washington, but altogether that gave him only 39 electoral votes. If he'd lost
California, with its 45 electoral votes, he would have been six votes down in
the whole far west. He didn't, however, so the west came in with a handsome 84
electoral votes for him.

Now, the pollsters agree with the pundits that any presidential election turns
on the popular vote in nine big states – the 'big' meaning the most populous
states which, their size apart, hold the most electoral votes – and they are
California, New York, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Texas, Ohio, Michigan, Florida
and New Jersey. Together they have 245 electoral votes, only 25 short of the
majority needed to win. If you add Indiana and Missouri, you'd get 270. So it
would have been possible for Reagan or Carter to win the election by getting a
majority of the popular vote in 11 states, while the loser took the other 39
states.

Well, Reagan took the 11 I mentioned and was already the winner. In the result,
he took 44 states and Carter took six states and the District of Columbia, the
home of the capital city.

If you want to write an even more sinister scenario, as we now say, you could
imagine a tight race everywhere in which 11 voters, literally, 11 human beings,
by having a change of mind as they went into the polling booth, could switch
the election from one presidential candidate to his opponent because the whole
electoral vote of any state goes to the man who has a majority, however minute,
of the popular vote. And if that sounds like a ludicrous possibility, let me
remind you that in the election of 1960, when over 60 million people voted, a
switch of only 40,000 votes in chosen states could have sent Richard Nixon and
not John F. Kennedy to the White House.

My suggestion is simply that, next time, the pollsters spend more time taking
more and more accurate samplings of the voters' mood in those nine big states
instead of piling all the projected votes of the 50 states into two lump sums.
There was no sign, this time, of a close call in any of the big nine. In
California, Reagan had a majority over Carter of one and a half million. In
Texas, 700,000, Florida 600,000, Illinois 400,000, Pennsylvania 250,000, Ohio
450,000, New Jersey 300,000, Michigan 250,000, New York 160,000.

The pollsters might also keep reminding themselves that there have been three
so-called 'minority' presidents, that's to say, presidents who did not get a
majority of the popular vote but what they got, they got in the right places.

It was, no question, a famous and, for the pollsters, a humiliating victory and
yet... and yet, only 26 qualified Americans in a hundred voted for Reagan.
That's because only half of the registered voters took the trouble to vote, the
lowest turn out in nearly 30 years. So without taking anything away from
Reagan's astounding massacre of Carter – 489 electoral votes to 49 – we have to
be disturbed by the thought that the mandate which he and the Republicans claim
is a mandate conferred on him by only one American in four, a fact that could
threaten all sorts of turmoil and, in some poor quarters, could stimulate a
revival of the violent protests of the 1960s.

We had a... a nasty harbinger of this the day after the election, when across
the bay from here on the Berkeley campus of the University of California 2,000
students gathered in a noisy, though peaceable rally and chanted belligerent
slogans against the man they love to hate, the most grizzly of which was, 'Two,
four, six, eight, we know who to assassinate'. And that, I hasten to say, was
the low point in protest or comment anywhere in the United States.

But some hint of the rather raw emotions that have been let loose can be seen
in the first cartoons drawn by the half-dozen or so first-rate political
cartoonists with which the United States is presently blessed. One showed a
Reagan got up in cowboy chaps with his hands on two guns sticking out of his
side pockets, the caption said simply, 'Back in town!'. The San Francisco
Chronicle, which takes advantage of the wit of Oliphant, the Washington Star's
resident cartoonist, showed, the other day, three recognisable grotesques with
outspread arms tumbling in ecstasy down a mountain side and headed for us. They
were in front, Reagan, and behind him, buoyed up by the roaring wind and the
clattering boulders, Dr Kissinger and Richard Nixon. The caption was one word,
'Landslide'.

I ought to say that people are talking in stage whispers about the possibility
of former President Nixon being offered a post in the Reagan administration.
Somebody dared to suggest to one of Mr Reagan's campaign aides that Mr Nixon,
himself, might be thinking that way. The aide put paid to that, I think, with
an acid retort, 'If he is, he must be hallucinating'.

But whether the people out here are happy with Reagan or sorrowful with Carter,
they have one grievance against the president which is shared by the other
western states that lie in the fourth time zone of the United States, three
hours behind the eastern seaboard. This is an angry and by now well-aired
protest against the president's going on the air to concede the election two
hours before the polls had closed out here. It was an astonishing and, in
President Carter, an uncharacteristic gaffe, a blunder both of tactics and
manners.

It seems that the White House decided, after less than an hour of the
television coverage, that the election was lost. NBC had been bitterly
criticised for coming out within that hour and positively announcing Reagan as
the winner but the president himself was ready to jump the gun on NBC and take
the initiative. He was restrained but when he did concede, his aide said he
thought it would be a simple, manly thing to do.

Evidently, it didn't occur to any of them that there was an hour of polling
still left in the mountain states and two hours in the far west. There doesn't
appear to be much question that many thousands of voters, seeing the president
make his concession speech on television, took off their coats and stayed home.
They may not, thereby, have affected the presidential vote but senators and
congressmen who lost narrowly out west were quick to blame the president.

The upshot has been two proposed bills in the House and one from a California
senator in the Senate proposing that the voting times across the country be
synchronised so that New York, for instance, would vote from 09:00 am to 09:00
pm and California would vote from 06:00 am to 06:00 pm, all the states closing
the polls at the same time.

I should guess that these bills will be quickly shelved. They present awkward
complications and a prospective barrage of complaints from farmers, office
workers, night workers, to go no further.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP