Carter's ultimatum under fire

Up in the beautifully combed snow wastes of upstate New York, the Olympic Games
opened on Wednesday with the usual bravura – 25,000 balloons, skydivers,
trumpets, the throb of drums, choral singers and 2,000 doves scattering or
scuttering among the sky-writers. Whether the word is bravura or bravado, it
was certainly a brave effort to pretend that what we were seeing was the
chivalry of 38 nations upholding the ancient tradition of international
friendship, a tradition which, unfortunately, many people have been reminding
us was plagued by wars and hatred from the beginning of the Games and led to
their suspension for hundreds of years.

As we all know by now, the International Olympic Committee delivered a slap to
President Carter by unanimously upholding Moscow as the site of the summer
games but left the question of participating or not till 24 May, the last day
for entering or refusing. In this way the committee gave the Russians elbow
room in which to get out of Afghanistan in their own way, in their own time – a
careful move that President Carter might better have thought of before he
decided to lay down an ultimatum of next week to which the Russians could only
say, 'Yes, sir' or 'No, sir'.

A New York Times columnist, a gangling, droll fellow called Russell Baker, came
back to Washington from a five weeks' holiday and was shocked to find everybody
wearing hawk feathers. 'The new style,' he wrote, 'was set by President Carter
with his extraordinary faculty for being born again and again and again. In his
latest re-emergence he's been born as a hawk and is perched in the White House
rose garden on a very strong public opinion poll. That was alright with me, I
had my hawk feathers stored in a closet, put them there in 1967.'

1967, Mr Baker implies, was about the time when the people were beginning to
fear that the wiseacres, from Walter Lippmann to General MacArthur, who'd been
saying we never should have committed American ground forces to Vietnam, were
turning out to be right. By 1968 the country was rocking with protest and
violence against the hawks but it took five more years for the hawk to
extricate America and pretend that they were really doves of peace.

Well now, as Mr Baker facetiously but correctly notes, hawkishness is the vogue
and it's a vogue created suddenly and dramatically by a Jimmy Carter who is in
this and other respects almost unrecognisable as the Jimmy Carter of 1976.

Only a little more than a month ago, 'he went up', as the saying goes, 'to the
mountain' – it was the mountain of Afghanistan – and came down, again shocked
to have discovered for the first time the true Soviet character. He told the
Russians to get out of Afghanistan by 20 February or face a boycott of the
Olympic Games. He told them to stop short of Pakistan or Iran and the Persian
Gulf or face the likelihood of military force. He called for not the revival of
the draft, but a national registration for the draft by both men and women. He
increased the military budget beyond anything he'd once conceived or favoured
and he sought, and got, the use of military bases in Oman, Kenya and Somalia.
He has ordered an amphibious assault force into the Arabian Sea to prove that
the Persian Gulf can be quickly manned by American ground forces.

Almost at once the campuses came alive again with students who were toddlers in
1967 bawling slogans and carrying placards saying things like, 'Hell no, we
won't go!' And 'We won't fight for the oil companies!'.

Well, after the first exhilaration of the new hawks and the first equally
automatic response of the new generation of student pacifists, there was a
pause for second thoughts and it should be said that the weightiest protest
against the President's sprouting hawk feathers has come not from the campuses,
but from an old Russia hand, a man who 30 years ago had most to do with
articulating, if not creating, America's post-war policy of 'containing'
Russian imperialism. In fact, he coined the word 'containment.'

His name is George Kennan. He was in the American foreign service for over a
quarter of a century, starting in 1926 seeing and serving everywhere from
Berlin to Vienna, Moscow, Prague, Lisbon, Riga; became, after the war, the
number one Russian expert of the State Department, was ambassador to the Soviet
Union, later to Yugoslavia, has taught Russian history and the history of
diplomacy in many universities from Oxford to Wisconsin and is now a professor
at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton where, in its early days,
Einstein and Oppenheimer brooded and taught.

Last Sunday, George Kennan was invited into the Columbia Broadcasting System's
studios and on to the famous and often brilliant, muck-raking – in the best
sense – programme Sixty Minutes. He feels strongly that President Carter
over-reacted dangerously to the Russian invasion of Afghanistan and he was
invited to say why.

George Kennan, born in the Midwest, is 77 now, a gleaming, handsome man who
looks not unlike a rather splendid bald hawk. He's also as alert as he was in
his famous containment days and if he's surprisingly young in spirit he's no
less a firm practitioner of the old diplomacy in the sense that he distrusts
dramatic twists of policy.

First he found the new atmosphere in Washington a rather dangerous one, in
which there's not only a high degree of militarisation, of thinking about our
problems with the Soviet Union but one in which a great many people seem to
have felt that we had to do something to show our muscle, our force, almost
regardless of what it is we do with that force. He's not against the building
up of the American military capability in that part of the world, he's for it
but it must be balanced, he says, with an effort to restore some sort of
political communication with the Soviet government to reassure them that if
they want to liquidate their unhappy situation in Afghanistan, we're not going
to take advantage of it or seek to humiliate them or make a prestige victory of
it.

Well, this led inevitably to the question, 'Why, if the Soviet invasion has
turned out to be unhappy for the Russians, why did they invade?'

Well, Mr Kennan scorns, in his mild way, the notion that the Russians were on
their way to their age-long goal of a warm water port. It would have been much
easier for them, he thinks, to have gone straight through Iran, which they
could have done at any time without resistance. He believes, in other words,
that the invasion was a defensive move to protect their southern border. He's
pretty well convinced that they do not intend to move into Iran and/or Pakistan
not just because Pravda says so, but, as he insistently pointed out, because
Brezhnev did the very rare thing of signing a statement and putting it on the
front page of Pravda, thereby, Kennan says, committing himself before 16
million members of his own party plus the entire Soviet population, plus the
satellite countries of Eastern Europe.

He reminded us that after 50 years of being involved with Soviet-American
relations and living through the whole Stalin time, he doesn't make light of
what he calls the 'negative aspects' of the Soviet political personality but he
says he has protested bitterly in the past and does so now against a frame of
mind which yields to the idea of the inevitability of war, 'I don't think our
differences have to be resolved by war, could be resolved by war, I think the
Soviet leaders understand that, if anything, better than we do.'

As for the president's boycott of the Olympics, he thinks it does little good
to send the Russians 'ultimata and say you must do this and that by a given
date or else because this is not the way you induce great governments to do
sensible things'.

And this brought him to something about which there's much underground
grumbling in the State Department but which has not before been aired in public
as a bad method of conducting foreign policy. It's the practice, which John
Kennedy started, of having a Secretary of State and also a National Security
Advisor in the White House. Today, we have Secretary Vance and, half a mile
away at the president's elbow, we have Mr Brzezinski. Inevitably two characters
are bound to conflict and it's no secret that Vance and Brzezinski are often at
odds on fundamentals.

Mr Kennan thinks that having two State Departments, so to speak, is a dangerous
system and he thinks that when the president sends the National Security
Advisor to Pakistan, has him discuss military matters, go out to the Afghan
border, the wrong signals may be given to the Russians. We may seem to be
frightening them with the spectre of a Chinese-Pakistan-American alliance on
their southern border. He grants that this is the first time the Russians have
moved 'beyond the high water mark to which they advanced in 1945' and he thinks
that hard-liners may be taking over in the Kremlin.

Against the use of Russian surrogates in Cuba, North Vietnam, he cites the
spectacular failures of the Soviet Union to bully many African nations into
their camp, for instance, Ghana, Egypt, [Yeni??] but he says if they remain in
Afghanistan, then the United States should think seriously about blockading
Cuba, about whether it can stand having an active Russian ally so nearby.

So, in the main, he thinks the Russians should not be given the idea that
America believes weapons will solve anything, that they made a mistake in
Afghanistan and know it and will get out in their own time.

In a nutshell, he believes in doing what Bobby Kennedy did in the Cuban missile
crisis in 1962 – offering the Russians a dignified out. There are those who
point out that for four or five years in the Thirties the European powers kept
giving Hitler dignified outs until he was powerful enough to capture Europe.

Anyway, Mr Kennan's is the most serious opposition belief to President Carter's
policy and whether he's right or wrong, there's no question that millions of
Americans yearn to believe he's right.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP