Philippines election queried

It used to be an annual pleasure, as well as a duty, to talk on this particular
February weekend about the coincidence of Lincoln's Birthday and Valentine's
Day and how they were celebrated or, in the South, ignored – Lincoln, not
Valentine. And if inspiration ran dry on those great occasions, there was
always Washington's Birthday coming up on 22nd.

But now, or a year or two ago, it was decided that a general work stoppage on
12th, if Lincoln's Birthday fell in midweek, and another on 22nd for Washington
was too much for the needs of commerce, school and work routines, not to
mention the jamming-up of traffic for two snatched holidays. So, the two great
dates which every schoolboy knew have been blurred in one, long, intermediate
weekend, which means the holiday date varies so that pretty soon, if not
already, you'll have to send out for a schoolboy to say when both of these
great men were born.

Valentine's Day, on the other hand, not only does not interfere with commerce,
it is as much of a stimulant to various billion-dollar businesses as Mother's
Day which was, long ago, an invention of the telegraph companies in association
with the florists.

Gone, along with the true dates of the two American giants, are the ritual
newspaper editorials calling all Americans to the wisdom of old George and the
simple grandeur of old Abe. In fact, the only conspicuous reminders of either
of them have been a flood of television commercials begging you to get in on
such bonanzas as the Washington birthday cut-rate computer sales, one day only.
Or the Lincoln bargain bedroom furniture sale.

The truth is that since the United States became the increasingly harassed top
dog of the world's nations, it has less and less time to celebrate the old
heroes. It is pressingly preoccupied with the new heroes –Sharansky's triumphal
arrival in Israel – and the new villains, Duvalier, to everybody's relief,
ousted from Haiti. But most of all, Marcos's stubbornly refusing to be ousted
from the Philippines.

If there are two topics that overwhelm the attention of the Americans from
coast to coast and beyond, they are the Philippines election and, closer to
home, the investigation or investigations now going on about the cause of the
catastrophe that, a couple of weeks ago, saw Challenger soar off into the
Florida sky and explode into a huge shower of smoke and flame.

Within a week of that appalling debacle, I was talking with a television
director, an intelligent and not, I should say, a conspiratorial type, who
assured me darkly that NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
already knew the cause but was sitting on the information. I thought back
almost 20 years to a dinner, a private dinner, I'd had with four of the early
astronauts, a privileged occasion for me, since as a working reporter I felt I
ought to pick up the elements, at least, of this new and thrilling science.

I can only say looking back to that evening that I might just as well have been
sitting in with Einstein, Rutherford and Oppenheimer on an early technical
discussion of nuclear fission. Even the elementary sense of what the astronauts
were saying was beyond me.

All I gathered from that evening is that space and space travel is an
enormously complicated business. So the other evening, I said to my television
director, 'Do you suppose that 140 of the space technicians in Houston have all
agreed on the primary cause and have somehow circulated a round robin pledging
each other, pledging the whole team, to silence?'

Not for nothing is this man a television director. He lives, night and day,
with a special view of the news. The news that can be simplified for a large,
general audience into pictures and, I should say, that for the past two weeks,
I, as a regular news watcher, have been bombarded with pictures or models of
booster rockets and the seams that bind them together and the safety seals of
the seams, both the single seal and the back-up seal, not to mention the normal
and abnormal behaviour of the gasses at preposterous temperatures and the
possibility which, at least, two bodies of experts have been working on of the
effect of exterior and interior cold temperatures on the fuels.

You recall that the morning of the shuttle launching was most unusually cold
for southern Florida. It had been down below freezing and a maintenance team
chopped off icicles that had formed on the boosters.

Well, the trouble with what I've called television's special view of the news
is that immediacy is its prime need and a nightly report is compulsory and, of
course, you can't go on saying the same thing night after night. What in
practice the reporters have to do is sniff around for one expert's guess,
usually called a NASA source, or one former astronaut, and elevate his guess
into a suspicion.

A suspicion, because there are literally hundreds of reporters, male and
female, television and radio and newspaper employees whose reputation depends
on getting the jump on their competitors. Which means, in the serious press,
writing more and more exhaustive and knowledgeable stuff about possibilities
that are beyond the grasp of the general reader. And in the popular press, it
means always looking for dirty work at the crossroads.

I'm afraid my television director, for all his intelligence and his experience
as a documentary producer with difficult and subtle material, was falling – at
an absurdly early stage of the investigation – falling for a deep-dyed plot.

Well, by the time some people in distant lands hear these words, the truth of
course may out, but it seems very unlikely, so I don't propose to say any more
about the shuttle disaster until it has been successfully probed and the story
can be told in words that you and I can understand, which may be next week or
never.

The other, consuming topic about which, also, the hard truth may never be
known, is the tortured mess of the Philippine elections. The Philippine
Islands, an archipelago off the south-east coast of Asia, comprise, in fact,
just over 7,000 islands which might seem to give some credence to President
Marcos's plea for patience in collecting the ballots.

The Philippines have been, for just on 90 years, an object of shame and pride
to the United States. The Spanish named them after King Philip II and founded
Manila in 1571. Spain held them till its defeat by the Americans in the
Spanish-American war, two years before the end of the nineteenth century. It
was, need I say, a period of glorious or rampant imperialism.

Big nations didn't fight other big nations in order to liberate their
possessions, but to exchange them and in the only, happily brief, period when
the United States too succumbed to dreams of empire, the United States took
possession of the Philippines in 1898 – a presumption that was murderously
fought by a guerrilla uprising which was only put down after seven years.

Of course, the United States, following the British example in far-flung
places, at first established civil rule under the military and then withdrew
the military and set up genuine, civil government under an American governor.
After that came the usual praiseworthy efforts of developing education,
agriculture, public health, roads, commerce and so on.

The large and benevolent President Taft in 1907 coined a slogan and issued a
proclamation which took the United States along a road it had probably not
meant to go, 'The Philippines for the Filipinos' was his slogan. It led to the
Philippines getting control of both houses of their own legislature. What Taft
had not bargained for was the movement, which never stopped rolling, for total
independence.

Well, as we all know, the Japanese attacked the Philippines on 8 December 1941,
the day after Pearl Harbor. The Philippines was, and unfortunately still is,
the strategic tee to south-east Asia, which is why the United States today has
its two main Pacific bases there and I should throw in the reminder that while
many congressmen wish there were some other place to transfer those bases, I
doubt there is more than the smallest handful of either party that doesn't want
to retain them.

So the Japanese conquered the Philippines by the spring of 1942 and I, for one,
shall not soon forget the day when the headlines, three years later, blazed
with the news, 'MacArthur Enters Manila'. He had, as he promised, returned and
the Japanese were thrown out.

The Philippines had been promised – so far back as 1934 – complete independence
some day. Since the Filipinos were the first and, for a long time, the only
Asiatic native peoples that rallied to the Allies and fought the Japanese, the
date of their independence came in less than a year after the Japanese
surrender – 4 July 1946 was the happy choice of a day to declare the
Philippines free and for nearly 20 years the Philippines were a shining example
of democracy in Asia.

In 1951, the United States and the Philippines signed a mutual defence treaty
and in 1966, one President Ferdinand Marco reduced the lease on the US bases
from 99 to 25 years, which means they may be held by consent only until 1991.
Marcos's whole reign – and it's not too much to call it a reign – was
consolidated in a dictatorship in 1973 when he practically wrote a new
constitution and set himself up as president. Perpetual president.

He has been harassed and hounded by guerrillas, by Communists, and most
recently, since the assassination of Aquino, by increasing great numbers of
people who would like to return to a genuine democracy with at least a
two-party system. His decision to call a snap election this month was a
brilliant stroke to prove that, if he was a dictator, he was there at the
dictate of the people's will.

As I talk, the whole question of how far the people were allowed to speak and
vote and for whom is being thrashed out in Washington, and now by the old, the
very able, diplomatic troubleshooter, Mr Philip Habib.

Maybe a week from now, maybe not, we shall be able to say something definite
and sensible about what happened and how and why. At the moment, it cannot be
done. Not by me, anyway.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP