Senator Jesse Helms

[WORDS MISSING HERE] ... there's no need to get fretful or anxious in the
presence of people who disagree with him or for that matter of people who
loathe him and as he is well loved, he is also well loathed.

Just to fill in his vital statistics, he was born in 1921 in Monroe in North
Carolina, baptised as, naturally, a Baptist, started out as a newspaperman and
then, having a mellifluous, good-natured voice, became a broadcaster. He
married, has three children, served in the navy during the Second War. He lives
in Raleigh, which is the capital of North Carolina, a city which encloses
within a 30-mile radius more centres of what are called higher learning than
probably any other town in the country apart from the state university and five
denominational colleges, all Protestant. It's within commuting distance of the
University of North Carolina, of the famous Duke University and a later growth,
the Research Triangle, one of the leading centres of industrial research.

But this man's eminence has not been earned through any notable connection with
the higher learning. Like John F. Kennedy who once thought of going into
teaching or journalism, this man decided that he, too, would rather be where
the action is. The action, then, for Senator Jesse A. Helms, who discovered
comparatively late in life that he was a born politician, is among the people –
the mountain lumber men, the oyster and crab fishermen of the coastal sounds,
the furniture makers, the women workers in the textile and chemical factories,
the old folks in the retirement homes, the young folk encountered anywhere, in
the schools, on the football fields and the shopping centres and the churches
of whatever faith. And among the hill farmers and the plains farmers, most of
all, the tobacco farmers.

You will appreciate that perhaps the trickiest problem of Senator Helms'
political life arises from his implacable stand against abortion – he wants a
constitutional amendment to outlaw it – and his implacable devotion to the
tobacco industry. The connection? Well, if there's one branch of knowledge in
which Mr Helms is absolutely dogmatic, though in his reasonable, quiet way, it
is in the knowledge of obstetrics. Learned doctors may argue, as they do, about
exactly when an unhatched offspring turns into a human being. The senator
knows, not in months, not in weeks – it is in the moment of conception.

A few weeks ago, he stood humming and nodding alongside 30 small children in a
school while a little girl recited a prayer of thanksgiving for each one of the
delicate parts of the inside of my body. To any pedant who wants to make a
medical, ethical issue of childbirth and abortion, Senator Helms could reply,
with absolute sincerity, 'A little child shall lead them'.

He is, he declares, dedicated to the sacredness of human life. Whether this
concern extends to the cigarette smokers of America is a nice point, which I'm
sure has been brought up to him and which I'm equally sure he could answer. The
tobacco industry has not yet got around to doing what some whisky people are
doing, namely, to advertise their product and, in the same breath, deplore
heavy drinking, but if anyone could reconcile an anxiety for human health with
the prosperity of the brightleaf tobacco industry, I'm sure Jesse Helms could
do it.

Of the hundred counties of North Carolina, 90 of them grow tobacco and the
state consequently produced between one-third and one-half of the entire
American tobacco crop, the brightleaf flue-cured tobacco that's used in
cigarettes and pipe tobacco. For a very long time now, it's been known abroad
as Virginia tobacco, though it is, in fact, quite different from the Virginia
tobacco that was introduced into Europe.

By the way, one of the ironies of its history is that the original Virginia
type, a fast-burning leaf, is grown now mainly in Turkey. When, during the
Second War, Mr Churchill begged Britons to switch to Turkish tobacco to save
the transatlantic ships' bottom for more precious cargoes like tanks and citrus
juice and other staples, the British cigarette smoker was unmoved by the fact
that the Turks were being enlisted in the Christian war against Hitler and went
on stubbornly craving the Carolina, the brightleaf, what they called Virginia
tobacco. And the British smoker had his way.

Now, North Carolina, like all the Southern states, was until a generation ago
solidly Democratic, with a big 'D' that is. In fact, throughout the Roosevelt
era and the Truman era and on into the middle late Fifties, the South was
always known as the Solid South, meaning that the whole region voted
overwhelmingly for Democrats in state offices and sent nothing but Democrats to
Washington.

Now the chairmanship of the Senate committees in every field rests on
seniority, on how long their members have been there, so the Southern senators,
for generations, had a monopoly of Senate chairmanships. In the 1950s came the
Supreme Court's famous and, in the South, long-resisted ruling on integration –
the reversal of 200 years of keeping blacks and whites apart in schools,
restaurants, theatres, buses, jobs, lavatories, everything.

One result of the slow but eventual integration of the Negro was that many
Southerners began to move away from the party, the Democrats, that most
strongly enforced the integration ruling. The Solid South was broken in 1972 by
Richard Nixon, the first time a Republican had taken all the Southern states.
The first time, indeed, the Republicans had made even an impressive showing in
the South.

That revolution is now complete. The South is solid again, but solidly
Republican. Ronald Reagan took every Southern state, as he took all the others
except one and while many Southern politicians remain Democrats in name and
party affiliation in state and local offices, again seniority gives them an
edge, lots of them have come to admit that they are no longer Democrats in the
sense of being loyal to the Democratic party in the nation.

So, while North Carolina has only three Republicans in the House and nine
Democrats, most of those Democrats are conservatives whom the Republicans can
call on.

One of them who is not only conservative by nature and political habit, but is
as conservative as you can come by any definition is Jesse Helms. Until 1970,
he was a registered Democrat. Two years before Nixon's landslide, he declared
himself a Republican and that landslide swept him into the Senate. So he's been
there for 12 years.

Since a senator has a six-year term, Jesse Helms was up for re-election this
time. He was up against the governor of the state, a moderate conservative
Democrat, Mr Jim Hunt. It's by now agreed that their campaign cost more money
and vented more below-the-belt punches than any campaign national or state that
political veterans can remember.

It's all over now, so we shall simply say that from supporters both organised
as political action committees and from individuals and small groups, not only
in North Carolina, but all over the country, Mr Helms managed to amass over $12
million against the governor's about eight millions. With these fortunes, they
attacked each other in the grossest way.

Two hundred television commercials a day, Hunt was pictured as a tax-obsessed
Democrat and a dangerous radical, not to mention, which came out in several
snide mentions that he might be too friendly with homosexuals and those wild,
New York liberals. On his side Governor Hunt did not falter. Senator Helms was
made out to be something very near to an American fascist, a buddy of ruthless
Central American dictators, a man ready with the bomb to overthrow the evil
empire of the Soviet Union.

Well, Senator Helms won handsomely. He was threatened with a heavy registration
of black votes this time, but the whites registered all the more heavily and,
in the end, Mr Helms didn't need a single black vote. He is today the political
leader of the extreme right wing of the Republican party. He resents big
government, big labour, the feminists, blacks, pro-abortionists, anybody ready
for an accommodation with the Russians. He unblushingly calls himself the
champion of a Christian nation, which America has not been for a long time, in
fact – and never, in law.

Of course, he's against textiles coming in from China and he warns that the
United States had better contribute a little bit of weaponry to the embattled
states of Central America if we don't want to see ten, twenty million
immigrants pouring into America and lining up at the welfare barrel.

As you might expect, Senator Helms is the chairman of the Senate Agriculture
Committee but he was second in line for the chairman of the most powerful of
all Senate committees, the Foreign Relations Committee, whose chairman, Senator
Percy of Illinois, was just defeated for re-election. So, if he wants it,
Senator Helms can become the man to resist any and all moderate moves from the
White House to negotiate in Central America, to come to an arms agreement with
the Russians, but Senator Helms has sworn to his constituents that he will not
leave the Agriculture Committee and the protection of their tobacco subsidy.

The North Carolinians mean to hold him to his vow. What he could do is to take
the chairmanship of foreign relations and stay on an agriculture sub-committee
to guard brightleaf tobacco. It's a very difficult, moral problem. At last
word, Senator Helms had gone off, according to his press secretary, to think
and pray about it.

With his private pipeline to the Almighty, I don't doubt that he'll find a
solution which will satisfy his conscience and the tobacco growers and all the
other subjects of his Christian nation.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP