Reagan wants second term

It must have been four or five years ago that a Japanese soldier came clumping
out of the under-brush on a remote Pacific island and said, in effect, 'What's
going on here?' He'd just made contact with a small town for the first time in
many, many years and the people in the small town were going about their
business just as if the Second World War was over. The staggering fact with
which the people acquainted him was that the Second World War was over, had
been for well over 30 years. Eventually they found out where this alert soldier
had come from and his home town gave him a hearty, if belated, welcome.

Most of us, certainly most of us who have radio sets and use them, find such a
story incredible but there must be many millions of people who haven't got a
radio and have no intention of ever having one. I know quite civilised people
living in large cities who, outside their daily work, have one consuming
interest – music or movies or fretwork or whatever – and who never read a
newspaper. During the Second War, when the action was well along, it must have
been during the two years of 1939 to '41, to which Mr Martin Gilbert has
devoted the sixth and finest volume of the official life of Winston Churchill.
He calls it, understandably, 'Finest Hour', there was a national poll taken in
Britain on feelings about the war and the statesmen who were most conspicuously
fighting it. It turned out that three per cent of the British public had never
heard of Winston Churchill. Do you believe it? It was so!

And when I wrote about this phenomenon at the time, I got a letter from an
Essex farmer who said, in so many words, that he, for one, had never taken the
slightest interest in politics, that his whole life was concerned with his
crops and his livestock and that he must have been one of the people covered by
the poll, though he couldn't imagine what a poll was, that, of course, he knew
there was a war on because of the blackout and the rationing and the suspicious
way people made up to him to snaffle an extra egg or two, but otherwise, he had
no idea who was in charge. He'd just learned about this Churchill fellow and he
wished him luck.

I thought about this farmer last November, in the high spring in New Zealand
when we were gliding through the majestic fjords with a feeling not unlike that
which must afflict a mouse tiptoeing for the first time into Cambridge's King's
College chapel at evensong. If there are few atheists in foxholes, there must
be even fewer among the people who have ever sailed along Milford Sound. The
enormous silence, the highest sea cliffs on earth. How, we wondered, could
anyone ever have got a foothold on the invisible shore, let alone penetrate
these vertical mountains of beech trees?

Our guide, who was no dollar-a-day guru – he was, in fact, a geologist and a
forester and had been in the ministry of foreign affairs – he said that, in
fact, much of this country was still unexplored, that from time to time, wisps
of smoke rose from forested canyons and it was quite possible that, in a manner
of speaking, my Essex farmer was in there, some tribe that nobody had ever
seen. It offers an immense challenge to some enterprising Gallup pollster.

I suspect that there must be many more, millions perhaps, of such exiles from
the world of what we used to call 'the well-informed man' and it's to such
people, to the Japanese soldier, the Essex farmer, the undiscovered tribe in
the South Island that I bring a bit of unfinished business from which we can
then move on. The breathless suspense of last weekend is broken. Ronald Reagan
is going to run again, or maybe stand again, for president.

The popular wisdom, nay, the expert wisdom, is by now so confident of itself
that there may be no need to talk about the presidency until 20 January next
year when Reagan puts on the mantel again and, again, takes the oath. The
wisdom goes like this:

Former vice president under Carter, Mondale, is getting so many promises of
support from so many large and special-interest groups, from the labour unions,
from the teachers, the steel workers, the Democratic state chairmen, from the
speaker of the House and from such a gaggle of Democrats in Congress, that the
Democratic convention to be held in San Francisco in midsummer will have
nothing to do but perform a quick coronation service. All right? Mondale will
be the Democratic runner. Reagan will, of course, be nominated by acclamation
in Dallas and in November, Reagan will romp into a second term.

All I can say is, don't bet on it! Never bet on anything in American politics,
especially a sure thing.

I recall that, in February 1976, one of the national weekly news magazines did
a cover story on the Democratic contenders for the presidency, six, I believe,
six good men and true. From them would emerge the Democrats' candidate. This
was a useful piece to read because you could bone up on the lives of six men so
as not to be a bonehead when November came and one of these six came in first.

The only flaw in that piece was that it made no mention of a man from Georgia
named Jimmy Carter. In other words, it is February. We have nine months before
the election. Whatever characteristics American politics lack, drama, even
melodrama, is not one of them. Within nine months, as we all know, a new being
can emerge, there can be a slump, some horrendous foreign disaster, an act of
God.

Well, now Congress is assembled for its final session and swearing to face all
the great issues of the day without playing politics, is going to play politics
harder than ever. There's one issue that is going to affect America's power and
its influence in the world that we have so far hardly touched on. It is the
matter of Lebanon and the American marines there.

Of course the social, religious and political fractures of the region are a
great deal more complicated than the plight of the American marines, but the
way the problem is being talked about in Congress and being forced on the
president, you'd think it was as overwhelming an issue as whether Great
Britain, on 3 August 1914, should or should not go into the First War.

I'm aware that this obsession with the American marines is irritating to many
people on the outside. It may, years from now, come to seem as negligible an
issue as the one that dominated the presidential debates in 1960 between
Kennedy and Nixon. How many people who listened to those television debates can
recall what was the burning issue? It was whether the United States should be
prepared to defend two islands off the mainland of China – Quemoy and Matsu.
Even before the election, the names, let alone the commitment, were practically
forgotten.

But I think Lebanon is a far weightier matter. Rightly or wrongly, the United
States initiated the move to form a multinational force to be known as a
peacekeeping force. Perhaps that was the first mistake, the name. Peacekeeping
forces have been traditionally mustered by, and in the name of, the United
Nations. They have been buffer forces. Their role, as such, has been tacitly
conceded by both sides. They have not been attacked as a third or combat force.
Unfortunately, that's what happened to the Americans and at least one of the
combatant sides in Lebanon, maybe more, regards them as a battle force or an
intruder that ought not to be there.

From the way things have been going, I think it's plain that the American
detachment is looked on as an alternative enemy, not the French or the British
or the Italians. Well, there was, to put it mildly, apprehension when President
Reagan first sent the marines in and after that frightful explosion of the
marine headquarters, the House of Representatives passed a resolution limiting
the marines' presence in Lebanon to 18 months.

The White House pointed out at once that this was a defeatist move. It would
tell the world either that terrorists had driven the United States out of the
Middle East or that the United States was voluntarily changing its mind and
leaving the Middle East as a battleground for many contestants who would,
sooner or later, come to be controlled by the Soviet Union through its
surrogate, Syria. This is the dreadful American dilemma. The White House is
undoubtedly right in saying that this is how a withdrawal would be looked on,
as a retreat from what every president since Truman has maintained is a region
of the world that contains a vital American interest.

So you could say, and I think fairly, that the Democrats in Congress are being
irresponsible in simply chanting, 'Get the marines out now!' Last week, Speaker
of the House Tip O'Neill who is, remember, not only the speaker, but the
Democrats' leader in the House, he went to the president and said, 'Every time
I talk to you, you say things are going well but there's nothing but
deterioration over there.' Later, Mr O'Neill said that about half of the 123
Democrats who voted in September for the 18-month limit would now vote to bring
them home at once. A House resolution to that effect for prompt and orderly
withdrawal has just been drafted, at the instance of Speaker O'Neill.

It was suggested months ago – and the White House was wistfully agreeable –
that the present multinational force ought to be replaced with a United Nations
force composed of small nations with no stake in the Middle East outcome.
Indeed, 14 nations were privately invited to join such a force. They all
declined and, in the UN Security Council, the Soviet Union would veto such a
move anyway.

Well, whether the Democrats are being political or irresponsible, the hard fact
is that they have been listening to the people. They have been watching the
polls. A big majority of Americans thinks of Lebanon as the most present danger
in foreign affairs and a literal majority wants the marines brought home now.

The Middle East is a dreadful complexity that most people want to forget. This
may be a tragic dereliction. It suggests that too many people crave the
ignorant bliss of the Japanese soldier, the Essex farmer, the undiscovered
tribe of the South Island. But, looking towards November, the Democrats have
listened to what most people want and it's a democracy, isn't it?

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP