Senator Sam Ervin

A great man has died and when the news came through the other evening, a
friend, sitting with me, said, 'If ever there was a case of the right man at
the right time...'

Now, I'm not, myself, of a mystical turn of mind but in the old days I used to
find myself saying or writing once every four years that although the race for
the presidency, at any given time, is a mad scramble of windbags,
exhibitionists and mediocrities, somehow out of the scramble, at the right
time, there usually emerged two first-rate men. I was thinking of Wendell
Willkie up against Roosevelt. Later, we had Truman against Dewey and then
Eisenhower against Stevenson.

In the past 30 years, it's been harder to maintain this wishful theory and to
go on believing in it you have to turn away from the big guns, the presidential
candidates, to, well, not... not to lesser men, but away from the political
stars to one or two feature players in the political game. Certainly anyone who
lived through one of the shabbiest times in recent American history, the
insensate hunt for Communists with the late Senator Joseph McCarthy as the
leader of the pack, the arrival at the centre of the stage of an old Boston
lawyer seemed God-sent. His name was Joseph Welch, a balding, stooped,
Dickensian character, precise and whimsical, maintaining an icy courtesy
towards McCarthy that could be a devastating kind of sarcasm.

By the time Mr Welch appeared, McCarthy had terrified the Congress, was holding
that the State Department was riddled with Communists and now he took on the
army, on the basis of two suspected officers. Mr Welch was hired by the army as
its counsel. So all-powerful was McCarthy at the time – and we're talking about
the spring of 1954 – that a mere sub-committee of the Senate became McCarthy's
kangaroo court and the hearings against the army became known as 'the
Army-McCarthy hearings'. Twenty million Americans stayed home or dawdled over
the work or feigned sickness to watch the hearings on television.

Incidentally, what was the great President Eisenhower doing, who was known to
loathe McCarthy? He was closeted in the White House and saying nothing.

Well, after weeks of McCarthy's almost brutal domination of the hearings and
the incidental humiliation of the army, there came a day when McCarthy shook
down from his sleeve the name of a very young man who had once been employed in
Mr Welch's law firm. McCarthy had discovered that this young man had once
joined a liberal law group. What McCarthy didn't say was that the group was too
radical for the young man and he'd quit after some weeks. He had absolutely
nothing to do with the army case but Senator McCarthy thought he was cleverly
showing that, even in the law office of the impeccable old Bostonian, there was
one subversive worm.

For the first time in the whole performance, Mr Welch was outraged, but though
he fumed, he did not explode. He filtered his outrage through the channel of
his courtly manner. He turned to McCarthy and said, 'Until this moment,
senator, I think I had never gauged your cruelty or your recklessness. If it
were in my power to forgive you for your reckless cruelty, I would do so. I
like to think that I am a gentle man, but your forgiveness will have to come
from some other than me.'

That was the turning point. Mr Welch had discredited McCarthy, not on a point
of order, but on a point of decency and, before the year was out, a select
committee of the Senate voted to censure McCarthy for conduct unbecoming a
member of the United States' Senate. It was the end of him.

Among the signers of that motion was a first-term senator from North Carolina.
Well, that first-term Southerner is the man we mourn today. Not too grievously,
for he was 88, was only briefly ill and, though he had delighted and convulsed
the Senate down the years with his anecdotes, his shafts of biblical wisdom, 12
years ago he achieved his finest hour and it was a fine and lucky hour for the
Republican.

His name was Sam Ervin – a big man, with a face like a giant friendly turnip.
In a nutshell, he was the chairman of a special Senate committee set up to look
into the campaign activities of one Richards Milhous Nixon. It became known
everywhere as the Senate Watergate committee.

Although its brief was to see if there had been any wrongdoing in the
solicitation and collecting of funds for Nixon's re-election campaign in 1972 –
and there was plenty – Senator Ervin suspected early on that the clumsy
break-in of paid agents into a Democratic office in the Watergate apartment
building, he suspected that the agents had been employed in the first place by
presidential aides in the White House.

A half-dozen of them were called to testify. The first who came up was one John
Dean and he told a horrendous story of bribery and telephone tapping and
laundering of campaign money and even went so far as to implicate the president
himself in the plot. As we all know, President Nixon first declared that
everybody in the White House was spotless and, as the hunt closed in on his own
office, protested time and again that he had no knowledge of the break-in or of
any of the dirty tricks connected with running his presidential campaign.

Senator Ervin then called on the president's closest top advisers to appear.
The president said they could not. They were protected, as he constitutionally
is, by executive privilege. Senator Ervin immediately called a press conference
and began with a line from Julius Caesar, 'What meat doth this Caesar eat that
he grows so great? And I say to you, what meat do these White House aides eat
that they grow so great? We abolished titles of nobility in the long ago and if
these men refuse to come down here, I shall instruct the sergeant-at-arms in
the Senate to go to the White House and fetch 'em. They are as subject to
questioning as any other citizens. The president calls it executive privilege.
I call it executive poppycock.'

Well, they were called and they gave the lie in everything to John Dean. The
man was a liar and a fantasist. However, under the committee's probing, it came
out that they had planned the break-in. Now, how did the knowledge of this come
about?

Well, quite casually, one day, a witness who'd been a minor official in the
White House happened to mention that a particular conversation with the
president was, of course, recorded on tape. What? The committee, its lawyers
were stunned. 'Oh sure,' said the witness, 'almost every conversation in the
president's Oval Office was taped without the knowledge of the other
participants.'

Well, many of you will remember in hair-raising recall that eventually the
committee went to the courts and got the tapes released and played and, in the
end, one damning tape had the president's voice urging the FBI and the CIA to
bottle up any investigation of the Watergate break-in. That tape was recorded
only six days after the break-in itself, so that the president had lied boldly
and steadily for over two years. Well, most of the aides subsequently went to
jail, the president faced certain impeachment in the Senate for high crimes and
misdemeanours and resigned.

So, the heyday of Sam Ervin's career was, of course, those six months during
which he presided over the Watergate committee. He was, in a way, Joseph Welch
reborn as a jolly, genial, sharp, delightfully courteous, old Southern country
lawyer. He would say, from time to time, 'You have to explain that to me a
little further. I'm just an old country boy from Morganton, North Carolina.'

One of his colleagues smilingly reminded the committee that Senator Ervin was
also a graduate of Harvard Law School and the Senate's expert on constitutional
law.

Ervin's best and, as it turned out, devastating, weapon was that of a rapier
disguised as a knobby old walking stick. Facing the formidable White House
counsel, John Ehrlichman, and going into a Nixon-approved raid on a
psychiatrist's office in the interests of national security, Ervin said, with
some heat, 'But foreign intelligence activities have nothin' in the world to do
with a psychiatrist's opinion of his patient's psychological state.' Ehrlichman
fired back, 'How do you know that, Mr Chairman?' Without a second's pause,
Ervin shouted, 'Because I understand the English language. It's my mother
tongue.'

And another time, he flatly announced, about Ehrlichman and the then,
Attorney-General Mitchell, 'I don't think either of 'em would recognise the
Bill of Rights if they met it in broad daylight under a cloudless sky.' And
about Nixon, he said, 'He certainly did obey Mark Twain's injunction, the truth
is very precious, use it sparingly.'

Sam Ervin was an old-time conservative Democrat. He opposed almost all the
civil rights legislation of the Fifties and Sixties. He was against equal
rights for women on the dubiously gallant ground that he wanted to protect
women from their fool friends and themselves, but he was not dependably
doctrinaire. You could never be sure which side he'd come down on. He was a
conservative hero for his opposition to integration of the blacks, then he was
a liberal hero for fighting, successfully, a Nixon administration plan to
institute a national surveillance system, including telephone tapping, of
government employees.

Whatever the issue, he never wobbled. Sam Ervin believed passionately in the
Bill of Rights and was the first to raise the alarm when he saw it threatened.

An early, a great, moment came when he was in his late twenties, when he saw
freedom of the press threatened by a bill before the North Carolina legislature
which followed the redneck campaign in Tennessee to ban the teaching of
Darwin's theory of evolution in the public schools.

Old Sam, young Sam, declared that if the bill passed, 'only one good thing can
come out of it. The monkeys in the jungle will be pleased to know that the
North Carolina legislature has absolved them from any responsibility for
humanity in general and for the North Carolina legislature in particular.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP