Reagan budget-cutting campaign

Have you ever a ridiculous question, because everybody has at some time or
other. Have you ever happened to spill or push a vegetable from your plate on
to the tablecloth? This happened some time ago to a friend of mine who did it
with spinach.

Did he take a napkin and try to swab it up? Did he pour salt on it and rub it
in the wound? He did not. He is an alert and responsible citizen. He sent a
postcard to the government printing office in Washington and they responded
promptly with a small but handsome pamphlet, for free, entitled, 'How to remove
spinach stains from tablecloth'.

I'd better say at once that the United States government printing office is,
without any remote competitor, the most completely equipped printing
establishment and the biggest publisher on earth. It has an enormous staff of
printers, proof readers, photo engravers, binders and the rest working on over
400 presses of various sorts. Obviously every conceivable sort of government
document is printed there, from the Congressional record, which is the sort of
handsome report of the debates in the House and the Senate and the reports of
all the investigating and standing committees and a fat weekly of everything
the president has done and said, from speeches to boy scouts, breakfast
meetings, executive orders, press conferences and so on.

Obviously every conceivable sort of government document is printed there but it
also prints and binds and sells and carries in stock more than a hundred
million copies of something like 150,000 different publications. Would you like
to know for free how to dress your doll? How to make a kitchen table? Or
ice-cream? How to file the books in your library? How to grow hybrid corn? Or
perhaps you have an urge for a pamphlet on the mating habits of Polish
cockroaches or understanding your mother-in-law? Conquering insomnia?

All this and much more, from the causes of backaches to the history of baseball
or labour unions or Chinese-American relations and a thousand more nuggets of
knowledge, can be yours for the cost of a postcard or a telephone call to one
department of the printing office which must be easily the largest publication
distributor in the world. It's called the public documents division.

Plainly, there's no excuse for an American citizen to plead ignorance about how
the internal combustion engine works, how and why Labor Day started as a
national holiday or who has scored more homers than any other baseball player.

It was from the government printing office that I acquired the best short
history of American agriculture and a compendium of labour statistics showing
that the workforce of barbers – what are now called hair stylists in the United
States – is considerably larger than the union-organised steel workers, and
many other adjuncts to knowledge, including a priceless, free pamphlet called
'Infant Care'. That one is still, I believe, the all-time bestseller having
sold, to date, something over 100 million copies.

I think the most surprising thing about the public documents division of the
government printing office is that so few Americans seem to know about it. They
may know it's there but they don't seem to use it because they have no idea, I
think, of its enormous range and, incidentally, of the old-fashioned speed and
courtesy with which it does its work.

Well, Mr Reagan has been looking over the government printing office as he's
been looking over every other department of the government that requires money
for its upkeep. That is needlessly repetitive – just say every other government
department. It has to trim its budget and its ambitions and, for the moment,
he's imposed a moratorium on the production of all new pamphlets, brochures,
films and audio-visual aids; naturally they have been mushrooming during the
past 20 years.

This is being done while officials of the budget bureau go over the whole
roster of the printing office's publications and decide what is essential, what
is useful and what is frivolous and, at the same time, Mr Reagan's budget boys
have taken a baleful look at the social scientists and the economists and the
sociologists and the psychologists on the government payroll, asking is all
this basic research necessary on how people act the way they do? How money
moves and grow and gets lost? How does poverty affect health or/and crime
rates, so on?

Understandably, the men wielding the budget axe, congressmen especially, are
hot for thrift, point to what look like the more absurd, knotty, psychological
experiments. The National Science Foundation, for instance, has a project paid
for by the federal government, quote, 'to explore gender differences between
men and women'. This doesn't amuse a Republican congressman from Ohio so much
as alarm him. He sees it as the opening wedge or the vanguard or the spark plug
or some other metaphor to 'set the stage for social engineering and government
intervention,' unquote.

I, myself, find it an intellectual strain to see how government is going to
intervene, short of a public scandal, in exploring gender differences between
men and women, but this congressman seems to know about it and he's one angry
man.

Not as angry, however, as the sociologists and psychologists on the staffs of
the alcohol, drug abuse and mental health administration. For years now,
conservative politicians of both parties have been riffling through the work of
these august bodies and fastening on federal grants given to researchers for
work on human and animal behaviour. One senator has made a point of making a
monthly golden fleece award to what he considers piddling research projects
that most effectively fleece the government of its money. The Polish cockroach
study would, I imagine, have been a certain winner.

But what the researchers themselves say is that such people overlook the
valuable body of their work – studies of social conditions or genetics or both
– that provide the breeding ground for mental illness. They point out that it's
not going to help to provide money for the treatment of rape victims and
withhold money for studying the causes and prevention of rape. The National
Science Foundation has been told to reduce its research grants for sociological
and economics research from 500 a year to about 140.

The Reagan men say that they can see the point, the necessity, of backing
research in chemistry and physics and neurology but they don't want the federal
government shelling out money to have people study why people age or get
divorced or how and why new attitudes to the working wife and the single parent
have come about. The sociologists, I must say, have had a long heyday in this
country. It appears to be fading.

Now this whole argument, if it were not linked to the Reagan budget-cutting
campaign, could be argued rationally, deeply and usefully if it were the
subject of, say, a presidential commission. It's certainly important enough for
that but it's being argued in Washington, in the White House, in the government
agencies that are threatened and, sadly and inevitably, it's being drastically,
and perhaps fatally, oversimplified on both sides.

It is surely too simple, for instance, for young Mr Stockman, the director of
the Office of Management and Budget, the man with the big axe, to say he thinks
that social research is 'of lower value to society than such other sciences as
chemistry and physics'. This remark shows a woeful ignorance of the whole point
and the mystery of basic research and I don't think I can do better than recall
an example I gave when President Nixon expressed a similar impatience with the
money going out for basic research and said, in effect, 'more of it ought to go
on the great crusade to conquer cancer'.

Now the snag here is that a man saying, 'I'm doing cancer research' is not
necessarily going to make a cancer discovery or one more vital than that of a
man who's working on something else which turns out to be central to a cancer
cure. We all know about Fleming pondering over a piece of mould, but how about
that Englishman, J. Griffiths, generally unknown to fame, who acted on a hint
that had been dropped a hundred years before by the Scottish physiologist, John
Hunter?

Griffiths developed a peculiar fascination. He was interested in moles and
hedgehogs and he noticed quite by chance that their prostate glands changed
size in summer and winter. A decade or two later, a couple of Frenchmen found
they could produce this change by injecting moles with female hormones. It took
two Germans, a Welshman and the discovery of something called phosphatase
before an American, Charles Huggins, in Chicago, working on dogs, tinkered
around with male and female sex hormones, found he could control the tumours of
the dogs and ,26 years later, was given the Nobel Prize for having discovered a
way of treating cancer of the prostate in men.

Nobody in his right mind in the 1880s, or for that matter nobody in the Reagan
administration of the 1980s, would dream of giving a research grant to a man
who came along and said, 'I'm interested in the seasonal cycle of the
hedgehog'. No doubt the congressman from Ohio would have picked on that
gentleman as yet another absurd example of government waste in scientific
research.

To make the argument worse, a lobbyist for the psychologists has angrily
declared, 'that Darwin, Marx and Freud are critics of the Reaganite view of how
the world was made, how it works and how we work in it and psychologists,
sociologists and economists are their heirs, the empirical left who challenge
the faith-based values of the creationists, the moral majority, the
laissez-faire industrialists, the militarists, the coalition who put Reagan in
office', unquote.

The time will come, maybe has come, when this passionate lobbyist will wish
he'd eaten his words before he spewed them. By labelling all sociologists,
economists, psychologists in the government employ 'Darwinians, Marxists and
Freudians', he has certainly delivered his brothers into the hands of the Lord
– the lord and master of us all – the president. The administration should now
have a much easier time wielding the axe on everybody, except the scientists
whose results you can touch and see now.

In the meantime, better write at once to the government printing office! It
soon may be too late to learn how to take spinach stains out of your
tablecloth.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP