American know-how

I don't know how many of you are old enough to remember an American phrase
which came into popular usage in the wake of the Second World War. It was
'American know-how' and it summed neatly the American inventive ingenuity,
from, you could say, the invention of the first refrigerated railway cars for
keeping fruit fresh during the Civil – that's right – the American Civil War,
up through the zipper and on into the rip-roaring improvisations of the Second
War.

Certainly, Air Marshal Goering, the fat overlord of the Nazi's Luftwaffe, made
a fatal mistake of judgement in calming Hitler's fears that President Roosevelt
could ever fulfil his promise of supplying the allies with 60,000 airplanes a
year, a boast that even Charles Lindbergh called 'hysterical'. Goering assured
his Fuhrer that the Americans 'can not build airplanes'. They're very good at
refrigerators and razor blades.

Well, Roosevelt was wrong. Within six months, a stretch of pasture near Detroit
had been transformed into an enormous room which, alone, produced nearly 9,000
planes a year. In all, Roosevelt's boast was modestly short of the mark.
America, in 1943, turned out not 60,000 but 86,000 planes. The morale of the
nation was bucked by other marvels, by bulldozing airstrips in impossible
jungles, by meeting America's desperate need of rubber with, in one year, a
whole synthetic rubber industry, and so on, and so on.

When the war was over, the United States was acknowledged as a technological
giant humanised by happy touches of good old Yankee ingenuity. Well, those are
long-gone days and the phrase 'American know-how' has quietly vanished before
the recognition – by Americans as much as anybody – that, in the past 30 years,
the Italians, the Germans, the British and, most of all, the Japanese, also
know how.

The phrase is so dead and gone that I was startled when it was used the other
week by an American and, moreover, was used with high sarcasm. He was talking
about the shift in the past two years of the American Open Tennis Championships
from their old stand on Long Island at Forest Hills, a bosky suburb, an almost
deliberate imitation of Wimbledon, with fake Tudor gables and ivy round the
walls, to a new and huger site, physically just on Long Island because you have
to cross the East River to get there, but technically in the New York City
borough of Queens, close by LaGuardia Airport. In fact, many spectators of the
tennis matches maintain that the new tennis centre is built on LaGuardia
Airport and on the tarmac at that.

It is, in fact, on the meadows adjoining LaGuardia. Everything that leaves or
lands at LaGuardia is roaring up or down about a hundred feet overhead and just
to the south is John F Kennedy International Airport, so we get all its
thundering jet traffic, too.

On the first day that a whole match was televised, somebody counted 76 jets
screaming throughout the two sets it took one dripping woman player to beat
another dripping woman. Somebody held a thermometer outside the sports
commentators box that overlooks the stadium court. This was while the
18-year-old Hana Mandlikova was darting around like a firefly in her defeat of
the lady in distress, Martina Navratilova. It registered 124 degrees. The
spectators, with handkerchiefs around their hair or holding newspapers over
their heads, sat through it all and if they were lucky enough to be in any
discoverable shade, they could bask in the comparative cool of 95 degrees.

In a word, this damnable heatwave which started in mid July is still at it and,
if the learned tennis commentators will forgive me, there may be a simple,
stark reason why, of the eight women in the quarter finals, there were two
18-year-olds, a 17-year-old and a 15-year-old. I don't think anything like that
has happened before in the history of tennis and when somebody jokily reminded
Mandlikova – for purists, by the way, that's how SHE pronounces it – when
somebody reminded her that she was the oldest of this quartet, she sighed, with
no apparent irony, 'Yes, it's true. I'm getting old'. How does poor Mrs Lloyd
feel in the twilight of her life in the mid-twenties?

Mandlikova went on to say, with that directness that seems characteristic of
the new young crop tennis stars, including old man McEnroe, a 20-year-old,
'Young players aren't affected by the pressure yet which is why they are
beating the older ones. We have nothing to lose now and everybody in the crowd
is rooting for us.'

'How about,' somebody said, 'the heat?' 'The what?' she said, 'Oh, sure! That,
too!' She meant – and it had to be so if you saw her darting and dashing after
impossible retrieves – that playing in 124 degrees is maybe a touch bothersome
but not really a factor. She was not complacent, mind you. She knew that if she
got through her next match she might have to face the real competition, the
number one seed, the 17-year-old Tracy Austin or the 15-year-old terror, Andrea
Jaeger. Even a year ago, it would have been totally unpredictable that a
cool-headed 18-year-old could recognise as the stumbling blocks to her throne a
17-year-old and a 15-year-old and be actually talking sense.

It's odd, for instance, that in the newspaper coverage of the Open
Championships, there's been very little, indeed, about the veteran matron,
Chris Evert-Lloyd who has gone serenely on winning 38 of her last 39 matches,
that fatal 39th being her defeat by Mrs Cawley at Wimbledon. But, as I talk,
anyway, several days away from the final, the young tigers or tigresses are not
thinking of Mrs Lloyd.

As a long admirer of Chris Lloyd – all of eight years – I am prejudiced in
seeing crabbed age win over brash youth but at this stage it seems unlikely to
happen. Austin, Jaeger, Shriver and Mandlikova are outrageously fit and
aggressive. They don't feel the heat. They forget to mention the airplanes.
These things are just part of the normal commotion of life, like the bawling of
three-year-olds in a school playground. The unflappable Mandlikova, with never
a cautious bow in the direction of Chris Lloyd, went on, 'If I beat Barbara
Hallquist in my next match, I think I can beat Jaeger in the semi-finals. I've
beaten her before and I know how to play Austin. I have a good chance to win
here.' We shall see. Maybe by now you will have seen.

Well, how about our sarcastic American and American know-how? Apart from what
to us oldsters – that would be anybody over 30 – apart from the remarkable feat
of building a championship tennis layout by an airport, there's one other
feature that provoked my friend's remark. The American officials who supervised
the building of the stadium and its surrounding courts decided that this should
be one national centre where tennis not only could, but must, be played at
night. Bjorn Borg, by the way, hates the place and his wily manager did
everything he could last year to help Borg bypass a night game. He didn't
succeed and, you may recall, Borg was blasted off the court by Roscoe Tanner,
the man with the thunderbolt serve.

So they built a huge, flat column of lights. It looks like one wall of a yet
unfinished, small skyscraper. When the sun goes down, this great grid flashes
on and bathes everybody in a Drury Lane theatrical glare but before the sun
goes down, the grid has been so placed that the sun sinks slowly behind it and
throws a dark shadow obliquely across one half of the championship court. To
say that this was an error of foresight is to be put it mildly. This is what
caused my friend to say, 'Put it down to typical American know-how. No wonder
we're screaming for tariffs against the Japanese.'

I don't know who said it, maybe me, that sports today confer a special blessing
on our times. They offer not just the relaxation of getting your mind off your
own troubles, they've always done that, they offer a useful fan of idealism in
an oven of reality. More and more, both in the real world and the world of
make-believe, nobody wins. We've come to feel this about wars and in the movies
it's rare for the boy to get the girl with any prospect more rosy than a tough
marriage ahead or a parting, or an unwanted baby. But in sport there's always a
winner and if it's said, and it often is, that sport, in moderation of course,
like alcohol, is an escape, well then so it is and I suspect an essential
safety valve for everybody.

I'll say no more about this except to add that looking over the people I've
known who take no interest in any sport whatsoever, they are with a couple of
glaring exceptions, more fretful than most and tend to be perfectionists in
politics, marriage, whatever. They're still looking for a hero or a heroine. We
know they don't exist in life but we can except this because we have our
heroes. We are more sympathetic to the people battling with reality. I don't
expect Mrs Thatcher to be Chris Lloyd and I don't, at the moment, anticipate
that Jimmy Carter will turn into Jack Nicklaus.

I suppose I ought to mention, for the record, that the American presidential
campaign started officially, as it always does, on Labor Day. There was one
notable break with tradition which promises some dirty work ahead. Presidential
candidates always start by saying they will scorn personalities and argue the
issues and, usually, it takes about a month for them to start on each other's
character. This time they pretended to no such delicacy. Mr Carter, the first
day, was off picturing Mr Reagan as a glib and dangerous character and Mr
Reagan was picturing Mr Carter as a bumbler and a failure.

Well, it's a change and it promises a hot time in a hundred old towns before
the next two months are out.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP