Carter boosts arms budget

Muhammad Ali, a handsome broth of a boy about 20, 30 pounds heavier than the
black leopard we used to know, appeared this week at the White House and, by
his side, President Carter, for the first time in months – in public at any
rate – wearing a wide grin.

Muhammad Ali was there to announce that he's taking the Carter re-election
campaign out of the hands of the amateurs. He's organising Athletes For Carter.
If the much-beloved John Wayne were still alive I'm sure there would have been
an answering bugle from him with the formation of Actors For Ronald Reagan and
there's no doubt that pretty soon there will be an Actors and Actresses Front
for Ted Kennedy.

This may not sound like the most tasteful or responsible way to start a Letter
From America when the Russians have 85,000 men in Afghanistan and appear to be
digging in for the winter, or for as long as it takes them to make the Afghans
feel safe from the aggressions of the Americans and the British.

Well, Mr Carter deserves to have a moment or two in which to relax and grin
with any visitor to the White House who's not there on Iranian or Afghan or
NATO business. Goodness knows, we'd got to the point a week ago when the
country – when powerful sections of it, anyway, and most of Mr Carter's
opponents for the presidency – were saying and then shouting, 'Why don't you do
something?'.

Now since the day's long gone when frustrated Americans could cry, 'Send in the
marines!' with any hope of being listened to, not one of Mr Carter's critics
cared to be specific about what he ought to do. But from the Midwest, as much
as anywhere, the chorus rose to a demand, 'Don't just sit there wringing your
hands! Do something!'

'All right!' said Mr Carter, 'I will.' And he cancelled the standing Russian
order for 17 million tons of wheat, maize and soy bean, at which the Midwestern
farmers let out a bellow of rage. 'But you told me to do something!' said Mr
Carter. 'Yes, but not that!' they howled.

As it is, the president has already secured the farmers against a drastic
tumble in prices by having the Department of Agriculture buy up the contracts
from the firms that were going to supply the Russians. This will cost about two
and a half billion dollars and if any American wants to know where that money
is coming from the Bureau of Internal Revenue will soon tell him. It's coming,
as the tax man said, 'From you, buster!'

So the patriots of the farm belt can now enjoy the emotional luxury of having
given their all for their country at no cost to themselves.

Now, into Iowa, the very heart of the corn belt which, being interpreted, means
the maize belt, charged young Lochinvar. Senator Edward Kennedy, as you must
know by now, faces the first head-on political clash with the president ten
days from now, on the 21st when the Iowa Democrats choose delegates to the
Democratic convention next August who will go instructed to vote for this man
or that man, namely for Carter or Kennedy. A couple of weeks ago the president
did what sitting presidents always do when the occasion offers, they announce
regretfully that though there's nothing they would like more than a face to
face, eyeball to eyeball debate with their principal opponent, the ship of
state happens to be in such a touchy or perilous situation at the moment that
it would be unfair to the American people to have the captain desert the bridge
and descend to mere political squabbling below decks.

Franklin Roosevelt did this with such consummate persuasiveness that in his
last campaign he simply announced that he'd dare not leave the running of the
Second World War to subordinates. He would stay at the helm. He thereby gave
the impression that the Republican candidate was fiddling while Europe burned,
almost that the man was unpatriotic in going on with his nattering. In the
result, Roosevelt went thundering back into the White House for an
unprecedented fourth term after an unprecedented third term.

So once the Russians moved into Afghanistan on their errand of mercy, Mr Carter
announced he could not and ought not go politicking in Iowa and would have to
resign himself to losing a delegation there for the sake of the country at
large.

It didn't take long for Senator Kennedy to discover that this move, however
truly felt, was also a sound political move. A quick survey of the likely Iowa
delegates showed that they somehow felt the president was acting like a
president, though that was before he announced the cancelling of the Soviet's
farm contract. In any case, Senator Kennedy – I was wrong, he didn't exactly
charge into Iowa, he went in humbly saying he was far behind in the state – he
didn't jeer at Mr Carter's decision to stay in Washington. He said simply that
if Mr Carter had not dropped out of the arranged debate, quote, 'he would
surely have been asked to explain why we have this drift in foreign policy,
domestic issues, energy, inflation and why we haven't been unable to anticipate
these problems.'

The senator made the point, which his fellow or rival candidates had started to
parrot, that banning the sale of grain to the Russians would hurt the farmers
more than it would hurt the Russians. This might have become the standard
Republican retort but it's hard to see how they can go on repeating it now that
the president has fixed things so that while the ban on grain will hurt the
taxpayer a little, it's bound to hurt the Russians a lot.

In the meantime, the president's hoping that the Australians and the Canadians
will do the same. However, 'drift' is Senator Kennedy's complaining slogan,
especially in foreign policy. Well, when and where did the drift start? There's
already a lot of writing and speechifying and searching for a scapegoat and of
course it's the burden of Mr Carter's presidential rivals to say that the drift
started with him.

But now something has come up which the Republicans will notice – and President
Carter, I shouldn't wonder – which could move the pointing finger away from Mr
Carter and point straight to Senator Kennedy himself. I bring it up because
it's an incident that has never been mentioned as a drag on the senator's
presidential ambitions. It is, indeed, one answer to the question which nags
the nation: When did America begin to lose its ability or inclination to
exercise and influence over events that matches its rank as a superpower? When
did America stop acting on its own and begin automatically to react to Russian
moves?

Well this week an English newspaper published a piece by Sir Robert Thompson,
the veteran of Malaysia, one of the very few men in our time who've managed to
conduct a successful military campaign against communists. For many years he
was, not very successfully, an unofficial advisor to the White House on
Vietnam. He holds the unpopular view that Vietnam could have been won in 1972
with a massive exercise of air power, after the North Vietnamese had invaded
the South.

Sir Robert rehearsed the steps, the downward steps, by which the United States
seems to have lost the power to intervene successfully in Indochina, in Africa
and elsewhere. Now, here, is the bit that will be quoted by old hawks, new
hawks, the Republicans and, I should guess, by President Carter himself when
they all get into the thick of the presidential debate about what America
should spend on arms. You'll recall that Mr Carter promised four years ago to
cut the military budget, though since then he's noticeably increased it. He's
now urging a tougher, bigger military budget, talking about a chain of bases in
the Indian Ocean and the Persian Gulf and leaving the Liberal Democrats to
deplore such a policy.

Mr Carter's conversion to more arms can now be explained by his having said
that he's suddenly changed a lifetime's thinking about the true aims of Soviet
policy. Now, here's the bit. Sir Robert Thompson, as I've implied, advised Mr
Nixon to move in with the full strength of the American air force in Vietnam in
1972. He believes the war could have been won then.

However that may be, in the piece published this week, he recalls something
that he wrote in 1974 and this is it, quote: 'When on May 6 1974 Senator Edward
Kennedy's amendment to a military aid bill to cut $266 million aid to South
Vietnam, when that was passed by the Senate by 43 votes to 38, it signified
that perhaps the major lesson of the Vietnam war is "Do not rely on the United
States as an ally". This vote may prove to be one of the initial steps leading
to the strategic surrender of the United States.'

Now, Senator Kennedy was greatly praised at the time, the spring of 1974, and
not only by Liberal Democrats. It would be interesting to know how Mr Carter,
then, I think, governor of Georgia, felt about that vote. Almost certainly I'm
sure he would have been for it. It looked then to a nation just emerged from
years of that detested and debilitating war, it looked like just what the
doctor ordered. In other words, vote less money for arms and you'll have fewer
wars. It may sound absurd now but it was no more absurd than that fatuous
fighting or non-fighting slogan of the 1930s, 'Against War and Fascism!'
chanted far and wide in Britain and America by people who were willing to do
absolutely anything to get rid of Hitler except fight him.

Throughout the five years since 1974, the Liberal Democrats in Congress and
outside Congress and the poor and the blacks and a sizeable majority of women
voters have said it over and over with feeling, 'Cut the military budget!' Men
who wanted a bigger military budget were looked on as warmongers.

Well, as Duke Ellington once said ,'There've been some changes made'. Even Mr
Carter, once the darling of the Liberal wing of his party, a man who would
never have made it to the White House if he'd come out in 1976 for a bigger
military budget, now Mr Carter has recoiled with a shudder from the wishful
thought that if you disarm you won't have to fight.

Quite apart from the challenge of Afghanistan, he's been forced into this
change of mind by the warning of the army and air force that there aren't
enough volunteers to keep them up to strength and this week, by a private
memorandum from Admiral Haywood, the chief of naval operations, to the joint
chiefs of staff, to the effect that the poor pay of skilled petty officers is
stripping the navy of enough men to run its ships. To put it bluntly, Iran and
Afghanistan together have sounded the knell, I should guess, of the Liberal
Democrats heyday.

Senator Kennedy, in spite of his now saying that 'Yes, we must militarily
strengthen the Middle East and Pakistan', he is the presidential candidate of
choice of the Liberal Democrats and he's going to have to do some fancy
juggling of his old convictions if he, too, is to come into line with the
national mood and with that reborn-again president who has seen the light about
Russian strength and Soviet purpose.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP