Dairy buy-out

A great deal of the pleasure, for me, of doing these talks is the fact that I
have no way of knowing which talks will appeal to which sorts of people.

I remember, years ago, being approached in an airport waiting room by a learned
judge of the High Court, an English judge, that is. He talked very affably
about this and that, but then said, 'What I really wanted to tell you was that
many years ago you did a talk I have never forgotten'. Of course, I took a very
quick, mental guess at what it might be, something possibly about the great
American jurist, Mr Justice Holmes; an obituary talk about the former Secretary
of State, Dean Acheson; probably the landmark decision of the Supreme Court in
1954 that abolished the segregation of the races?

Not at all. It was one I'd long forgotten. I've had to look it up. About a
barely literate black girl, childless, who'd sneaked into a New York hospital
on a perishing winter night and stolen from an incubator a ten-day-old baby,
premature, two pounds at birth.

And, about a month later, after the FBI had sent out a 20-state alarm, all the
way down to New Orleans, they found the girl because they heard a baby's cry
coming from a tiny cupboard above a heating cistern. It was in good health
because this slightly crazed girl had bought a 25 cent paperback about baby
care at a drugstore and had somehow acquired baby formulas, a pan of water,
sterilising tweezers, baby oil, cotton wool, a thermometer kept in the steaming
cupboard at the exactly correct 96 degrees, and the essential feeding weapon
for a two-, three-pound baby, an eye dropper. So you never know, do you?

I wasn't surprised, some time later, when a golf writer told me that he'd
remembered most the talk on Dean Acheson, but in recent years, if there's one
talk more than an other that more people write to me about – several people
this year wondered if I'd repeat it now – it's a talk about spending Christmas
in Vermont with my daughter and son-in-law and their two sons, one four, the
other a bubbling baby of, I think, then, six months.

Well, I'm not going to repeat the talk but we did, this year, repeat the
pilgrimage and just to make clear and sharp what's happened since, I'll read
over the final paragraph which I'm shocked to see was broadcast on the last day
of December 1976. It went like this:

On Christmas Eve we sang carols in close, if creaking harmony, with the
four-year-old Adam, piping 'God Rest Ye Merry Gentlemen' right on pitch. Next
morning I woke up and he was on his skis. They are small skis and he was
plumping up the hills and skimming down with the poles helping him on the
turns. And I thought what an extraordinary childhood. Born in 20 below zero, 50
below freezing, knowing few winters that have less than a hundred, 120 inches
of snow, May – the squishy, melting month, summer banging in with 90 degrees,
fall – a fountain of scarlet and gold, and here at four, he's skiing over the
deep and crisp and even like a Disney doll. And this is all the life he knows.
One day, he will grow up and, I'm afraid, taste of the forbidden fruit. One day
he will read the New York Times and Adam will be out of the Garden of Eden, out
of Vermont, forever.

Well, ten years ago, we flew into Montpelier which, though it's the state's
capital, is a small town and had then a small airport with a small runway that
would only take propeller planes, so it was always very dicey whether you'd get
in there in a blizzard or after an ice storm. It's closed down for commercial
traffic now and you land 40 miles away at a big town, Burlington, which lets
the jets in and out in all sorts of weather.

We'd been told, this time, that it was a remarkably mild Christmas. No snow. By
which they meant that, of course, all the fields as far as the eye could see
were under a deep blanket of snow, but not too much in the mountains so that
the ski season has hardly got going. They were right. It never got much below
20 degrees or 12 below freezing. Even so, the fun and games were mostly indoors
due to a natural increase in the size of the family.

There are now, counting my daughter and her husband, seven of them. Three girls
ranging, or bouncing, from six to four to 20 months. The six-month-old boy,
Zeb, is now, surprisingly, ten and he was out most of the time tending to the
horses – a neat, modest boy the size of a jockey, not surprising since he won
the fall Junior Show Jumping Championship of the state, the junior competition
being open to entrants from age nine to eighteen.

Adam, the Disney doll on skis is 14 and looks down on me from a height two and
a half inches above my head. Adam, remember, was the one who, I feared, would
lose his four-year-old innocence by getting to read the New York Times. He does
that, but he was too busy this Christmas to bother much with the papers. He was
just finishing his science project which had to be handed in next week. 'And
what', I asked indulgently, 'might that be?'

I thought back to the smelly days of Bunsen burners and litmus tests and
panicky moments when some slob spilled a test tube of sulphuric acid. 'Well,'
said Adam, taking a long, tolerant sigh, knowing that he was going to have to
be the patient one, 'it's a model,' he said, 'for planting a human colony on
the moon'. He went off and he brought back a big plastic bowl and he began by
pointing out two or three artificial mountains. 'Artificial?' I screamed. He
explained that you'd have to rearrange the contours in order to confine an
atmosphere into which you could introduce and maintain a steady layer of
oxygen.

There's no point in my going on. I thought then of taping the whole story, but
for every 14-year-old who'd understand it, there'd be legions of the old and
middle-aged as stupid as me, what with enveloping skins of this element and
that, baffled ultrasonics, vegetable elements synthesised for food and
reflector shields for the galactic portisfriggis and the anti-meteorite
whatnot, or some such.

'Let me rough it out for you,' he said, moving to the computer and starting to
punch numbers and wait for telephone rings and command instructions. 'Help!' I
cried and told him I hadn't even moved on to an electric typewriter. I use a
manual. 'Gosh!' he said, 'A manual! I'd like to take a look at that next time
I'm in New York.' I left him to it and retreated to the Burlington Free Press
and such life among the locals as I can understand.

I was pleased to see that 30 students from Steeple Ridge riding school were out
on their horses, riding around the country roads and reigning in by farms and
other habitations to practise their Christmas tradition, 30 teenagers on horses
forming a chorus and singing Christmas carols. On the last day of school at the
Main Street Middle School in Montpelier, four youngsters had got together to
organise a state-wide mission to relieve hunger in Vermont. They have a garden
on their playground and they give its produce to poor people on the back roads.

This year, though, they circulated a letter to sixth graders across the entire
state asking each student to take a tin of food to the nearest church, all of
which would be collected and distributed to, as the boy said, all those family
farms that may go out of business by the end of the year because of the federal
whole-herd dairy buy-out.

That puzzling phrase is no puzzle in Vermont. It's the four-alarm fire siren
announcing the state's acute, present problem. It's not difficult to explain
and not painful, except to the farmers impoverished by it. The country – the
United States – is hopelessly floundering in oceans of milk. So the federal
government offered to pay farmers to quit dairy farming for five years only if
they sold out their whole herd for slaughter, for beef, that is which, of
course, deflates the price of beef. They were required, last February, to
submit bids, so much per hundred pounds of milk, according to their guess at
the value of their dairy cattle, as beef, and what they would need to go
comfortably, well, safely, out of business.

Later, when all the bids were in, the government would announce its maximum
price. That was the tricky part, the perilous gamble. If you bid too high, you
were out of the programme altogether and stuck with milk at ruinously low
prices. Bid too low and you let the herd be slaughtered anyway and found work
where you could.

One lucky farmer nearby bid $21, which everybody thought was gamblers' madness,
but the government came through to announce it would pay up to $22.50. The man
had a huge herd and picked up $800,000. He's taking it easy for a while and
thinks of going, first, to Florida and then to Europe. But his luck is unique.

Another, more typical farmer is John Levesque – lots of French Canadians
settled here a couple of generations ago. In February, Levesque bid $18 per
hundred pounds of milk and then he got cold feet and resubmitted $11. In the
lush years, he'd mortgaged more land but he didn't put in modern equipment. He
had no milking parlour. He and his sons carried 50-pound milk pails to each
cow. He had 3,000 cattle. He sold the lot.

He's still way in debt for the extra land he bought to accommodate the big herd
he'd built up. He's made a little pin money chopping wood and next year he
hopes to pick apples. And the other day he sat in his meagre kitchen and said
he'd miss most 15 May when the cows come out in the open and run around and
kick up their heels. He looked out to a barn and broke down. 'I don't know why
all this is happening' he said.

So we walked back home and looked at the fat smoked turkey and decide two
things in the world are insoluble. The farm programmes of Europe and America
and peace in the Middle East. And we open the presents under the tree and feel
a little guilty.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP