Fred Astaire

Movie stars don't make it, nor statesmen, not prime ministers or dictators –
unless they die in office – not even a world famous rock star, unless he's
assassinated. But last Monday, none of the three national television networks
hesitated about the story that would lead the evening news.

On millions of little screens in this country and I don't doubt in many other
countries around the world, the first shots were of an imp, a graceful wraith,
a firefly in impeccable white tie and tails and, for much longer than the lead
story usually runs, for a full five minutes on NBC, we were given a loving
retrospective of the dead man, ending with the firm declaration by Nureyev that
he was not just the best ballroom dancer or tap dancer, he was simply the
greatest, most imaginative dancer of our time.

And the newsmen were right, I think, to remind us of the immortal comment of
the Hollywood mogul who, with the no-nonsense directness of an expert, reported
on Fred Astaire's film test, 'Has enormous ears, can't act, can't sing, dances
a little'.

Well, that Hollywood mogul, long gone, spent his life ducking round corners to
avoid being identified as the oaf who looked in the sky and never saw the
brightest star. However that expert opinion was, as the lawyers say,
controlling at the time and in Astaire's first movies there was no thought of
allowing him to act or sing. But not for long. And thanks to the invention of
television and the need to fill vast stretches of the afternoon and night with
old movies, it has been possible for my daughter, for instance, to claim Fred
Astaire as her favourite film star from the evidence of all the movies he made
three years, five, ten, fifteen years before she was born.

When I got the news on Monday evening here and realised, with immediate
professional satisfaction, that the BBC had smartly on hand a musical obituary
tribute to him I put together eight years ago, I couldn't help recalling the
casual, comic way this and similar radio obituaries came about.

I was in London at the end of 1979 and Richard Rogers, one of the two or three
greatest of American songwriters, had just died, I believe on New Year's Eve or
the night before. Britons, by that time, were getting accustomed without pain
to making what used to be a two-day Christmas holiday into a ten-day much
needed rest and for all laborious research purposes, the BBC was shut up and
there was no retrospective programme on the life and music of Richard Rogers in
the BBC's archives.

Of course, in a gramophone library that looks like an annexe to the Pentagon,
there were hundreds, perhaps thousands of recordings of his songs. The SOS went
out to a writer, a producer, and I presume a man who had the key to the
gramophone library. The silent place was unlocked and the three of them
laboured through the day to put together an hour's tribute to Richard Rogers.
It was done. It was competent enough, but rushed to an impossible deadline.

Well, this hasty improvisation happened just when my own music producer and I,
who had come to enjoy working together for six years or so on American popular
music, we were wondering what we could offer next. We'd done a sketch history
of jazz through individuals. We'd gone through all the popular music of the
Twenties, Thirties and Forties and were stumped for a new series, at which
point I asked if we mightn't go and talk to the head of the channel network or
whatever. We went in and the genial boss asked me what we had in mind. 'A
morgue,' I said. 'A what?' 'Where,' I asked, 'is your morgue?' He was not
familiar with the word, a newspaper term.

'Well,' I said, 'all newspapers have them.' 'How do you mean?' 'If,' I
explained, 'Mrs Thatcher died tonight and you woke up and read a two-sentence
obituary, you'd be rightly outraged. But if you saw a two-page obituary, you'd
take it for granted. When do you suppose it was written?' 'Ah, that's right!'
he said, thoughtfully.

What I was proposing was a morgue of the Americans eminent in popular music and
jazz so they'd not get caught short again. 'A splendid idea,' the man said,
'pick your stars!' We made a list and were commissioned to return to America
and finish all of them. Naturally, we looked at a calendar and birth dates.
Hoagy Carmichael, Earl Hines, Harold Arlen, Ethel Merman, Stéphane Grappelli,
Ella Fitzgerald. But then, in a spasm of panic, we thought of two giants, if
the word can be used about two comparative midgets – Irving Berlin and Fred
Astaire.

Berlin was then 91 and Fred Astaire was just crowding 80. The boss man, to whom
the idea of a morgue had been only a few minutes before quaint, if not morbid,
he wondered what we were waiting for. 'Get busy at once on Berlin and then on
Astaire!'

I remember doing the Astaire obit then and there while I was still in London.
Meanwhile, we'd simply pray every night that the Lord would keep Irving Berlin
breathing until I could get home and get busy. I remember being picked up in a
car by a charming girl to get to the BBC and record my Astaire narration –
there wasn't a moment to lose – and she asked me in the car what the script was
that I was clutching. 'It's an obituary,' I said, 'of Fred Astaire.' 'Fred
Astaire?!' she shrieked, 'Dead?!' Almost swerved into a bus. 'Of course he's
not dead,' I said, 'but he's going to be one day.'

She, too, was new to the institution of a morgue. I recalled that when I was a
correspondent for a British paper in the United States and when, for example,
Dean Acheson was appointed secretary of state, the first cable I had from my
editor said, 'Welcome Acheson obituary soonest'. 'How ghoulish', she said.

Well, need I say that all the great ones, then in their sixties, have gone by
now except Grappelli and Ella Fitzgerald and until this week, I'd come to
assume that the last of these obituaries to be played would be the immortal
Astaire and the immortal Berlin.

Well, now we are left with Irving Berlin. I should guess he will outlive all
the others, this wispy, immigrant boy, sickly, weedy from birth, one of nine
children of a rabbi who fled from a Russian pogrom to land in the slums of New
York. This sliver of a youth, who always looked as if he wouldn't make it
through his twenties, he will be 100 years old next May.

I imagine that for two generations at least, it's assumed that Fred Astaire,
this slim, pop-eyed newcomer to Hollywood who couldn't act, couldn't sing,
danced a little, only made a fool of the mogul through the movies he made with
Ginger Rogers in the mid and late Thirties. But, long before then, from the
mid-Twenties on, he was already an incomparable star as a dancer to theatre
audiences, both in New York and in London – perhaps in London more than
anywhere. Certainly in the 1920s with the early Gershwin hits, 'Funny Face' and
'Lady Be Good'. And lastly, in 1933 in Cole Porter's, 'Gay Divorce'. That was
the title of the theatre show. Hollywood would not then allow so shocking a
title and called the movie version, 'The Gay Divorcee'.

Of all the thousands of words that have been written this week and will be
written, there's a passage I recalled and went back to on Tuesday night, which
I think, as well as anything I know, sums up Astaire's overall appeal, the
appeal that takes in but transcends one's admiration for his dancing and for
his inimitably intimate singing style. This was written in November 1933 by a
theatre critic who had so little feel for dancing that he marvelled why London
should go on about Mr Astaire's doing well enough what the Tiller Girls at
Blackpool do superbly.

The critic, the writer, was James Agate – the irascible, dogmatic, opinionated
but brilliant journalist and, I believe, the best critic of acting we've had
this century. He is writing his review of 'Gay Divorce' and after declaring,
yet again, his contempt for musical comedy as an entertainment for idiots and
deploring the pace, plot and the acting and hoping, Micawberishly for something
to turn up: 'Presently', he wrote, 'Mr Fred Astaire obliged and there is really
no more to be said, except a very distinguished colleague began his criticism
of this show by asking what is Mr Astaire's secret. May I suggest that the
solution hangs on a little word of three letters. Mr Astaire's secret is that
of the late Rudolph Valentino and of Mr Maurice Chevalier. Sex, but sex so
bejewelled and betwixt that the weaker vessels who fall for it can pretend that
it isn't sex at all, but a sublimated projection of the little fellow with the
knuckles in his eyes. You'd have thought by the look of the first night foyer
that it was Mothering Thursday in London, since every woman in the place was
urgent to take to her bosom this waif with the sad eyes and the twinkling
feet.'

As for the unique quality of Astaire's dancing, something impossible to put
into words, I think the near impossible has been achieved by an American critic
of films and jazz, the late Otis Ferguson.

He wrote, in reviewing the movie, 'Top Hat', 'He has given the best visual
expression that has been generally seen of what is called "the jazz" as a man
who can create figures intricate, unpredictable, constantly varied and yet
simple, seemingly effortless. Whenever the band gathers its brasses and rhythm
section and begins to beat it out, he is unequalled anywhere with his soft-shoe
sandman number.

'And when, before the line of men with top hats, he swings up the steps, Fred
Astaire, whatever he may do, in whatever picture he's in, has the beat, the
swing, the debonair and damn-your-eyes violence of rhythm, all the gay
contradiction and irresponsibility of the best thing this country can
contribute to musical history, which is the best American jazz.'

There is no more to say.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP