Paul Volcker, head of the Fed

Suppose you were told that you were privileged to meet the second most
important man in America. Who – if you're a schoolmaster, whom – do you think
you'd be going to meet?

It's an interesting quiz and I tried it out long ago on an eager pack of
visiting foreign students, students of politics. The automatic first guess is
the vice president. Oh dear, no! Power is something the vice president can only
get by accident in the sense old H. L. Mencken implied when he said, 'The vice
president is a man who sits in an outer office at the White House hoping to
hear the president sneeze.'

The vice president is not a deputy president. By his office, he's actually
removed from all power except for a bone or two that the president might care
to toss his way. He has the theoretical duty to preside over the Senate and
it's a duty that he very rarely exercises. He's mostly, in spite of the
protests from all sitting vice presidents, he's mostly a ceremonial figure for
he does represent the president at all the best funerals. He is, for the term
of his office, sidelined to the shallows of power until the death of the
president sweeps him into the main current.

So, how about the Secretary of State? That's a good guess. In many countries,
the foreign minister is the second man in line for the succession though, in
Britain, the Chancellor of the Exchequer is usually picked as the heir apparent
to the top job. Some shrewd, unfooled student, precociously aware that money
can mean power, may recall the days around the turn of the century when the
robber barons owned the railroads, the oil, the steel, the copper, the iron
industries and when, at one time, it could truly be said that J. P. Morgan was
the second most powerful man in the country until President Teddy Roosevelt,
with the Supreme Court on his side, knocked him off his pins and told him to go
back to his mansion and the collecting of Old Masters and medieval manuscripts.

One bright and knowledgable student even suggested the mayor of New York City,
which is nothing like as wild as it sounds, since the mayor of New York, chief
executive head of the most powerful city in the country has an administrative
job second in scope only to that of the presidency and when Fiorello H.
LaGuardia was mayor for 12 crackling years after 1933 – we are, by the way,
celebrating the hundredth anniversary of his birth – in him we had an
indomitable and cocky little figure whose energy, and most of all whose
absolute incorruptibility cleaned out the stables of machine politics so
alarmingly and introduced to city government so many reforms that his example
fired not only other mayors, but many governors and congressmen. But such
excellent power as he had was exercised by osmosis flowing out from New York by
example.

Patience! Let's go and visit the second most important American in his house,
his home. Perhaps that will give a clue. He lives, as you might expect, in
Washington. What you would not expect is the flat he lives in which looks like
the very camped quarters inhabited in a rooming-house by an impecunious college
student. It has a living room, kitchenette, bathroom. That's it. It's known as
his garret. Sherlock Holmes, I suspect, would spot a prime clue that Dr Watson
wouldn't notice – a small, black and white television set.

Now this usually means you are in the living quarters of a bookish type or of a
countryman or of what I like to call a media snob, the type who, at first,
scorned a radio set and then he got a radio, but no television. And then
succumbed to television but deigned to have a colour set. Rather like the
intellectuals of the early 1930s who made a point for some years of seeing only
silent films, since silent films were suddenly called art, whereas sound films,
the talkies, were fit only for the mob.

There's another clue to his type in a dark closet. He has a slender forest of
fly-fishing rods, not by any means squeaky clean since they go too long unused
– the man doesn't get to use them as often as he'd like. Why? Because, well,
because he's the second most important man in America and lives, day and night,
in the knowledge that more, even than the president, he can produce panic and
paroxysms in the governments of Britain, France and Germany, Japan, of any
industrial power.

I will tease you no longer. His name is Paul Volcker. He is the chairman of the
Federal Reserve Board. He is responsible – alone, for his job is independent of
the administration, of any administration in power, even though the president
appoints him – he is responsible for saying how much paper money is available,
should be available, to all of us. 'Us' being you and me and 12 Federal Reserve
banks and about 7,000 member banks throughout the country, but since, as
somebody said long ago, 'If Wall Street sneezes, Europe catches a cold', Mr
Volcker's decisions can immediately and profoundly affect the banking systems
and the economies of many other countries.

I ought to say, as simply as possible, why and how the Federal Reserve system
was set up and how it works. It was set up as an independent arm of government
in 1913 by the Congress after it recognised that in every financial panic and
business depression since anyone could remember, the first people to go to the
wall were flocks of banks around the country. Congress felt that something had
to be done to tide over responsible banks and to save ordinary people from
losing their savings if their money happened to be in sound banks that had the
bad luck to suffer from a run of withdrawals.

The new system, the Federal Reserve, stopped privately owned banks issuing bank
notes. That can be done now only by Federal Reserve banks which, because the
Congress was suspicious of centralised power, were instituted all around the
country in 12 federal districts, allied to member banks which owned stock in
their district bank.

The way the Federal Reserve system works is pretty simple, but in the sense
that the way the commander-in-chief of a military theatre works is simple. His
commands are unquestioned and can, however, lead to the disaster of Waterloo or
the triumph of the Battle of Trafalgar. The word 'reserve' is the key. The Fed,
as it's called, dictates the reserves of all its member banks, that's to say,
it, alone – 'it' being generally the chairman, Mr Volcker – says how much
money, what percentage of a bank's deposit, must be held in the vaults to
support the loans made to borrowers.

This is the central decision, a judgement that Mr Volcker ponders from dawn to
dusk and often beyond, because he has to say, any day, any month, according to
how he senses the economy's going, what trouble Germany or Saudi Arabia or some
other country's in. He has to decide just how much money those 12 district
banks and their 7,000 satellites must keep on hand. If he lowers the
percentage, the banks can lend more money. If he raises it, they can lend less.

So, he's directly responsible for interest rates, for saying we're going to
hold back the supply of money or release floods or dribbles of it. The Fed can
reduce the reserves of all its banks by selling bonds to its satellites and to
the public. It can increase the banks' reserves by buying bonds from the
satellites or the public. Or it can lend money directly to shore up the banks'
reserves.

All this power would be much smaller if the Federal Reserve system was run only
for its member banks but the Fed is the chief agent, the financial agent, of
the national government. It holds most of the government's money and Mr
Volcker, more than anybody, has to decide how much of the nation's paper money
ought to be issued, which it does in the form of notes to be banked by a stated
percentage of gold certificates, also by government bonds and various
securities.

Now, whether or not the public grasps the power and delicacy of these
interlocking mechanisms, what it does know is that the Fed, in the person of
its chairman, is responsible for setting prime interest rates and so, by
further trickling or flowing down, the interest rate you have to pay your bank
for a loan or the mortgage rate you're going to have to pay on a new house.
Everybody says the interest rates are too high. Every different school of
economists says it. The French say that, more than anything else, the American
rate is responsible for their economic troubles. The Democrats are saying it
now with wounded, a sort of wounded, air, though under Carter the rates were
just about double what they are today.

Mr Volcker, by the way, was appointed by Mr Carter and very soon was blamed by
the Reaganites for the recession, but inflation came tumbling down and the
Reaganites thought again. They still hound him to bring the interest rate down
on his own and he quietly insists that they are not coming down much unless the
administration, itself, acts to reduce its huge budget deficits. To relax his
tight money policy now, he believes, would refloat a soaring inflation.

Well, the time came this month to appoint a new chairman. Mr Volcker's
four-year term was up. Mr Reagan was persuasively advised to replace him but
the president's closest advisers and a legion of financial experts on the
outside said that nobody had a firmer grasp of the main, the most urgent
international situation, namely the international debt situation and the plight
of the allied nations, and, anyway, the American economic recovery is well on
the way.

Last week, the president reappointed him. So, he can hole up again in his
garret – he's paid less than a congressman and appears to have few other assets
– he can watch the news in black and white. He can gaze wistfully at his dusty
fishing rods, he can smoke his cheap cigars, his only luxury and resume his
role as the dean of the world's central bankers.

A huge, six foot, seven inch, 17-stone man, the odd refreshing figure of the
giant of international finance who, for himself, has no interest in money.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP