Car workers to strike

In just about every region of the United States, there are two more months of
what, in northern Europe, would be regarded as ideal summer weather – in the
south and the south-west make it three more months, or four, but it's no news
to any of us; this country, or rather this nation, was founded by people of
British descent. September and October in the old country were times of mists
and mellow fruitfulness and then the wild west wind signalled the approach of
winter.

It's a colonial hangover. In New Zealand, there's another example. It might be
80 degrees in some places on Christmas Day but, as a friend of mine remarked,
we shall have the holly and the ivy and the greeting cards with snow drawn on
them and we shall obediently sweat our way through turkey and stuffing and plum
pudding.

So, Labor Day, the first Monday in September, is doggedly accepted as the end
of summer, whatever the thermometer says. The time to get back to work and the
time for the unions, the steel workers, the airline workers, the automobile
workers, to look towards a new contract. The middle of September is the usual
deadline and it used to be, through a long stretch of modern history, that the
deadline would pass, there'd be no agreement and there'd be strikes, almost
always for more pay, better pensions, more paid holidays and so on.

Two years ago, the country was struggling out of a recession and the automobile
industry was in a disastrous slump. Nothing like the thousands of lay-offs had
been seen since the Great Depression. You know that since the movement of goods
across the continent passed from the railroads to the highways, THE barometer
of the American economy has been no longer the monthly average of freight car
loadings, but the number of new cars pouring out of Detroit.

President Reagan appealed to the automobile workers to exercise restraint in
their wage demands, even to take cuts, and they did. Ronald Reagan wasn't the
threat to their jobs but the Japanese imports. The general attitude – and it's
remarkable to think now that it was a general attitude – was summed up
concisely and grimly in the words of one automobile worker, 'We priced
ourselves out of the market'.

So, to the outsiders' amazement and the great relief of the manufacturers, the
workers in two great companies requested no wage increase in a new contract. In
the third company, they went as far as to accept a 15 per cent cut. They were
resoundingly praised by President Reagan as fine, upstanding and far-seeing
Americans.

Well, in two years there's been a spectacular change. The industry is greatly
prospering again. The three main automobile companies reported record profits
and the most positive sign of the new prosperity was the fact that the top
brass of the automobile companies, managers, vice presidents and the like,
voted themselves bonuses running to many millions of dollars. In some quarters,
notably among Democrats and liberal columnists, it was called 'an obscene act'.

Some economists and columnists who are devotees of Reaganomics – cut taxes,
keep cutting government spending – hastened to explain to shocked onlookers
that these multi-million dollar bonuses did not intrude on the profit margin
and nobody should think that if the chairman of the board awards himself a
million-dollar bonus, it will make a dollar's worth of difference to the pay
cheques of the rank and file.

Now whether this argument is defensible, intellectually defensible, or not, it
sounded brutally insensitive to many thousands, many hundreds of thousands, of
automobile workers who had lived in the past few years, or are still living
now, pinched lives and feeling that helpless sort of humiliation which is known
only to people in middle life who suddenly find themselves unemployed.

I think we shall look back a year or two from now on the action of the company
bigshots as a mistake. A psychological mistake or, to be cold-blooded about it,
a howling mistake of public relations. The automobile workers, both those in
and out of work – and there are still 140,000 men who've been out of work since
1982 – they're not waiting for another year or two to react to the company
managers' bonuses. It has undone the goodwill, the trust that the workers
showed in bowing to Mr Reagan's appeal to stay with the old wages or have them
cut.

Until a few months ago, when the industry's record profits were announced, the
workers, according to surveys, were on the whole loyal to Ronald Reagan. The 40
per cent of them, anyway, who had defied their union leaders and voted for him
in 1980 believed him when he attributed the 1981 recession to the Carter
administration, to its runaway inflation and its 19, 20 per cent interest
rates, whereas the startling economic recovery which nobody denies – interest
rates are about halves and inflation has gone from 12 to two per cent – the
recovery must be due to nobody but Reagan.

Then came the proud announcement that the automobile industry was booming again
in spite of the Japanese invasion and then came the managers' presenting
themselves with the million-dollar bonuses. It seems to have aroused an enmity
between the bosses and the workers which is common enough in European trade
unions, but which has been noticeably absent from American labour relations
since the worst days of the Depression in the 1930s. Namely, the belief in a
class struggle, or at least the belief that labour and capital are natural
enemies.

British labour leaders, I remember, who came over here in the 1930s, when the
automobile industry especially was ravaged by picketing violence, by running
fights between strikers and company scabs, such labour men – I recall Nye
Bevan, in particular – were astounded that labour in America had not founded a
political party. Sure, there was a small attempt and a very minor party ran and
runs a presidential candidate, just as the farmers' union runs one and the
temperance party and the vegetarians, not to mention the single tax party and
the Communists. But American labour has always preferred, especially since the
great union organising movement of the Thirties, to use its power as an outside
bargainer between the two ancient political parties.

The big American labour leaders of the times, John L. Lewis for the miners,
William Green for the American Federation of Labor, the Reuther brothers for
the automobile workers, they stayed with the traditional conviction that to
elevate labour into a national political party would alienate working people
from the rest of the electorate by creating a party out of a single issue –
employment. They've always preferred to stay on the fringe of politics, like
some gorgeous and greatly-to-be-desired bride. They need us more than we need
them was the principle, let them come to us. Which, of course, they did.

So, you saw and will see in the coming two months of campaigning between Reagan
and Mondale each of them sweating and straining to try and prove that he can do
more for the working man and woman than the other.

Well, now, next week, the 15th to be exact, is the strike deadline for the
workers of the General Motors Corporation and the Ford Motor Company and, as I
talk, the chief union bargainer at Ford says, 'We are not in the same ballpark
at this point'. President Reagan still urges the need for wage restraint, but
today that's a dirty phrase. The Ford union man expresses the new attitude in a
nutshell, 'We shared in the misery. Now we want to share in the prosperity'.

And this time it's not just a share in the record profits by way of what they
call a fair and equitable pay rise and better pensions, but a guarantee of
stated restrictions on foreign production. That means tough import quotas and a
limit on foreign parts. The new element in these contracts is profit-sharing.
The unions response has been to call a strike at both companies.

There is, I suspect, a tough time ahead, not just in these negotiations, but a
tough time for organised labour. In many other industries, in steel, in machine
parts, in the schoolteachers' unions, in, of course, coal mining. There is,
apart from their own particular grievances, a general recognition that
organised labour is on the ropes. One economist has put it in a, at first
sight, puzzling and alarming way. He says, 'Union labour is on the run because
labour is losing its place in the economy.'

Now, how can that be? Well, one result of the recession is that the increase in
productivity is due more to overtime than to rehiring the people who lost their
jobs in the recession. There are still 175,000 automobile workers who have not
been recalled and the vast increase in employment in this country, the seven
million new jobs in 20 months that the administration understandably boasts
about, are mostly unskilled, low-paying jobs, probably a majority of the
skilled victims of the recession are now attendants in supermarkets or
fast-food chains or running small garages, if they're lucky. Forty per cent of
all of them have used up their savings.

So now it appears that the really significant – and could be ominous – thing
about the 1981-83 recession is that most of its victims were skilled workers.
They are the nucleus of the new unemployed and they are mostly union men. The
result has been that today there is proportionately less union labour in the
United States than there was in the early 1930s, before the big New Deal union
recruitment began. By the time of the Second World War, about 40 per cent of
all American labour was organised in unions. Today, it is 24 per cent. In other
and starker words, only one American in four belongs to a union.

Walter Mondale, calling on the workers' old allegiance to the Democratic party,
could win every union vote and all other things being equal, still lose the
majority of working-class votes.

Sooner or later, surely, there's bound to be a second, big movement towards
unionising, to restore the workers' stake in the economy? Probably, it won't
come this year, but if, next year, or the year after, the country slumps again
into recession, I doubt there'll be any more disposition on the workers' part,
obediently to share the misery. They will ask the government to do more than
its share.

And, at that point, the reaction against Reaganomics and the Republican party
could be as palpable as an earthquake.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP