Boycotts can backfire

I remember one evening, I could say long ago, but there would be no memory of
what happened if it had been any other time than 1947. It was the bitter, the
very contentious year before Israel became an independent state and the
Zionists were accusing the British foreign secretary of ruthless treatment of
the Jews in the process of trying to hold on to Palestine with the support of
the Arabs.

In New York City, in those days, the name, the reputation, of Ernest Bevin was
not to be defended by reminders of the fine work he'd done improving the lot of
dockers and transport workers or mobilising the manpower of Britain in the dark
days after Dunkirk.

I was going to dine with some friends, and in New York City that is more likely
than not to mean Jewish friends. I recall that we started the evening amiably
enough. It was not so much that politics was barred, it was one of those
evenings when politics didn't come up. 'What would you like to drink?' my host
asked. He was a fairly old friend, not old enough to know that nobody ever
needs to ask me what I'd like to drink. I, long ago, gave up cocktails and had
taken the pledge to imbibe nothing before dinner but the barley wine of old
Scotland. My host was sorry, he was courteous but firm, he was serving anything
but Scotch.

I don't know how long this ideological prohibition went on in his home and many
other Jewish homes in the United States. Not more than a year I should guess.
Many years later, when the Russians moved into Afghanistan, there were similar
idealists who would not serve Russian vodka and the same man went into effect
when the Russians shot down the Korean jet liner.

I once made a little list of all the things you ought to deny yourself if you
wanted to be consistent in boycotting products that came from totalitarian
countries. Sherry from Spain, while Franco was in power. I don't remember
anybody refusing you sherry. How about coffee from Brazil, frozen beef from
Argentina? Nutmeg from Grenada? Grenada, that is, in the West Indies, once it
set up a one-party state. If you meant to keep your ideology pure, you could go
on and on until you'd have to pin up a shopping list, a non-shopping list, in
the kitchen.

Of course, this form of acting on principle is a very old form of retaliation.
Think of the colonial committees signing up thousands and thousands of people
from Boston to the Carolinas to turn back from American ports all shipments of
tea. And one of the bravest campaigns of the American civil war was that of the
workers in the Lancashire cotton trade who condemned themselves to unemployment
for a year or two for refusing to unload shipments of Southern cotton that had
run the blockade. Now both these boycotts, of tea coming into America and
cotton going into Britain, worked in the sense of inflicting heavy losses on
the exporting country because its product could not be resold and smuggled in
by a third party.

Economic sanctions are, I suspect, as appealing today as they've ever been
because they offer the sop to the conscience of acting on your principles
without having to fight for them. Merely the latest form of them is penalising
the foreign firms that supplied parts for the Soviet pipeline and Mr Reagan's
embargo on grain to the Soviet Union – a bold action, cancelled with regret
when it was seen that the people penalised the most were the wheat and corn
(maize) growers of the American Midwest, while the Russians were getting most
of the wheat they needed from other sources.

Ever since that grain embargo, there has been a running, or trotting, battle in
the Reagan administration about the sense or the effectiveness of economic
sanctions, especially against the Soviet Union. Only a month ago, a group of
advisers within the administration, experts from various government agencies,
recommended to the president that 17 products which helped in exploring for oil
and petrol be put under export control by the defence department.

Ten days ago, the president and his men turned down the plan. They apparently
felt, after the orgy of abuse directed at Moscow over the Korean jetliner
incident, they felt that enough righteous indignation was enough for the time
being.

I imagine that somebody in the administration has been reading a book just out,
a collection of pieces by foreign trade experts and former government officials
called, 'Common sense in US-Soviet Trade'. Together, these pieces constitute a
pretty objective study of the pros and cons of economic sanctions. They
conclude that 'the trade sanctions the United States has imposed on Moscow have
been ineffective in their main purpose'.

They go further, obviously bearing in mind the hullabaloo that was caused by
the sudden cancelling of export licences for all sorts of technology that could
be used on the Soviet pipeline. Those licences, you'll recall, had been granted
to American firms, especially American firms with an operating base in Europe.
This book says that once a contract is signed, it should be honoured and not
subject to cancellation for reasons of American government policy.

I think this may be the strongest point the book has to make in contending that
when American government policy invades trade and traders without warning, what
suffers most is America's reputation as a reliable trading partner. The book
also points out that American trade with Russia is far less than the Russian
trade with West Germany, Japan, France, Italy and that the likelihood of all
these countries jumping to toe the line of every new policy that the United
States lays down is remote.

What is not stressed is something that has dogged and defeated not only
embargoes, but well-intentioned shipments of foreign aid. It is the devil of
trans-shipment. Obviously a sanction fails hopelessly when, as this book
demonstrates, Moscow can get embargoed goods elsewhere. What is worse is the
ability to receive, say, the very goods that are being embargoed from the
country that's doing the punishing by simply receiving them through a third
country whose trade with the United States is not in question.

Something that the United Nations discovered long ago is that foreign aid, sent
in all good faith, to a needy country can be re-shipped from the port of entry
by unscrupulous importers and corrupt politicians and sold at a profit to
another country that wants the stuff but is not in dire need of it. It was the
American once in charge of American aid to the needy peoples of the Third World
who pronounced the sad maxim, 'Trans-shipment is the curse and the doom of
foreign aid'.

Talking of our unflaggingly unhappy relations with the Soviet Union, it had
better be said that there's almost no hope in Washington for any agreement with
the Russians at the arms talks in Geneva. The Russians have evidently decided
that the day, which is at the beginning of December, that the United States
deploys its Pershing 2 intermediate missiles in Europe, the Russians will
recess the talks on such weapons and will also ask for, or call, a break in the
strategic arms reduction talks.

Senator John Glenn, one of the two leading Democratic candidates for the
presidency, has come out and urged the administration to delay one last time
the deployment of the Pershing missiles and see if that gesture will persuade
the Russians to come to some compromise agreement. If this proposal had come
from the White House, it would make thundering news, but Mr Glenn is not in the
White House, yet – if ever – and nothing could be easier for the administration
than to say he's making a straightforward electioneering ploy.

We – I, at any rate – am always looking down that interminable, dark tunnel
where the Americans and NATO and the Russians stagger and squabble and, like
many other people, am almost pathetically eager to glimpse a ray of light.
Well, this week there was one. Whether it will strike the men of Geneva and
Moscow and Brussels and Washington as a ray of light, I don't know. It's all
the more welcome and all the more poignant in that it is shed by two groups of
children, one from America, the other from Russia.

The Harvard Medical School lent three of its psychiatrists to a project
conceived by the now very large and impressive group known as International
Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War. They first interviewed a group of
American children between the ages of 11 and 14 about their knowledge of
nuclear weapons, their ideas of what a nuclear war would be like, their fears,
their hopes of its not happening in their lifetime.

I ought to say that the American children were statistically chosen, that's to
say they did not represent any common economic group or a prescribed high
standard of intelligence. They were, so far as the psychiatrists could
determine, a cross-section. The same, I think, can be said of the Soviet
children, so far as it's possible to isolate in a totalitarian society a true
cross-section. Obviously, it did not contain the children of defectors or
non-conformists.

Well, the answers were much the same from both groups but they were the same in
a heartening way if intelligence and freedom from patriotic sentiment can be
called heartening, which I think they can. To us, naturally, the replies of the
Russian children were the more fascinating because, I suppose, we should expect
them to spout, however sincerely, the party line.

They all knew about Hiroshima. One mentioned that radioactivity lasts so long
that there can never be much hope of underground survival. They all know it
would be terrible but they were quite specific about imagining a world in
which, as one put it, there would be no parents and no use for doctors or
teachers. Both sides made the point that our computer or your computer could
make a mistake and that would be it. And that a nuclear war cannot be won, that
there would be no hope after the first strike. Some of them said or hoped it
won't happen because America and Russia will come to terms. What message did
the Russians have for American children?

'We would like to wish them well in their struggle against nuclear war. We are
like them. We are the same race, we are the human race.' One little girl said,
very gravely, 'Our message to American children is, hello.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP