Unemployment looms in Hollywood

WORDS MISSING //said the cab driver, 'It's finally here.' And he put his thumb
and index finger together like a man about to take a pinch of snuff and gave a
gentle tug to his T-shirt which had great blots of sweat on it. The summer heat
was what he was talking about.

We had a rather freakish heatwave in the middle of May, with a couple of days
in the 90s but we were soon back to gorgeous weather and roving thunderstorms
and even dry, sunny days as clear as the fall, but this week, bang! The dank
south-east wind set in from the Caribbean and the sun glowered at us from dawn
to dark and we walked around in the furnace which is New York and about a
hundred other American cities in midsummer.

As we trundled down Fifth Avenue and the traffic began to clog at the southern
end of Central Park, the driver grew restless. He kept popping his head out and
said, 'And the mayor calls this good for New York! Ties up the whole city
making movies and calls it good for business. Well, I'll tell you somethin'
chum, it's not good for my business.' I paid him off and walked down to the
corner of Fifth Avenue at 59th Street and the fountain and the statue of
General Sherman that stand opposite the Plaza Hotel. The traffic seemed to be
clogged for good.

Parked, partly on the side walk, was a big private bus and nearby, big trailers
with cables leading to blinding lights. The last thing New York needed, at that
point, was an arc light to make things brighter and hotter. In an oasis of
space, ringed off by the police, a crew was milling around. They were busy
taking close-ups of the stars. All it takes these days to film one close-up is
40 actors and a crew of, literally, 80. Somehow the director managed to get the
traffic moving, except for one bus which had been commandeered as an actor too.
The scene, the big scene, called for Liza Minnelli to board the bus, say a line
to Dudley Moore who then says, 'I'm not married' and she hesitates on the bus
step, changes her mind and steps down. That's all.

It was about 120 degrees in the sun, not counting the reflector lights and they
did this over and over. In the end, I'm told they did nine takes. Off on the
side, sitting and looking on as imperiously as a Roman emperor waiting for the
games to start, was a lean man with a portly face and a snap-brim hat and a
cigarette dangling from his mouth. Speaking with only a tinge of complaint, the
lean man said, 'I don't think they'd allow it in Piccadilly.'

He said 'Piccadilly' with a ripe intonation that defies imitation, except
perhaps by John Gielgud, which is understandable since that is who the lean man
was. 'They make films in the streets in London,' Sir John went on, 'but only
very early in the morning.' He looked coolly or hotly at the swirling crew and
the suffocating traffic and sighed, 'Very, very early'.

Well, behind the police cordon there was a crowd of people craning their necks
and mopping their necks, for even in the summer furnace of New York, there are
people reared from the cradle to believe that nothing in life, next to a big
fire, is as magnetising as seeing a movie being made, even when they discover
that filming outdoors is the most tedious form of labour imaginable.

'Acting', a famous actor once said to me, 'is the icing on the cake. It's a
bonus. What you have to learn to put up with is the ghastly sitting around.'
And nobody believes this until he gets involved with it. I could give you a
hundred dreadful examples, but one will suffice.

Some years ago, when we were filming for television a history of America, we'd
come to the episode that took in the American Civil War. The director and I had
carefully weighed the claims of several famous battles to be THE representative
Civil War encounter and, of course, even if there's no such thing, it's
essential to, in television, to find a scene, an incident, that's visually
striking and close enough to some general truth about the war.

We chose a peach orchard in southern Tennessee at Shiloh because the battle was
fought there and we were there at the same time of year, so it was possible to
see the blossom and feel the hurt of the contrast between the gentle face of
nature and the brutality of the battle. We were all set to go when the sound
man signalled a cut, pressed the earphones against his face and said, 'There's
a rumble coming from somewhere.' We tried again. Still, the rumble. Then
somebody spotted it. Far off to the south, maybe a couple of miles and turning
a bend in the river was a huge coal barge. We waited. It took 50 minutes to
disappear and get lost on the soundtrack. Ready? Again, please!

Now there was a strange sighing sound in the earphones. A wind had come up, a
mere zephyr but on the soundtrack it was like the Empire State building
collapsing. We watched the fluttering leaves and the branches bending slightly
– two hours gone. 'Do you think', said the director, 'you can sum up the war in
two minutes instead of four?' I rattle the brains awhile and say, 'Sure!'

Now a bus arrives with some schoolchildren taking in a battlefield tour. Give
them another hour! By now, the sun was going over and the light was turning
orange which comes out red on the film. At last, after four hours in all, we
had something like silence. I lean against the tree. 'Action!' says the patient
director. I start to talk. Suddenly, there's an eruption of sound, an
electronic chatter like a small pneumatic drill. It was a woodpecker, about
eight feet above my head. That was it. It was beyond reach and it was very
busy. We gave up. We wouldn't be back in Shiloh. In the end, I said a sentence
or two summing up, you understand, the whole Civil War, voiceover to two still
pictures. We did it in a BBC studio in London.

Now this was not... not a bit of bad luck. It was no accident. It is incident
to an actor's trade and I thought that Sir John Gielgud and Miss Minnelli and
Mr Moore deserved everything they earned for their endless sitting around in
blistering heat in the roar of the traffic for a scene that took several hours
to shoot and, if successful, would wind up as about eight seconds' worth of
entertainment on the screen.

The cost of this infernal bit of work, somebody figured, would be about
$20,000. Thirty, forty years ago, the average movie worked to a budget of well
under a million dollars. A million-dollar movie was big stuff. Today, the
average movie costs $12 million – $6 million to make and another six to
advertise, promote and market. That's the figure they budget but time costs
money and labour and petrol, electricity. They're all soaring beyond the budget
estimates.

So that, for instance, Paramount must be delighted with the success of a
so-called low-budget horror film they bought for only one and a half million
dollars. They set aside another four million – a mere four million – to film it
and market it which, as you'll see, is a rock-bottom bargain these days. They
let it out as what we used to call a B-film, no blockbuster and they kept
pretty close to the budget. Say, in all, they spent $6, 7 million. So far the
movie has been in circulation for no more than a month, so far the movie has
grossed 33 millions, but, in the past six weeks, Hollywood has released 20
movies. 'Friday the 13th' is one of two that have more than paid their way.
Eighteen will be lucky to recover their costs. In short, the word from
Hollywood is that the recession has moved in.

Like any other business, any other industry, Hollywood budgets for the next
year on the earnings, the trend, of the last year. Well, 1978 and '79 were what
they call 'glorious box office years', so Hollywood, having hit pay dirt
decided to mine deeper and wider. They will have 80 films out this year and
they're in deep gloom about the number of likely hits. The box office receipts
around the country have slumped by 15 per cent already.

Most people put it down, as I say, to the recession but there are other voices,
producers, critics who blame the product itself. The president of a famous film
corporation says, 'The truth is we're just not making the pictures audiences
want to see.' It used to be that the top stars could rescue indifferent movies.
This also seems to be an obsolete bit of wisdom.

A number one box office star in the United States not merely of last year, but
of the last decade is Clint Eastwood. He's appeared lately as the manager or
owner of a wild west show in a movie called 'Bronco Billy'. It was described
the other day by the New York Times not in a movie review, but in a financial
dispatch from Los Angeles, as a 'devastating failure' and the same is more or
less true of the number two star, Burt Reynolds, number four, Robert Redford
and the latest picture of the newest star, John Travolta.

Well, after the studio managers and the critics have had their say, one or two
executives have come along with a more plausible explanation – it's what the
recession is doing to people's movie-going habits. They shop around, they hold
back. They go to one movie instead of two. They don't anticipate that they're
going to be entertained come what may, they listen to word of mouth. With the
result that maybe out of the 80 movies released this year, maybe eight will be
hits, a dozen will pay their way. Sixty will go down the drain and, with them,
producing companies will fold, studios will begin to see gobs of red ink.

The word Hollywood fears come the autumn is the word that has depressed the
steel industry, the auto-mobile industry, the building industry, the word
'unemployment'. A year ago, six months ago, the big spectre that haunted most
Americans, according to all the polls was inflation. Inflation has been
checked. Now the bogeyman is unemployment. It's the one theme that Senator
Kennedy hammers away at in the 'do or die' days of his angry campaign.

Meanwhile, President Carter, stung to the quick by the 80 Americans in a
hundred who think he's a poor hand at foreign policy, has been getting himself
filmed embracing the Pope, buddying up to Chancellor Schmidt, dancing with
Yugoslav peasants, but opinions about foreign policy are a luxury of
comfortable people. Now that he's back, he's going to face the toughest ordeal
of his re-election campaign. He is going to have to embrace the unemployed.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP