Tougher drug laws

One of the sparkling sights at this time of year around the equinox – it can
vary by a day or two – is to see the boats go out from the marinas and inlets
into the blue expanse of Peconic Bay, which divides the forks at the end of
Long Island.

The boats are owned by the so-called baymen and what they go out now to garner
is the first harvest of a delicacy about which a friend of ours, a visiting
Frenchwoman, once said, 'If they were as fine as this in France, tourists would
come from all over the country'. The delicacy is the tiny Peconic Bay scallop,
in its maturity no more than an inch in diameter, and on the first day of the
season, the baymen usually bring in hundreds of thousands of this tender,
delectable, bi-valve mollusc, which is not matched anywhere.

The Peconic harvest provides more than 30 per cent of the bay scallops served
in restaurants around the country. At any time of the year you can see bay
scallops printed on menus everywhere but the fresh Peconic variety is not
available before the third week in September. What you get at any other time is
either frozen scallops or calicoes from the Carolinas. Most often the title
'bay scallops' is a cover-up for the large sea scallops cut up into small
chunks.

Well, this past weekend, it was a sad sight on the shores of the bay. The 400
baymen whose livelihood depends on this late and abundant harvest stayed home.
No boats went out for the simple, blunt reason that there are no scallops. This
is the third autumn of our discontent. In the later summer of 1985, we'd look
out from any cliff or bluff and see something new and puzzling.

Instead of the blue waters lapping in, we looked down on what we came to call
the brown tide. It was the first invasion in human memory of what the marine
biologists call a 'bloom' of algae, so microscopic and so dense that we assumed
we were the late victims of some pollutant, of spreading industrial waste which
has deprived us, for instance, of our finest eating fish, the noble striped
bass. They spawn in the Hudson River in what are now polluted stretches, but
even when they swim out along the ocean line and into the bays along a hundred
miles of Long Island, their catch has been prohibited.

But this is not the case of the bay scallop. Nobody knows where the brown tide
came from. One marine scientist has a theory but is ready to admit it's only a
hunch. He thinks it's meteorological in origin and follows on a succession of
dry winters and dry springs, but we've had, we had in the mid-Seventies, three
or four such dry seasons, we also had a million scallops later on. There's no
mystery, however, about what the algae do. They choke out the normal
phytoplankton, the microscopic plant life on which the scallops feed so,
simply, they starve to death.

In the fall of 1985, the scallop harvest was pitifully small; last year there
was none. Same this year. The expert theory, not a very cheerful one, is that
in some mysterious but dependable way, the scallops would learn to overcome the
algae and would recover on their own, but not much before the end of the
century. So, at the understandable pleading of the 400 baymen who together will
lose the $2 million they earn at the dock, New York State has done something
about it – an experiment conducted with skill and crossed fingers.

Last Monday in the late afternoon, a single-engine plane flew into Montauk, the
last, the most eastern, settlement on Long Island. It had come from the state
of Maine. It carried 800,000 minute bay scallops taken from a nursery on a
river in Maine at eleven in the morning. They were packed in foam coolers and
the pilot was nervous about their expectation of life, for they can live
outside salt water for no more than eight hours. He landed at Montauk just
after 4.30. That left two and a half hours to get them into pens in a salt lake
on Montauk Point. It took two hours to unpack and separate and open up the
scallops.

In the last half-hour, the divers started plunging into the lake and by seven
o'clock, just when the sun was sinking, as it does at this latitude as fast as
the divers, and to everybody's relief, the minuscule molluscs were feeding away
in their new home. It's a reseeding project and the hope is that if it works
and if the brown tide that killed the native scallops doesn't come back next
summer, there could be a sizeable crop of these mature immigrants by the fall
of 1988.

I appreciate that the sudden impoverishment of 400 men and their families is
not a matter of great pain to 99.9 per cent or more of my listeners, but it was
happening to us and, as we all come to know, 400,000 people killed in an
earthquake in China is a horrid but bearable statistic, whereas a child you saw
killed by a motorcar is a memory that stays with you for life.

There's one form of pollution that is drastically affecting this whole nation
and if it's true, as somebody said, that in America we see our future, good and
bad, then this blight will soon overtake the other countries of the Western
world. In fact, there's lots of evidence that in Germany, in Scandinavia, in
Holland, in Britain, it is already well under way. I mean the drug blight which
60 years ago was a small, sinister symptom of the decadent 1920s, restricted to
Hollywood and among the arty society bohemians of London. Dorothy Sayers wrote
one of her novels, an untypically tart one, about them, 'Murder Must
Advertise'.

But now, we're talking about a country, this one, in which one high school
pupil in five has tried cocaine, in which one in 20 or 30 is likely to become
an addict. A treatment programme in Florida which has over 600 teenagers under
treatment found that most of them had started a drug habit by the age of 12
and, as against seven per cent of a similar group that had used cocaine in
1984, today 63 per cent, two in three of them, used drugs of one sort or
another before their parents suspected it and most, 70 per cent, were
introduced to drugs not on the street or by pushers, but by friends.

I talked at length a few weeks ago about cocaine which has become the drug of
choice of the middle-class teenager, not to mention, of course, prosperous
yuppies, rock performers and showbiz parasites and an alarming minority of star
footballers and baseball players. I come back to the odious topic again because
President Reagan decided to propose a national battle against drugs.

Of course, the White House, through the Department of Justice, has for long had
a programme of trying to stop the importation of drugs into the United States
from South and Central America – an effort which, in view of the size of the
country, its enormous wriggling borders, the impossibility of patrolling the
2500-mile southern border of the United States with anything like enough
radar-equipped helicopters, the ruthless ability of South American growers and
organised crime to mount fleets of small boats and larger fleets of private
airplanes on secret night flights – in view of this tidal wave of drug entry
into the country, the official programme has been, so far, about as effective
as mopping up the ocean with a pocket handkerchief.

What the president has now done, in a deliberately dramatic appearance with Mrs
Reagan on national television, is to announce what he called 'a national
crusade against drug abuse'. It went far beyond the long battle with foreign
importers, suppliers and pushers. For the first time, it turned to the users.
It was a powerful sermon against drug abuse and a warning especially to the
young, though as such people who've spent half a lifetime with addicts doubted
that the young, who are temperamentally curious and likely to try out drugs,
will be stopped by sermons however eloquent or well-intentioned.

The presidential programme, which must go before the Congress, would stiffen
the laws against drug-related crimes, give more money for research and
treatment centres and, in its most controversial proposal, require about a
million government workers in sensitive jobs to take regular drug tests. That
means routine urine analysis. This suggestion at once provoked an outcry in
Congress and from civil libertarians and one from one government union that has
already filed a suit. They all protested that compulsory testing would violate
a citizen's constitutional rights by invading his/her privacy.

The House of Representatives, which is controlled by the Democrats, no sooner
heard about the president's forthcoming address than it rushed, three days
before it was given, to prove quite suddenly that it was more alert than
anybody to the nationwide drug abuse. The House passed, helter-skelter, it's
own anti-drug programme. It was more specific than the president and tougher on
two counts, both of which had other congressmen and civil libertarians
protesting against an unconstitutional use of the military and a federal return
to the death penalty.

The House bill proposes the death penalty for pushers of drugs, especially to
children and it sanctions the use of the military instead of only the local
police and the FBI to stop illegal drugs coming into the country.

I'm afraid that both the House bill and the president's crusade represent less
of a considered cure than a rush to righteousness. The whole House comes up for
re-election in November and a congressman voting against a drug abuse bill
today would be about as popular as a congressman who voted against Mother and
Santa Claus. Maybe when the election is over, both Houses will sit down and
look at all the facts and ponder and write a thoughtful, effective programme.

At the moment, the government's anti-drug programme and the House's response to
it have been launched in the headlong, vote-catching atmosphere that
characterised the passage of the 18th Amendment which prohibited the
manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors and which plunged
the country into a 14-year orgy of self-righteousness, hypocrisy and prosperous
crime.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP