Kennedy's brief triumph

'Go west, young man!' said a famous New York editor a century ago and for at
least several decades after he said it, it had a special invigorating meaning
to Americans in the east. It was an invitation to pull up stakes, to tackle an
untamed landscape, to start society all over again.

In the editorial in which the famous slogan was coined, Mr Greeley also foresaw
the appeal to people weary of city life, the appeal of putting aside the main
political wrangles of America and problems that were rooted in the populous and
wealthy east. Most of the money for political campaigns came then from
easterners and southerners and the eastern banks and putting aside, also, the
nagging problems of what Americans then confidently called 'sick old Europe'.

It was recognised then that if this was a personal abdication of citizenship in
the sense of abandoning national issues and politics, you were also taking on
the obligations of what was much touted at the time, what was called 'the
national destiny'. It was assumed – and rightly – that the future of national
growth, of new empires, of crops, of fortunes and, ultimately, of political
power, would rest in the opening up and domesticating of the west.

Well, it must be obvious that it all happened and that to leave the east today
is in no way to lose touch with the problems either of the metropolitan east or
of Europe or the Middle East or wherever. Probably the only Americans who
suffer from the delusion that they are at the centre of things are New Yorkers,
in some way the most parochial of Americans. I find that even among my
cherished friends in New York, there's always at the back of their minds the
comfortable assumption – it's really a transplanted European assumption – that
the cities outside the capital city are provincial cities which, to the extent
that they are distant from the big metropolis, are correspondingly gauche or
ignorant or uninformed.

But America has always been like, say, Eastern Europe or Africa, a continent of
regional capitals. Forty miles outside New York City you can snooze away, a
rural uninvolved, like in a village as remote as a small town in Kansas. In
Chicago or Los Angeles or Atlanta, you can no more escape the main problems of
America than you can if you live in a street hard by Pennsylvania Avenue in
Washington DC.

The main point is that today all the sources of news and debate, the news
agencies, most of all the services of the four national television networks,
are equally available to a reader and viewer in Crescent City, California as to
an inhabitant of New York City. The columnists and commentators who have any
talent are printed in Wichita, Kansas as well as in New Orleans. More of them,
in fact, are available in Los Angeles or San Francisco than in New York City
because Los Angeles and San Francisco have more newspapers under separate
ownership than New York.

I always find that if I want to have at my elbow the widest range of national
and international news and comment, it's much easier for me in San Francisco
than it is in New York because of the coincidence of the time zones and the jet
airplane. When I wake up in New York, the New York Times is on my doormat. If
I'm particularly eager or conscientious, I can wait a few hours and go downtown
and pick up a London Times but in San Francisco, when I wake up, the San
Francisco Chronicle is outside my hotel door and so, if I want them, are that
morning's New York Times and Los Angeles Times and London Times.

Consequently, when I come out here to San Francisco – and you'll notice the
persistence of the old snobbish idiom 'out here' which means 'out from centre'
– I often find myself spoiled for choice of a topic to talk about. I'd read a
good deal in the past day or two about the transformation of popular art on the
streets of Peking and Shanghai, the vanishing panoramas of noble soldiers and
happy peasants labouring together for the perpetuity of paradise under the good
god Mao and their replacement with positively sexy murals of naked girls
drawing water and thrashing rice – still doing useful labour, you'll notice,
but in a strangely elegant and provocative way. I decided this was unworthy of
my serious listeners who, I'm told, carry around with them the thoughts of
Chairman Carter or Chairperson Thatcher.

Then I got caught up in an interesting institution I'd heard little about – a
department at Stamford University down the peninsula from here, a department of
earthquake engineering. They have not been sitting idly by since the big horror
of 1906. There are teams of scientists working away to establish methods of
predicting the timing of earthquakes big and small, but what was new about the
latest reports from this engineering department was the work being done to
revolutionise the techniques of building, literally of designing structures
capable of withstanding an earthquake of seven on the Richter scale.

The latest technique to emerge is one of cushioning the foundations of a
building with concertina-like shock pads to isolate the building from the
movement of the earth. It seems that this technique is well along, though the
numbers of buildings that already have these pads are few and far between. Talk
about this invention is, if I may coin a word, 'relevant' out here just now
because the seismologists who are bound in California have been saying that a
really big earthquake on the 1906 scale is long overdue.

However the California papers last Wednesday morning were just as overwhelmed
as the papers of New York or Minneapolis or Chicago with the shock of a totally
unpredicted landslide – the landslide win of Senator Edward Kennedy in the New
York Democratic primary. The only shock pads the rest of the country heard
about are the rhetorical shock pads being installed under the White House to
cushion Mr Carter from the Kennedy rumble.

It is something quite new to hear the White House press spokesman going over on
the defensive and explaining away a defeat. Mr Robert Strauss, the very alert
and able Carter campaign manager, is not a man to twist in the wind. He blandly
announced that the Kennedy landslide was only 'a dip in the road along the way
to Mr Carter's renomination'.

Jody Powell, the youngest and usually the most confident of the president's
spokesmen, reacted rather than responded by saying that, 'No, Mr Carter would
not begin campaigning actively just now' implying that he might later on and
would need to, though all along it has been the Carter strategy to remain in
the White House as the conspicuous national leader, the captain on the bridge
who dare not desert the ship of state in order to get into piddling dogfights
with underlings about who was going to be the next captain.

'Anyway,' said Mr Powell, 'in order to tie up the Democratic nomination,
Senator Kennedy would have to win 63 per cent of the delegates in the remaining
25 – 26 is it? – primaries.' Certainly there is a long road, however dipping,
ahead to the midsummer convention in New York and it's a fact that so far Mr
Carter has 746 delegates pledged to vote for him on the first ballot at least,
while Senator Kennedy has only 385. Mr Carter is almost at the half way mark to
the 1,666 required.

But there is nothing hidebound, or pledge-bound, about these figures. It's a
mistake to assume that one or the other of them, or for that matter Governor
Reagan or Mr Bush, will have the delegate strength necessary for nomination by
the time the conventions meet. If that were so there would be no need of the
conventions. The rules and obligations of the elected delegates vary widely and
in all sorts of tricky ways. Only one or two states vote for delegates who are
pledged to stay with their man through thick and thin or until he releases them
to go for another hopeful, though in the end, that's what always happens.

When it becomes clear on the actual convention floor that your own man's cause
is hopeless, the hopeless one always goes to the rostrum and makes the supreme
sacrifice, tossing his delegates to the obvious winner. And the other hopeless
ones do the same, for it's considered essential that they line up behind a
single man, however repulsive he may have been to his rivals or to a majority
of the delegates before the convention was called to order.

'Why?' everybody from coast to coast is asking, 'Why did Kennedy win in New
York and why by the astounding margin of 59 per cent of the vote to Carter's 41
per cent?' I'm sure there is, there were, separate forces working to build up
Kennedy, other forces working to corrode Carter. There seems to be no doubt
among all the analysts, the psephologists, that Kennedy's strength came from
the Jews who are still mad over the now notorious switch of the American vote
in the United Nations condemning Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank.

We might notice, by the way, that apart from the technical bungle, this issue
cannot even now be debated on its merits as a possibly valid act of American
policy.

Kennedy's second big block of votes came from blacks embittered by the
president's failure to fulfil his gaudy promises about repairing the New York
slums,. But, independent of these arguments, President Carter lost former
Carter supporters who are aghast at the soaring rate of inflation and others
who are disillusioned with his handling of foreign affairs, who are sad and
sorry and bewildered by the lack of any rousing American response to the
capture of the hostages and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.

At the moment, all one can say is that Senator Kennedy had better enjoy his
triumph while he may. Ohio and Wisconsin, more still, Texas and California,
have an enormous number of delegates and nothing like the weight of New York
Jewish and black vote and – an interesting point made by the latest Harris poll
– more than a third of the disillusioned Carterites who would have voted for
Kennedy on the Israeli and the inflation issues stayed at home, baulked at a
word which Kennedy's own campaign managers concede has grown as a menace since
his campaign started. The word is 'Chappaquiddick'.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP