Mount St Helens erupts

A French philosopher of the eighteenth century astonished the prevailing
thought of his day by saying that nationality was not the thing that divided
people so much as climate and the sort of work they could do in it. This
doesn't sound very revolutionary to us until we move on to his conclusion –
that the laws should be framed not for the whole nation but, especially in
large countries, for the latitude that people live at and the physical
conditions it imposes on them.

Well, if he'd been living today, Montesquieu would have taken sombre
satisfaction from two events that have happened in two places five thousand
miles apart, neither of which could possibly have happened in the other.

The United States, three thousand miles wide, lies between the parallels of 20
and 52 degrees north and if you draw a line across the continental mainland
from the extreme south-east point to the extreme north-west, you would be
linking Key West, Florida with the Cascade Mountains in the state of
Washington. At these extremes, this week, we have watched a natural drama and a
predictable tragedy.

At just after half-past eight in the morning of Sunday, May 18, Mount St
Helens, in the Cascade Mountains, which had been growling and spewing earlier
this spring, exploded with a mile-high column of steam and pumice; no lava, but
vast eruptions of volcanic ash. The first explosion sounded like a clap of
thunder a hundred miles away and, since the prevailing wind is westerly, within
hours this atmosphere of ash was drifting eastward and depositing itself on the
towns and the crops in its path to the depth of seven inches. By the third day,
the volcanic ash was darkening the skies and blanketing the ground downwind
five hundred miles away. Ten people had died, over a hundred were missing from
the slopes and valleys close by and 50,000 people were being warned by the
United States Geological Survey to expect a monster flood if the outlet to a
large lake on the north flank of the mountain got plugged up by rocks and ash
and trees.

Meanwhile, the great, grey cloud drifted at forty miles an hour in a widening
swathe that reached from Maine in the north-east to Georgia in the deep south.
It was flying high above the usual low pressure systems and New York, having a
day of heavy rain for a change after hot, muggy weather, never saw it as it
passed on into the Atlantic. Although the scientists are not quite sure, they
doubt that the falling ash will confront us with any hazards to health but the
damage to crops and trees over about a quarter of the country is already cruel
enough to help the nosedive of the recession.

Meanwhile, the lord and master of us all, one Jimmy Carter, sits in his white
mansion in Washington DC, three thousand miles from Mount St Helens in the
state of Washington, interpreting the laws of the nation to apply to wildly
different catastrophes in places as far apart in climate and ways of life as
Norway and Cuba. There is luckily one initiative, not a law, which the
president has at his disposal that does not require the consent of Congress. It
is his right to proclaim any part of the country a disaster area and so qualify
it to receive federal aid. Last winter he did this, most notably for two other
places at similar extremes.

Los Angeles county had a week of incessant rain and houses slid down the
crumbly soil of the coast range. On the other coast, the state of Vermont,
whose main source of income in winter is from skiing and skiers, had the
mildest winter in forty years and lost over $20 million. It, too, was
proclaimed a disaster area from having had too little precipitation as southern
California from having had too much.

But, on the Saturday night before Mount St Helens blew up, there was a human
explosion at the south-east extreme of the country that must have made the
president feel relieved that a volcano, while very terrible, is not even a
political headache.

Miami, Florida – which to all the world is a sun-drenched haven of bathing
beauties, pastels, skyscraper hotels, golf, shuffleboard and stuffed alligator
souvenirs – Miami blew up in the worst race riot since the late 1960s. The
spark that ignited the charge was the verdict of an all-white jury in Tampa on
the west coast of Florida setting free four Miami police officers charged with
beating a black insurance man to death the week before Christmas. But I think
only in annual almanacs of events will this verdict be put down as the prime
cause; it was only the culmination of what Miami's large population of blacks
regards as an intolerable series of frustrations and injustices.

Random reports of police brutality as fact or hearsay seem to have started it.
Then a municipal official, the number one Miami black, was convicted on charges
of corruption. Such indignities might have gone on galling the blacks for
months but there is one that grew and grew visibly and physically overwhelmed
them to the point that all they could do was scream and burn and loot and set
off guns. And that was the sudden armada of refugee Cubans, variously known as
'the Hispanic invasion' or the 'freedom flotilla' who in one month have
deposited nearly 70,000 humans on the shores of Key West and how that became an
eruption is still something we can only guess at.

It was preceded, you may remember, by the bizarre news a couple of months ago
that thousands of Cubans had stampeded the Peruvian consulate for exit visas.
There was, too, a May Day rally in Havana to urge the arming of a people's
militia in defiance of Castro's regular army, which is routinely trained by the
Russians and pundits have speculated that the Cuban people, in spite of three
billion dollars of annual aid from the Soviet Union, are tired of queues and
shortages.

Whatever the train of grievances may be, the fact is that one day, a little
more than a month ago, we woke up and read that Castro would allow 100,000
exiles, from Florida mostly, to return to Cuba for family visits. From his
point of view, like the Hong Kong visitors to mainland China, they brought
useful hard currency but from his people's point of view, they were like early
Irish immigrants on family visits back from America. They brought visible
evidence of smart clothes and new shoes, and an air of carefree prosperity.
This could well have been the charge that set off the headlong exodus to
Florida.

When the first boats came in, listing into Key West with their loads of
hysterical Cubans, President Carter gave them a traditional greeting. We
welcome them, he said, with open heart and open arms. They were yet one more
regiment of the legions of the persecuted and the poor who had responded with
trusting innocence to the rolling verse inscribed on the Statue of Liberty:
'Give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free'.

This is, by now, almost a sacred tablet of American folk law, in spite of the
long and well-documented record of millions who've found here no golden door or
gold-paved streets, but sweat shops, slummy tenements and a grinding life.
There were, however, enough millions of the most humble and degraded of other
lands who, as we used to say, 'made out', who moved up beyond their gaudiest
dreams to become prosperous in one way or another, to be elevated from the
peasantry or the ghettoes into the professional world of doctors, engineers,
lawyers, merchants, even judges. Enough to keep alight the strong belief that
America was the only place on earth where a man and woman might begin a new and
better life.

It used to take a decade or more for many of the old immigrants to go from
naiveté to cynicism to wince at the bitter truth of an American who wrote, 'The
Tsar beat them into submission with the secret police'. We took it out in
14-hour working days and tuberculosis.

Well, it appears that the cycle of disillusion for the Cubans has been
drastically contracted. By the time 10,000 had arrived, and then 20 and then 40
and on and on, the government went into a flap and the new immigrants were
being herded into schoolrooms and huge, makeshift camps and all the desperate,
brave efforts of the Miami doctors and the city manager and the governor of
Florida, could not begin to cope with the problems of feeding, sanitation and
the care of the very sick. It was a shock to us to learn that there were, among
them, people terminally ill.

Castro had given the fleeing Cubans a sneering farewell: 'Good riddance,' he
said, 'to the trash and the criminals and the perverts' and Castro, it came
out, had a literal point. He had opened up some prisons and the Carter
administration discovered that among the poor, yearning to breathe free, were
people seeking freedom from murder charges and from mental hospitals. Now the
great mass, no question, are family folk who believe in the glorious prospect
of a free life and a job and a house of their own but by only the most generous
definition can they all be called 'political refugees'. Yet, that is or was,
the administration's definition invoked in their favour as against the
so-called 'economic exiles' of Haiti.

The administration has now re-defined the Cubans as 'exiles' so that they may
escape the quota limits of the new refugee act which Congress passed only six
weeks before the Cuban deluge. It is the deluge that finally outraged the
blacks of Miami who see themselves swamped by newcomers to swell a Cuban
population which has moved in on the blacks' jobs and which is already more
than a third of the population of the city. The Miami blacks have rebelled
exactly as the Harlem blacks did in the Sixties when waves of Puerto Rican
immigrants began to outnumber the natives.

Last week, a young Cuban braced himself in a lobster boat against the slapping
waves. He vomited twice. Coming up ashen but unbowed, he said to an American
reporter, 'I am going to a great country where they give opportunity to all
immigrants to find work to make a living and to walk the road they want.'

A brave sentiment that has provoked in the government a noble response. A
response that, unfortunately, has led to chaos.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP