Thatcher plans second term

Mrs Thatcher's announcement that Parliament would be dissolved this Friday,
that a General Election would be held barely a month later and that the new
House would assemble on 15 June has revived again the sneaking envy of
Americans not of a parliamentary system as such, but of an electoral system in
which the antagonists, the party leaders, are known many months, often years,
ahead, in which the election campaign lasts no longer than a month. Not least,
a system which installs the new leader whenever there is a new leader in
Downing Street, literally, overnight.

In May 1979, I was in London watching the last General Election returns coming
in with a couple of American friends. They were not Anglophiles, so they did
not make the automatic assumption that they order these things better in
Britain. They had, in fact, never before seen a British election in action.
They were bored by the slowness of the counting and, seeing a television shot
or two of it going on, wondered if the counters didn't get arthritic fingers
and tired lips. For a very short while, they were able to enjoy a little
chauvinism when they made the odious comparison with a system in which
electronic machines accumulate the totals with every pull of a voter's lever,
but their surprise and admiration were unbounded when they woke up next morning
to catch Mrs Thatcher twinkling out of Number Ten with all the confidence of
the oldest inhabitant.

'I suppose,' said a bland San Franciscan, 'she's been to have a meeting with
the outgoing Prime Minister.' 'Not at all, ' I said, 'the outgoing Prime
Minister has already out gone with all his worldly possessions and Mrs
Thatcher's vans delivered all her possessions in the dead of night. In fact,
she lives there.'

It used to be, before America woke up to the fact in the pit of the Great
Depression that the world couldn't wait four months to learn what the new
government was up to, it used to be that an American president was elected in
November and inaugurated the following March. This was changed by a
constitutional amendment, moving the inauguration of the new man forward to 20
January. Even so, it takes over ten weeks for the old man to get out and the
new man to get in. What can the outpatients and the inpatients be doing all
that time?

Well, this leisurely interval provides, I think, a beautiful example of
Parkinson's Law, that work will always last as long as the time available for
it. The outgoing administration, in all its departments, announces that it's
available to the incoming administration to help it to learn the ropes. The new
administration sets up what is called 'a transition team' so that this man and
a small temporary staff go off to the Department of Agriculture to learn about
the machinery already under way for, say, subsidising wheat farmers for not
growing wheat. The old boys at the Treasury help the new boys at the Treasury
learn about outstanding commitments to debtors or creditors, near and far.

The Secretary of State and his innumerable assistants on the different desks –
the Middle Eastern desk, the Far Eastern desk, the West European desk and so on
– confer with appointees of the incoming president about the whole range of
foreign policy, whether or not any range of foreign policy has been discernible
in the old administration.

The people I've talked to who've been on these transition teams have assured me
that ten weeks is little enough time in which to get the feel of the ropes. The
reason for this is a fundamental difference between the two systems. In a
parliamentary system, the transition team has been sitting in the House
throughout the whole life of the government. It is in fact that nucleus of the
opposition known as the Shadow Cabinet. There is no such thing in Washington as
a Shadow Cabinet. How could there be when, for, at the very least, three years
and six months, nobody has the faintest idea who the next prime minister, I
mean, the next president, is to be?

Also, the new Cabinet, the new administration, is almost entirely recruited
from outside the Congress, not from the people who've been doing all the
legislation. It's recruited from a motley assortment of the next president's
friends and associates, state politicians who've never worked in Washington,
businessmen, academics, old college buddies, industrialists, labour colleagues,
economists, heavy contributors to his campaign. Most of them, we discover, are
not only new names to us, they're new names to Washington and to the conduct of
the federal government.

Also, the government bureaucracy that is permanent is very much smaller than it
is in a parliamentary country. The new Secretary of State, for instance, cannot
call on a permanent Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs who has served many
masters from both parties and who is already grizzled and toughened by long
familiarity with the Polish question, the Persian Gulf question, the Mexican
debt question or whatever.

In fact it's always a shock to visiting Europeans to politicians and reporters,
especially, to discover that even the boys who carry messages between the
Senate and the senators' offices, the humble Senate pages, are all changed. The
patronage of the new administration, as of the new Senate and the House,
extends to hiring a whole new set of janitors to firing the old White House
barber and hiring the new.

Well, this is amusing and stimulating to look on from the outside but it's no
joke to America's allies who find, as one of them put it, 'We have to get to
know a whole, new cast of minor characters, often inexperienced, every time the
star performers change'.

There've been, for many years, suggestions ranging from the passionate to the
half-hearted about how to reform these procedures. One that interested
foreigners always come up with is a single, six-year term for the president,
the argument being that this would make it absolutely clear at the start how
long you could expect any government policy to last, that agreements and joint
allied policies would not be hamstrung by the long period running anywhere from
six months to two years during which friend and foe alike wonder and guess
whether the incumbent is going to go for a second term.

We're all, as you must surely know, in that period now and there's a body of
informed opinion in Washington already resigned to the belief that the Russians
will not attempt any serious arms negotiations until they know whether or not
in 1985 they're going to have to deal with a new man. By contrast, all the
doubts about Mrs Thatcher's intentions were canvassed and settled within about
a couple of months. She said on Monday that the atmosphere of uncertainty bred
by all the 'Will she, won't she?' talk had become intolerable. This provoked
wry chuckles in Washington. We've been writing and guessing and arguing for
about a year now whether Mr Reagan will or won't run again. We've learned in
every administration to tolerate a period of intolerable uncertainty for
upwards of two years.

The White House insiders, themselves, I mean the president's own closest aides
are regularly interviewed, briefly, on television and some say he will and some
say he won't and some say he'll decide in October. The only man who's willing
to come out and say flatly that the president has had it and will have no more
is Mr Tip O'Neill, hardly a close aide of the president. Mr O'Neill is, in
fact, the Speaker of the House, the leader of the Democrats there, who are the
majority party in the House, the most dependable political opponent of the
president in Congress. So his assurance is, at best, a deliberate exercise in
blarney or wishful thinking.

As things stand now, it looks more and more as if Mr Reagan would run again. He
gives coy hints, jests about it. His closest aide, Michael Deaver, says
positively he will run for a second term and so does – of all confidantes –
Vice-President Bush, but, personal opinion apart, there are present most of the
signs the president has eagerly looked for that would encourage him that in
fact he, himself, would be most persuasive in deciding him to run again, and if
these signs have to do with the economy, they are the ones that Mr Reagan swore
would appear, the forecasts, the boast, with which he put his presidency on the
line. And they are also the ones that the Democrats who've already put
themselves in the race – there are six of them – used to discredit with
confidence but now are keeping fairly quiet about. What are they?

Well, the worst news for Glenn, Mondale, Cranston, Hollings and co is that even
Mr Carter's former economic advisers now grant, with a sigh or a brave smile,
that the economy is well on the way to recovery. Inflation is less than half
what it was under Carter and going down still. Prime interest rates may not
have declined enough for the European allies but they are about half what they
were under Carter. Unemployment is the bogeyman, but it's down only slightly,
but one-tenth of one percentage point means a gain of another quarter of a
million jobs and the other side of that picture, which the Democrats are
careful not to mention, is bright.

In a word, there are many more Americans at work than there have ever been. The
notable pick-up, very long in coming, has been in the basic industries,
especially in automobiles. Two automobile companies that were on the verge of
bankruptcy 18 months ago are beginning to show impressive profits. After two
years of sluggish life, the retailers are reporting business as brisk.

Now these signs may not be enough for the 40 per cent of unemployed black
youths or for the trimmed staffs of welfare agencies or for the people who
don't share the president's concern for Central America as a potential or
actual Russian base, but they are enough to have changed the public opinion
polls dramatically and made Mr Reagan a close-shave winner today against the
two men who, six months ago, would have beaten him handsomely, namely, former
Vice-President Mondale and Senator Astronaut Glenn.

Nothing in American politics is sure after next Monday but it does look as if
the present incumbent would lay down his heavy load in 1989 and totter out of
the White House at the ripe age of 78.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP