Mayor Clint Eastwood

At a similarly anxious time in American history, just about 13 years ago this
Christmas, I was about to go to bed in my London hotel and I popped into the
lounge to see if there was anyone I knew. There was a lonely old man with his
daughter.

My distance vision is very good at the fine print on menus or railway
timetables, but not very good, well, at a distance. I was about to pop out when
the old man raised an arm and waved it. I walked over to him and was delighted
to see a distinguished figure, a tall, bony man with the austere air of a New
England sage, on the order of Emerson, or Justice Holmes, which indeed he was.

He was then, at the age of 86, the greatest living American historian – Samuel
Eliot Morison. He'd been in Florence and had been allowed to see the diaries,
or journals, of Magellan for yet another titanic work he was finishing on the
early explorers of America. He talked about this for a while, but pretty soon,
inevitably, we came around to topic A, which was then the continuing crisis
over the Watergate break-in and the still, uncertain involvement of President
Nixon.

I asked him how he thought it would come out. He paused a moment and said, 'I
think he'll brazen it out'. Well, Morison lived three more years and, of
course, long enough to see that he did not brazen it out.

The same question is being asked today about the extent of President Reagan's
involvement, how far and how long ago, in the Iranian arms Contra deal which
develops new tentacles every day, reaching into agencies and countries and
mercenaries and government underlings we could never guess at when that Beirut
magazine fired the first charge about the secret sale of arms to Iran in
exchange – nobody now credits any other main motive – in exchange for the
release of American hostages.

It's a story, in some ways, more serious than Watergate that cannot be brushed
aside. The two committees, one in the Senate, the other in the House, are going
along every weekday probing into the memory and knowledge of more and more
witnesses and there seems no doubt that it will not, as some people are saying
or hoping, it will not go away. But there are other things going on and across
this continent, of course, and for now I will just make a point that could
possibly have puzzled some listeners.

It was the act of Admiral Poindexter and Colonel North in doing something never
done before in living memory by a member of the armed forces – the refusal to
testify before a committee of Congress on the principle of self-incrimination.
The admiral and the colonel both took, as we say, 'the Fifth'.

The fifth amendment to the constitution was one of the ten original amendments
that are known as the Bill of Rights. All but three of the original 13 states
ratified these amendments by 1791. The fifth amendment set up the grand jury
system. It went on to forbid anyone's being tried twice for the same crime and
then it comes to the famous and, today, relevant clause, 'Nor shall any person
be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself'. That is the
protection that Admiral Poindexter and Colonel North seized on.

This protection was never in dispute when the first American governments came
to propose it. The memory was very green in the minds of those old colonials,
when they were British subjects, of being thrown in jail or otherwise forced to
tell their own part in acts of defiance against laws passed by Westminster
which the colonials thought unjust and which, in the end, led to the
revolutionary war. They'd seen enough of brow-beating and physical punishment
and the new American governments extended the protection to all criminal, or
otherwise infamous, charges. A man could not be forced to condemn himself.
There must be witnesses.

So, the admiral and the colonel asserted no more than their constitutional
right in refusing to answer all and every question that might, in retrospect,
incriminate them. Now, there's no doubt at all that, as American citizens, they
have every right to do it, but there's been a lot of hot and angry debate in
the innumerable nightly panels of congressmen, senators, reporters and the
like, about the wisdom of claiming the fifth in this case.

One member of the Senate Intelligence Committee pleaded for the men to change
their minds and their stand on the ground, as he put it, 'that we have 95
pieces of this puzzle and it won't be fitted together until we get the other
five, which these two men could provide'. That's a not very good argument for
their surrendering their constitutional right.

Other people, equally impatient, think the president ought to compel them,
which he can't, or beg them to think again and, by now, he may have succeeded.
But I'm afraid that a murky cloud fell on the two of them when they took the
fifth because the cases that most Americans can recall of hiding behind the
fifth amendment have come from gangsters and hoodlums called to testify before
a famous Senate committee hearing on the structure and behaviour of organised
crime. When such types claimed the fifth, everyone assumed their guilt.

When the admiral and the colonel did it and did it, unlike the gangsters, not
shiftily, defiantly, but courteously, regretfully, their demeanour had the
effect of making people say, 'If they can be so calm and sorry about having to
do it, they must be covering up for the very highest authority'. It appeared
they were calm and regretful because they'd decided to stay loyal, whatever
happens, to their chief – a military principle, if not a civic one.

Well, these assumption, inferences, are quite likely unfair to them both. I'm
simply reporting how immediately sinister their action looked when people
stopped to wonder why they'd taken the fifth and noticed the way they did it.

I was down the peninsula from San Francisco last weekend and I went into
Carmel, a small town on the Pacific coast famous for its mild climate, its
towering pines, its air of preserved gentility and the numbers of retired old
soldiers who chose to live out their days there. General Omar Bradley was one,
General Doolittle is another and on Sunday this tiny, wiry old hero, the first
man to fly over – and alarm – Tokyo was given a large birthday party to
celebrate his ninety years.

Carmel is close by the staggeringly beautiful coastline of the so-called
17-Mile Drive which looks out on the swelling Pacific through tangled, hoary
trees, the famous Monterey cypress which is indigenous to this stretch of
coast. So Carmel gets a fairly steady troop of visitors and tourists, but long
ago Carmel zoned itself, kept its skirts clear of the passing tourists by
limiting the number of hotels, of parking space, vigorously restricting all
building close to the shoreline, with the help of the very strict, very alert
California Coastal Commission whose permission you must get to cut down any
trees, let alone to build a house or a golf course.

It took a friend of mine three years to get permission to buy a small tract of
land along the 17-Mile Drive and to provide plans for the house he meant to
build. When it became obvious that he would not be allowed to clear dead
cypresses so as to open up his view of the ocean, he gave up and put the land
on the market. So far there've been no takers.

The nearby town of Carmel is known, then, to tourists going south, around
Carmel Bay and on through the old fishing town of Monterey. But, until a year
ago, it was unknown, I should guess, to newspaper reporters in Tokyo, London,
Bonn, Stockholm. No longer. They've been pouring in media scouts from all
around the globe. Have they come to learn what one small seaside town can do to
stem the tide of development? Alas, no.

They've come to see the mayor who was elected last year. The mayor is Dirty
Harry – Clint, 'Make my day' Eastwood. One local reporter bemoaned the presence
of these outlanders, not because they were here, but because, as he put it,
'these people show a monumental lack of interest in the town's political
issues. They have overlooked the essence of the Carmel story because they're
obsessed with a major lunacy of our time, celebrity mania. They want to see in
a sloppy, general way, how this tough-guy mayor is doing his job'.

Quite simply, Clint Eastwood is not a tough guy. He's a slender, shrewd,
concerned citizen of the town who has an ambition that should evoke sympathy,
at least, in all good politicians. He wants to keep intact the natural beauty
of the town and yet control the growth of businesses that might spoil that
beauty. He doesn't want to stifle new enterprises. He's asking perhaps the
impossible of enterprising businessmen, he's asking them to limit their aims
and this means that an application for a motel's expansion, for a new jewellery
shop are matters of great moment. He takes his time. The old timers want to
clamp a lid on Carmel as it is. The new timers want to expand and boost and wax
prosperous.

Eastwood has trod a careful middle path. He's cleared the midtown traffic
clutter with a new parking lot. He tore down a fence along a scenic ocean drive
and built a public access stairway to the beach. He's built restrooms for
tourists in the town park. He has poured money into the Carmel Youth Centre to
attract the young to an open meeting place. He's allowed children to buy
ice-cream cones and take them out on the streets. Incredible! What a work of
statesmanship.

Tiny moves, you might say. What he's doing is attempting, in this very pleasant
place, very tempting to developers, to set an example for all small towns to
control growth. I wish he'd been drafted years ago as mayor in several score
other small seaside towns I could mention in other countries to anticipate and
arrest their defilement by tacky lunch counters and caravan sites and novelty
shops and general dreck.

Oh yes! Last weekend, Eastwood paid $5.1 million out of his own pocket to buy
and freeze, in its present virgin state, an old mission ranch that was up for
development. Some things in the past, he says, should be kept the way they were
in the present.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP