D-Day anniversary

There were two topics that flooded the papers and the telly in Europe and
America last week that I made no mention of and some listeners want to know
why. They're not complaining, they're not accusing me of indifference or
insensitivity to the great matters of the days, they're just curious in a
friendly way.

One of these was a topical event and the other an historic one. The topical
theme was the great economic summit in London. It was about as fully reported
here and in Britain as such things can be when the press is, quite rightly, not
allowed into the meetings and has to muse and speculate and, as we said in
school, waffle.

I have been, in my time, to several of these so-called summits and unless a
reporter hides under the carpet where the great men are arguing or manages to
charm a leak out of someone who was present, the only substantive news he can
get is the final communiqué and the final communiqué is, must be, always, a
masterpiece of piety and cliché, signifying nothing.

It's bound to be so. To be useful at all, these meetings must allow the
participants to speak their minds, to question, to argue, to challenge, to air
their real differences about trade, defence, economic policy, nuclear arms,
whatever. The press, surely, has no more right to be in on these frank debates
than it has to be a fly on the wall at a confessional or a psychiatric session.
So, the bland communiqués. And the reporters go away guessing and blowing up
hints into theses. It's inevitable that the only vivid memories that come out
of such things are personal incidents seen in the flesh.

If I were challenged at the point of a gun to say immediately what was most
memorable about Mr Khrushchev's 1959 visit to the United States, on which he
was accompanied by over 600 of us batting around in trains and airplanes from
coast to coast, I should have to say it was a unforgettable scene at lunch in
one of the big Hollywood studios.

At the head of that famous studio was a man with a Greek name. When the lunch
was over and the toasts were in order, this man rose with the look of an
evangelist about to proclaim a mission. He recounted his life's story. He told
of himself as a poor boy in Greece, his parents bringing him on to these shores
in a shawl – his mother, I guess – and how he worked humbly and hard. And he
said, in effect, 'Look at me now! The head man of one of the great
motion-picture studios of the world.' He piped a tear and turned with what I
think we can for once legitimately call 'a meaningful look' at Mr Khrushchev
and he said, 'Only in America, Mr K, only in America!'

There was a thunderclap of applause from the studio executives, the dazzling
stars and the official representatives of President Eisenhower. Mr Khrushchev
gave a sort of 'so what' shrug and then he got up. He had a story to tell.
'There was once', he said, 'a simple shepherd boy, born on the borderland of
the Ukraine. The boy had an ambition to do more than tend sheep, he moved
onwards and downwards into the coal mines and then upwards into a factory. Then
he took a three-year night course at a workers' educational institute and look
at him now!'

Mr Khrushchev, with a marvellous expansive gesture that ended by crooking a
finger in the direction of his own chest indicated none other than the head man
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. He turned slowly toward his Greek
host, 'Only,' he said, 'in Russia! Only in Russia!'

And all I can, to my shame, remember of an earlier summit, an Anglo-American
summit in Bermuda, was the charming little ceremony at which President
Eisenhower planted a tree in the grounds of the governor's mansion. The
governor in the uniform of a model major-general, the white plumes of his
helmet fluttering like a swan in ecstasy, led his son to be presented to the
president. The little boy had wonderful, ropey, light-golden hair – tow-headed,
you could have called him.

So what was so memorable about this cosy scene? It would, I think, have faded
from memory if the Bermuda newspaper the next day had not reported that the
president was enchanted, as weren't we all, with the governor's two-headed son.

Well, the only really substantive thing to come out of the London summit – and
some reporter got it from an American delegate present at the table – was a
rather tart exchange between President Reagan and Prime Minister Trudeau. Mr
Trudeau, we learned later, had sent several private letters to the president
urging him to talk to the Russians about stopping the arms race from becoming a
race in outer space. At least, start there, then maybe you could come down to
earth.

Mr Trudeau had also written to Mr Chernenko with the same suggestion and got an
answer back saying that the Russians were willing now, without delay, to
negotiate a pact or treaty banning weapons in outer space. Now Mr Trudeau had,
at the end of last year, also, had a long talk in Washington with the president
and told him that he was not making it plain enough to the allies or the
Russians that he really wanted to achieve settlements in Central America and
the Middle East without the use of force or the threat of force. This is tough
talk and if Mr Trudeau were going to run for re-election, I doubt he would have
done it but he's retiring. He has no more political ambitions and he can speak
his mind without the pussy-footing and professional tact of an allied prime
minister still speaking for his country.

In London, Mr Trudeau put the point again to the president pretty bluntly
saying, in effect, 'what are you doing to convince the West and the Russians
that you mean what you say when you claim to be a man of peace?'. The
president's actual reply is by now well authenticated. He took off his glasses,
he looked, if not glared, at Mr Trudeau and said, 'Dammit Pierre, what do you
want me to do? We'll go sit with empty chairs to get these guys back to the
table.'

It was pointed out in the New York Times the other day by an old American
radical who is now what we call a neoconservative, that Mr Reagan did not
initiate the policy of having intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Europe.
Western Europe asked for them and President Carter agreed to send them. It was
Mr Carter too who, expecting to be re-elected, proposed increasing the defence
budget by five per cent. Mr Reagan, if he's re-elected, hopes to have increased
it by seven per cent at the end of 1985, which will be at the end of five years
in office.

The writer also pointed out that it was Mr Carter who sent military aid to El
Salvador and it was Mr Carter who cut off help to the Sandinistas in Nicaragua.
It was Mr Reagan who pressed for a ceasefire in Lebanon. So the men decided
that Mr Reagan's foreign policy is not much different from Mr Carter's. The
startling difference is in his rhetoric. Mr Reagan does believe that the Soviet
Union threatens to bully and blackmail the West into political subordination,
that it wants not war, but, as Churchill said about the Nazis, the fruits of
war.

But the fact, and it is a fact, that galls and tortures the president, is that
he's seen far and wide as a provocative leader, not as a warning messenger on
the Churchillian model. What rankled the president was the implication of Mr
Trudeau's remark that, as the Duke of Wellington said about his own troops when
he saw them drawn up before the Battle of Waterloo, 'They may not frighten the
enemy but, by God, they frighten me!'

It will remain the chief psychological task of Mr Reagan's term, of his likely
second term, to convince the world that the United States does not in its
posture or its policy mean to be as frightening as the Russians. Long ago, a
reporter, who covered Mr Reagan through the years when he was governor of
California, noted his fondness for brave rhetoric and off-the-cuff gallantry,
'But,' he wrote, 'Mr Reagan developed a proclivity for doing what is necessary
at the expense of his rhetoric.'

His problem, it seems to me, his biggest task in the coming year or years will
be to convince this country, and the allies alike, that he believes he can find
a way to live honourably with the Russians rather than to die with them and if
he can do it, it will be the feat of the century.

The other, the historic, event was, of course, the celebration of the 40th
anniversary of the Allied invasion of Europe. I suppose I saw on television as
much of the ceremonies and the survivors and their memories as anybody and,
naturally, I saw mostly the enormous coverage by the four American national
networks. Some of it was impressive and much of it was moving, but I found it
also sad and saddening in a way it was not meant to be.

I imagine that British television covered the British move in the operation
known as Gold and that Canadian television covered the advance on St-Aubin
known as Juno and, maybe, the British and the French retold the story of their
joint operation, Sword. The American networks, vividly and without foolish
boast, covered exclusively the American invasions of Omaha and Utah. The Allies
were mentioned from time to time as such, but we saw nothing of Gold, or Juno,
or Sword, and I would like to think – a wishful thought – that some country,
some network somewhere gave a fair comprehensive picture of the five fronts
with due tribute paid to the nationals who established them and fought and died
there.

I don't know about you but I can only say that the overwhelming impression left
on an American viewer, who did not lean back, shut his eyes and think or be
otherwise instructed, was that the Normandy landings were a wholly American
enterprise. Nobody, you understand, said as much and I think if the point had
been brought up to the producers and the network heads they would have been
surprised and sorry, but on television the thing seen is everything.

We all know, of course, that the Russians were barely short of boorish in
acknowledging the feat or the value of the invasion. They simply reminded their
listeners of the 12 million Russian dead.

Nowhere was it suggested that this sort of heroism can not, in the nuclear age,
be called on again. What we had was a celebration of 'our boys' – a revival
after 40 years of that chauvinism, that national pride, that may yet be the
death of all of us.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP