Republicans solid for Reagan

The summer is not yet here in theory but it's certainly here in fact. Half the
continent is burning in the summer sun, most of the population of New York City
out in T-shirts through a week of muggy, drenching heat, then a heavenly spell
like the fall come too soon, then more humid heat and torrential rains, flooded
underground stations and a couple of crashing thunderstorms that sounded like
Armageddon.

After a nasty sizzle of lightning and one tremendous explosion that literally
shook the house, a neat little French woman, a visitor, said, 'How American
(...), you know, violence and drama and always unexpected changes.' Well, as a
famous American journalist said to me shortly after I arrived here, in the long
ago, 'You may be exasperated and delighted and shocked but you'll never be
bored.'

We don't have laws like the Italians with their famous, maddening wind that
give a violent act by putting it all down to the weather but summer is the time
that the police in the big cities dread. It rouses old grievances, it makes
life in the tenements insufferable. It prods sulky people into random violence.

Several hundred Cubans who had been removed far from Miami and sent to Arkansas
for processing grew restless in their hot camps and went berserk. It came out
that a score or more of them were well-known – well known in Cuba – agitators
and there was a riot. Meanwhile, the Cuban refugee policy switched again.
President Carter said, in effect, 'No more!' The influx has now gone to over
100,000 and he ordered the coastguard to arrest the crews of incoming ships and
the people who organised the charters. So, what happened?

Last Tuesday, a freighter, packed to the gills with over 700 refugees was
shadowed by a coastguard cutter but it stayed on course and arrived in Key West
under the cutter's escort whereupon the owner, captain and 66 crew members were
arrested on a charge of transporting illegal aliens. Well, the justice
department said that the ship would not be allowed to dock at an American port
but next day they said it had better dock, since the only alternative was to
threaten force and, as one glum department spokesman put it, 'have a riot on
our hands'. The justice department then started totting up all the charges to
which the owner, captain and crew were liable – illegal entry, trading with the
enemy act, overloading of ship's quarters etc etc.

Then, it turned out that the owner was a British subject and when the
department of justice was asked how a Briton could be charged with trading with
the enemy when, in British law, Cuba is not an enemy, they admitted they were
stumped.

Then a special assistant to the president horned in and said, 'We're willing to
receive refugees who are being reunited with their families and also former
political prisoners of Castro but private flotillas have been stopped.' Well,
if they have, the word has not got to Cuba. Forty-seven vessels carrying over
five thousand refugees arrived the day after the man announced the new order
and, at last report, forty more boats were on the way.

If Mr Carter were merely a prime minister instead of being a head of state and
a prime minister and a party leader and a man running like mad for the
presidency, maybe he'd be free to take time out and unravel the preposterous
legal and human tangle of the Cuban refugees but he has the Middle East to
think of and a big battle in Congress about increasing the military defence
budget and a thumping vote in the Senate to have Congress review and look over
all United States' intelligence agencies and the delegation of Ohio's steel
workers wanting to know what he's going to do about the big slump in
employment. Not to mention the cables from Tehran about the so-called
'conference' on American crimes in Iran and then whether India should get
nuclear fuel and whether to veto a bill passed by the House to deny the
president a ten-cent-a-gallon fee he wanted imposed on imported oil.

No sooner does he catch his breath than the word comes in at dawn on Wednesday
that a succession of tornadoes had blasted through Nebraska, killed 30 people,
injured 130 more and left millions of dollars worth of damage. So he has to get
up and sign an order declaring that part of Nebraska to be a disaster area
liable for quick federal funds.

And yet, last Wednesday, all the television pictures of him showed a beaming
boy. Is this his version of a man whistling in a graveyard? Not at all. He had
cause to beam, or thought he had. He'd heard the results of the eight remaining
presidential primary elections and he's come out with more than the 1,666
delegate votes he needs to secure his nomination in New York in August as the
next Democratic candidate for president. Now, among these eight, there were
three big states – big in population and so, big in the number of delegates
they're allowed to send to the conventions – New Jersey, Ohio and California.

Ohio, in spite of its feeling the recession worse than most states, went for
Carter over Kennedy but Kennedy won New Jersey and the really big one, the most
populous state, with therefore the biggest prize in delegates, California, to
the horror of the White House and the astonishment of most of us, went for
Senator Kennedy.

We were saying until Tuesday night, the day of the voting that if Kennedy lost
California, that would be the absolute end of his presidential hopes. Before
the voting the Carter team was so confident it was all over with the senator
that the president, remembering Churchill's maxim that 'nothing is more
becoming in victory than magnanimity', President Carter offered to forgive and
forget the waspish taunts of Senator Kennedy – quite recently, the senator
described the president as a 'Reagan clone'.

Mr Carter suggested that they meet and discuss the future and the unity of the
party. Mr Carter's idea of unity being that Senator Kennedy should quit the
race and, for this concession, the president would generously incorporate some
of the senator's ideas and policies into the Democratic platform which has to
be worked out between now and the convention, even though some of those ideas
the president has described as disastrous and harmful to the country.

Well, the Kennedy team, flushed from the California victory, at first scorned
the idea of a meeting. Next day, last Thursday, Senator Kennedy said, 'Yes!'
The White House was delighted, imagining a humble Kennedy arriving, cap in
hand, to admit that the game was up. It wasn't like that at all. The president
and the senator spent an hour together, at the end of which the senator
appeared saying he intended to be the Democrats' nominee and would battle for
the nomination on the convention floor. Of course, there's a lot of time left
between now and August for manoeuvring and compromising but if things go as
badly for President Carter as they have been doing, he may be the one with cap
in hand.

On Wednesday, a non-profit research group known as the National Bureau of
Economic Research published a report which said that the United States was now
settled into a recession that began in January. Well, many people have been
saying so and any housewife would tell you so but the administration has hedged
by saying the recession was here or about to be but might be milder than it had
guessed.

The force of the National Bureau's report is the force of its authority. It's
an entirely neutral body calling the shots in fair weather and foul, it has no
ties with any political party or any special-interest group and its reports
carry great weight in the business world, so that the New York Times could make
a big headline, 'Nation Declared in Recession.' It quoted the National Bureau
as saying that 'every business cycle has four parts – a peak, a period of
contraction which is when a recession has positively arrived, a trough and a
phase of expansion.' The report says we are in the 'contraction period', that
the worst is yet to come and that the recession will last and probably deepen
through most of this year.

Well, the voters may never have heard of the National Bureau of Economic
Research but its authority makes it all the harder for Mr Carter to say that
things may begin to look up before the presidential election and the voters, by
now, have positive and depressing things to say about the Carter presidency.
Only 28 per cent of Americans think he's doing a good or excellent job as
president. Sixty per cent think he's doing a bad job with foreign policy and
more than half the people think he's failing on domestic policy, but the
results of the last of the primaries hold worse omens for him than just the
general consensus that he's inept as president.

When you look not at the simple gross figures of who voted for whom in the
three big primaries – New Jersey, Ohio and California – but at why they voted,
there's bad news both for Mr Carter and the two-in-three victor Senator
Kennedy. In each of these three states, more than two-thirds of the people who
voted for Kennedy confessed in an analytical survey that in November they
expected they'd vote either for representative John Anderson, the independent
candidate, or for Ronald Reagan. Ronald Reagan? Democrats for Kennedy, the
un-defeatable liberals, saying they would vote for Ronald Reagan, the great
right-winger? That's been out of the question.

It may give solace to President Carter in suggesting he's unlikely to lose the
nomination at the Democratic convention but it gives little encouragement to
Kennedy to see himself as a longed-for candidate and, worse still, about 15 per
cent of the people who actually voted for Carter said they expected to defect
from him in November and vote either for Anderson or Reagan.

Well, Reagan has obviously rejoiced in the candidacy of John Anderson because
he would probably pull liberal Democrats away from Carter but nobody expected
that any Kennedy supporter, however dashed and desolated by a Kennedy loss of
the nomination in August, would come to vote for Reagan in November. On the
contrary, over 60 per cent of all the Reagan voters in the Republican primaries
are positive that Reagan will be their man come the fall. For once it's the
Republicans, not the Democrats, who have a united party.

Mr Reagan expects to go to Europe shortly to expound his ideas on foreign
policy to the allied ministers. A lot can happen between now and November
but,for the first time, the title 'President Reagan' sounds like one we may
have to get used to.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP