Mondale gets mad

We keep seeing on our screens on the telly a Roman profile which keeps saying
to audiences all over the country, 'I'm angry, I'm mad'. It is the Roman
profile of Mr Walter Fritz Mondale who's running, running almost breathlessly,
for President of the United States.

Thirty-six years ago another Democrat with a distinctly non-Roman profile was
shouting from the observation platform of a train also at audiences around the
country, 'I'm angry, I'm mad'. He was Harry Truman. He, also, was running
against a Republican who, every political expert agreed was invincible. Mr
Truman's whipped-up indignation seemed like a desperate form of blindness to
the political facts of life, the main one being that he was shouting himself
down to certain defeat. Mr Truman was mad at what he called the do-nothing 80th
Congress and, in his anger, he called it back into an unprecedented summer
session.

Well, as we all know, to everybody's astonishment and to the great pain of the
invincible Republican candidate who'd already announced some of his Cabinet
before the election, Mr Truman went back to the White House. At some point in
the plotting of Mr Mondale's campaign, his advisers looked over the very bleak
map of the United States – bleak from the point of view of a Democrat looking
for states coloured in red, as ones leaning to Mondale. Two weeks ago there
were two of them or rather one state and an election district. West Virginia
was leaning towards Mondale and so was the capital city of Washington DC.

All the rest of the country, 49 states, coloured blue, true blue for old Ronald
Reagan. Old Ron! This time, four years ago, early in the year, the Democrats
were pounding away at the terrible hazards involved in electing a man for
president who was already in his 69th year. The Reagan campaign team countered
this with a bold and sassy move. They had Reagan, himself, make jokes about his
impending senility and, just before the New Hampshire primary of that year,
they organised a national celebration of Reagan's 69th birthday. That was
enough, once for all, to obliterate the age issue.

Well, here he is in his 74th year, four years older than any man who's ever
found himself, even at the very end of his term, in the White House and the age
issue is simply not there. I haven't heard any Democrat out on the stump wave
spooky warnings before the voters that in the last year of his second term Mr
Reagan will be in his 78th year, though it has crossed my mind when people lay
flippant bets about who'll be the next President of the United States, it might
be a winner's hunch to say George Bush.

Let's look for a minute at the latest breakdown of an electoral poll. It might
tell us why Mr Mondale is so angry, so fighting mad. In a national poll, which
as usual says if the election were held today 57 per cent say they would vote
for Reagan and 35 per cent for Mondale, leaving an unusually small percentage
of the undecided, namely eight per cent, Reagan is preferred by the young and
the middle-aged and about 40 per cent of the people over 65. He's preferred by
all but the poor and the blacks, by most Americans who went through elementary
school, also by those who went through high school, by those who went through
college, by Protestants, by Jews, by Roman Catholics. Don't forget that just
about one American in three or four is a Catholic, one American voter in six,
and, an astonishing statistic, one American voter in eleven is an
Italian-American Catholic, like Mrs Ferraro, who is not, however, going to vote
for Reagan.

The part of the country most committed to Reagan is the South which, for the
first half of this century, was automatically committed to the Democratic
candidate, whoever he was. It was, for complicated reasons having to do with
its devotion and free trade and to the seniority system in running
congressional committees which we won't go into now, the South was known far
into my time as the 'solid South' – solid for the Democrats – and always the
firmest enemy camp for any Republican to invade. Eisenhower did it and Nixon
converted it into the Republican solid South.

Now Democrats, especially since that geo or demographic revolution, have always
cheered themselves up by pointing out, correctly, that in this country there
are three registered Democrats to every two registered Republicans. So that if
every one of them went out and voted the party line, we'd have nothing but a
succession of Democratic presidents.

A friend of mine who loves statistics is always stuck on this one and he's been
saying for months, to the amazement of anyone who's listening, that he can't
see how Mondale can possibly lose. He may, of course, be simply being cute,
implying in a quiet, wise way that he knows something the rest of us don't. But
the other evening I showed him the most significant figures in this latest
poll. Significant, that is, if you're bearing in mind the three-to-two
advantage the Democrats have in registered voters and, for the Democrats, here
is the awful truth – two figures that are more dramatically tilted towards
Reagan than towards any other Republican presidential candidate I can remember
– Reagan is, at the moment, luring away 26 per cent of regular Democratic
voters. Worse is yet to come. It has been noticeable in the past three or four
presidential elections that the normal balance or imbalance, the swing vote, if
you like, has been that of independents. Well, this latest poll shows that the
independents would, today, vote 61 per cent for Reagan, 31 per cent for
Mondale.

A landslide, it appears, is in the offing. We shouldn't forget, however, that
the so-called Reagan landslide of 1980 requires a very peculiar definition of a
landslide. Because of all the democratic peoples, the Americans are the laziest
or the least caring about using their vote. In 1980, only 51 per cent of
Americans registered to vote went out and did so and, of those, 26 per cent
voted for Reagan. In other, alarming words, one American in four believed in
Reagan enough to vote for him. The other three were either against him or
didn't care who got in.

Still, the general sentiment among voters in Reagan's favour today is
overwhelming. It all adds up to a picture of despair for Mr Mondale and Mrs
Ferraro – who, by the way, is not being helped by the decision of the House of
Representatives Ethics Committee to begin a formal investigation into charges
that she violated a law, the ethics in government law, in failing to disclose
not only her own assets, but those of her spouse which the law requires for all
members of the House of Representatives. This is quite separate from the
charges about not revealing her husband's income tax records and what she might
profit from him as a candidate for the vice presidency.

Anyway, there is the electoral map of the United States two months before the
election. Mr Mondale's advisers stared at it and decided that their man had
better cease to reason with his audiences in a reasonable way. He'd better do
what Harry Truman did in a similar plight. He must get good and mad.
Unfortunately, his anger is reflected or absorbed, it appears, only by the very
poor and the blacks, whether they're registered or not registered.

Mr Mondale bleeds for the poor persuasively. He's angry on behalf of the
unemployed. He's alarmed and mad at the huge national deficits, the prospect of
$200 billion of debt. Unfortunately, he's doing this at a time when the
unemployment figure is a little lower than it was during the Carter
administration, during, as the Republicans love to remind us, the
Carter-Mondale administration. It's also a time when more new jobs, seven
millions of them, have been created in the past 18 months – an American record.
A time when inflation, which Mr Reagan promised to reduce from 12 per cent to
six or seven is done to about three per cent a year. A time when the Carter
record of a one per cent in growth in the gross national product has gone up to
six per cent. A time when nobody can tell us what deficits mean in human terms.

So, it's not surprising that the cheers of the people who come out to listen to
Mr Mondale sound half-hearted, respectful, wanting to help, but not a cry from
the heart.

A week or two ago, the Mondale team sat down again. Of course, they're sitting
down all the time but I mean sat down in a grim session to invent some other
tactic, some more resounding slogan. They found it in the forgotten fact that
Mr Reagan is the first president never to have talked with a Russian leader
since Herbert Hoover. Mr Mondale started intoning this dreadful charge day
after day, though I should guess very many of his audience could barely
remember who Hoover was and quite possible confused him with J. 'FBI' Edgar of
that ilk. It's a point, not mentioned, that Franklin Roosevelt didn't talk to a
Soviet leader either until he was in the eleventh year of his presidency and
then, only, into the fifth year of the Second World War.

But, fair enough. Since the emergence of the United States and the Soviet Union
as the only two superpowers, every president – since Eisenhower, anyway – has
felt it essential from time to time to try and discover a secure way of living
with the Russians in peace and without fear. We haven't done it and it's the
Democrats contention and, to be truthful, the admission of many Republicans,
that relations with the Soviet Union have never been more fractious, more
fearful, more strained.

So, Mr Mondale seemed to have a good point in sharpening his attack on the
president's bellicose attitude towards the Soviet Union by appealing for a
summit meeting. He did it, of course, on the fair assumption that Mr Reagan
would stand pat and stand off, certainly until the election.

But, after some keen and diligent exchanges between the White House and the
Soviet embassy, Mr Reagan announces that he's going to talk with Mr Gromyko
when he comes here for the United Nations' annual general assembly.

So, now Mr Mondale has to say, 'Well, about time! But how shocking you've
waited so long!' It is not a response that stirs the blood. Sometimes it seems
hardly worth running for president, does it, Fritz?

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP