Growing US deficit

My live-in mate, I think we now say, is always complaining about digits.
'What's all this,' she'll say, 'about a $200 million deficit?' 'Not 200,000
millions,' I say, 'two hundred billions! Two hundred thousand millions.'
'Billions, trillions,' she says, 'who cares so long as he loves his mother.'

It's an enviable view to take of America's plight and its new role as a debtor
nation. I must say it used to be more difficult to talk about these figures
when Britons and their imperial cousins used to think, if ever, of a billion as
a million millions. But now, in spite of the insistence of the Oxford English
Dictionary, the Treasury, along with all, I think, other English-speaking
countries have adopted the American usage and mean, by a billion, a thousand
million. Still, I believe the overwhelming majority of citizens everywhere are
like my room-mate. They look at the word 'billion' and don't stop to register
amazement and alarm by translating it truly into one thousand million.

But since governments have been running to these gaudy figures, politicians, at
least, have got used to tossing them off – at least, members of the
administration, any administration, have. Which reminds me of the grilling a
Senate committee was giving years ago to a general who was defending, in an
open hearing, the Pentagon's budget for new fighter bombers.

The general was reeling off the price of this and that and was stopped by the
famous Senator Dirksen from Illinois, a watchdog with the voice of an operatic
basso profundo. 'Hold it right there, General!' he said, 'You talk about a
billion here, 2.1 billions there. Pretty soon, General, that can run into
money.'

And the trouble is that it runs into money beyond our ken, so that when a
friend of mine, a friend on the right, told me six years ago that another
Carter presidency would plunge the republic into ruin and I asked him why, he
said, 'Do you realise that in one year, from fiscal 1979 through fiscal 1980,
the budget deficit has gone from 27 billions to 60 billions?' It sounded awful.
And it made me understand why the Republicans and, as it turned out, millions
of Democrats, were getting behind young old Lochinvar from out of the west,
former governor of California, name of Ronald Reagan.

He was even more scared and outraged than my friend and he swore, if he became
president, that his absolutely top priority was a balanced budget by the end of
his term by 1984. Now for people to whom such routine government lingo as 'net
receipts' and 'undistributed offsetting receipts' are as unreal as billions and
trillions, let me explain in the simplest possible language the difference
between being solvent and being broke.

The words are those of Mr Wilkins Micawber. 'Annual income,' said Mr Micawber,
'twenty pounds. Annual expenditure nineteen pounds, nineteen shillings and
sixpence. Result, happiness. Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure
twenty pound, no shillings and sixpence. Result, misery.'

This view of economics, that you can't spend what isn't there, that you
shouldn't buy things you can't afford, is so naive that it has not been held by
any government I can think of since Bismarck and is obviously irrelevant in the
world of bank loans, mortgages, usury, which is called the prime rate and
credit cards – buy now, pay later if you feel like it.

And yet, there arrived on the scene in 1980, as I say, this western politician,
Reagan, who actually believed in Mr Micawber's economics. I ought to say that
he was not born that way. For 16 years of his adult life at least, he'd been a
passionate disciple of Franklin Roosevelt and voted for him four times in the
long-gone days when it was possible to vote four times for a president.

Roosevelt was a Democrat and the Republicans were so enraged by the practice of
letting anyone run for president four times that they managed to get through
Congress, and then through the states, a constitutional amendment limiting the
highest office to two terms. It was Roosevelt who, at the peak of his power and
popularity, once gave vent to his economic rule of life. 'Spend and spend,' he
said, 'and tax and tax.'

Well, after 16 years of this heady life, Ronald Reagan was not the only
Democrat who came to the realisation that he'd been living a life of sin. He
became a born-again Micawberite or Republican, and so, when he said around the
country in 1980 that any government of his would cut both spending and taxes,
the country rose to him. First item of business, as he said, was to wipe the
word 'deficit' from the language. The budget would be balanced in four years.
Taxes would be cut by 30 per cent. Money would go out by way of education,
health to the poor and the disabled. Only to the truly needy. No more
disgraceful Carter balance sheets and a deficit going from 27 billions to 60
billions in one year. Or any year. There would be no debt. No deficit at all.

So now at the end of six years in office, where do we stand? The deficit this
year is going to be around 220 billions and – what is a very annoying mystery
to the poor, skulking Democrats – Ronald Reagan is, today, more popular over
the long run than any president in American history. I don't know if there
sounds something fishy in all this to you.

There is no mystery. Reagan has convinced most of the American people that he
has done what he said he'd do. He has cut taxes by 30 per cent, which is a
mighty popular policy in any country. But how about the other side of the
prescription, to cut spending?

Well, he's done his best, hasn't he? It's that dreadful Congress that won't let
him stop handing out money in all the ways the government has been handing it
out since Franklin Roosevelt, following Lloyd George 26 years later, invented
the New Deal and three years after that, the idea, the practice, of social
security.

Social security started in 1935, was intended originally as a form of
compulsory savings, the ordinary family's pension savings plan. A small
percentage was deducted at source from your pay cheque and kept by the
government in your name. And when you retired at 65 – then and still the
official retirement age – you drew all the money you'd put into social
security. It was pointed out early on that, of course, since the government was
holding the money and not just keeping it in a bag, but investing it, you had a
right to the interest earned. What was not appreciated early on was that with
the ups and downs of the banking business and the stock market and inflation
and other forms of casino, the interest would, from time to time, get ahead of
the original investment.

So that, by now, there are millions of people who are getting monthly cheques
from the government which, in one year, amount to one or two or even three
times as much as the amount they put into their social security every year.
That's a system that pleases everybody. Once you get to the age of 72, your
wife, whether she was or was not ever gainfully employed in the government
sense, a job outside the home, well, she also gets – surprise, surprise – a
monthly cheque, even if she's a billionaire.

I don't know a woman, however anti-Reagan, however fervent a Democrat, who
doesn't think this quite right, not to say, delightful.

The result is that as the president and his director of the budget sit down to
compose or propose next year's budget, there is one enormous figure that stares
mockingly at them from the start. It's the percentage of the budget that is
marked off, already spent, so to speak, for social security. It is 40 per cent
of the whole domestic budget.

When Mr Reagan came in, he looked at that figure and he was understandably
appalled. His bright young director of the budget, one David Stockman, pointed
out that if there was going to be any balancing act with the budget, a colossal
cut would have to be made in social security. In fact, Mr Stockman, a whiz of
an accountant and a realist, more or less told the president that if he was
going to cut taxes so drastically, if so much less was coming in, just so much
would have to stop going out.

In other and plainer words, Mr Stockman said – and he said this behind closed
doors, mark you – the economic revolution that the president had promised could
only be accomplished by dismantling the whole welfare system. The only people
who would remain beneficiaries of it would be the very poor. No more
college-tuition loans to students whose parents earned 20,000 or 200,000 a
year. No more fat cheques to the ageing comfortably off, no more food stamps to
the children of families that earned 18,000 a year, twice the poverty rate. And
so on and on.

But the word behind closed doors got out. The Democrats screamed with warnings
that the wily Reagan was going to eliminate or cut social security. The
president then learned, to his astonishment, that social security in the 50
years of its life had become the ark of the covenant – an untouchable sacred
script for the acting out of democratic life. The president eventually had to
say that the rumours were ugly and unworthy. Of course he wouldn't dare touch
that 40 per cent, that bit of holy writ.

Well, young Mr Stockman – as I say, a very sophisticated accountant – was very
naive about the American system of government. He thought it was like a prime
minister and a parliament. Parliament would pass practically any law the prime
minister put up. When the Congress went to work on putting back into the budget
all their favourite programmes, their local handouts, all the presidential
cuts, Mr Reagan called the speaker of the House, Tip O'Neill.

'Mr Speaker,' he said, 'you're doing a great job but you must make some more
cuts!' The speaker was appalled. 'Mr President,' he said, 'have you ever heard
of the separation of powers? You think we're a rubber stamp?' That's all.

So, the president pretends he's doing what he said he'd do and he is cutting
taxes. But actually more money is going out than ever on all the welfare
goodies we all love so much. So instead of no deficit, it's now approaching
four times the deficit Jimmy Carter left us with. The Democrats howl at the
size of the deficit and the size of the cuts Mr Reagan keeps saying he wants.

Meanwhile, 67 per cent of the people, the most Americans in history, say their
president is doing a fine job.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP