Reagan backs Palestinian autonomy

Something I said in a talk two weeks ago – it has been a joke for some time in
our family, not a great joke but a serviceable one – that the only two states
of the union I've not been in are Niagara Falls and Martha's Vineyard.
Everybody knows about Niagara Falls, the honeymooners' Mecca, if only by Oscar
Wilde's comment, 'Every American bride is taken there and the sight must be one
of the earliest, if not keenest, disappointments in American married life'.

Martha's Vineyard is a small island, twenty miles by ten, that lies off the
Massachusetts coast, or rather off the elbow of Cape Cod which lies off the
Massachusetts coast. It was settled in the mid-seventeenth century and in the
eighteenth century was one of the famous New England whaling centres. I went
here last weekend to visit old friends who rent a cottage every August. Maybe
if these words ever reach them, they would rightly take umbrage since it's a
substantial colonial house built in 1720 to overlook a boat slip down by the
water. It suffered grievously from high tides and was dug up complete and moved
a mile or so up the hill a hundred years later by mules or oxen or whatever.
Later on, it was moved again into a field above the main street.

I didn't know till now that Americans started so early doing something that
always shocks and delights a contemporary visitor to this country. You'll be
driving calmly along a country road or an expressway and suddenly there looms
up on the horizon the mirage of a floating house. It comes on alarmingly at you
and solidifies into the real thing, sitting placidly on top of a flat truck,
mother maybe sitting with equal placidity in the living room window. By
nightfall the thing will be planted on its new site and, in no time, there'll
be nothing to show that it hadn't always been on its native ground.

Well, a generation or two ago, a New England writer described Martha's Vineyard
as 'a land of old towns, new cottages, high cliffs, white sails, green fairway,
salt water, wild fowl and the steady pull of an ocean breeze'. Even as late as
40 years ago, the population was only six or seven thousand. Its permanent
population is now more like 25, 30,000 and in the summer, the half-dozen small
towns are jam-packed with the carefree, employed young, with people mad for
fishing or sailing or just living it up at the weekend. And the old houses
which you could buy 30 years ago for, say, $10,000 are now commandeered at
Beverly Hills' prices by successful actors, writers, chic photographers,
television stars and such. And recently, the island received the supreme
accolade, rather like the Kaiser appearing at Bad Nauheim or George V
recuperating at Bognor, of having one of its houses bought and done over by
Jacqueline Onassis.

But in case the descent of the beautiful people should give you a mental
picture of velvety lawns, sweeping ball gowns and nearby mansions taken over by
the rock aristocracy, I hasten to say that most of the island is a cluster of
scrub pine and what looks like forests of tundra, infested by mosquitoes the
size of MiG jets and that, consequently, all the character of the island lies
in the boxy houses, colonial or plain Victorian, balancing themselves against
rock outcrops or rising above tumbling narrow streets and looking out over
splendid coves and slips and slivers of blue water and wheeling gulls against a
heavenly blue sky lapped by a dry breeze. Rather like an American Rye – the
Sussex town that is, if it's still called Sussex and not Danegelt.

This long weekend was meant to be a holiday but, as a newspaper man from a
tender age, I cannot go anywhere without tracking down the cigar stand, a drug
store or wherever that sells the local newspaper and buying it. These days, of
course, the New York Times is available almost everywhere. I see that the west
coast, the California edition, which used to be flown 3,000 miles for fussy
people who don't believe anything unless they read it in the New York Times, I
see that it's now published in a small California town, Torrance, the whole
paper beamed by lasers from the word-processors in New York and set up
simultaneously with the New York edition.

Well, they get it on Martha's Vineyard by airplane still and it's a
refreshingly quaint sight to see the bundles being unloaded from a two-engine
prop plane. The friends, our hosts, get up very early in the morning – at first
light, I think the boat people call it – but they are, thank God, not the type
which keep saying that early morning is the best time. They listen to radio, I
presume, since by the time I got down, they were up on the latest deaths of
eminent persons. Nothing much else though. We never saw the evening news and
though the master and I ambled down the hill to get the Times, it was more of a
ritual than a necessity. We were too busy relaxing and chasing a white ball,
one white ball, one orange ball, to read much of anything.

In fact, this was the first time of three or four days I can remember that I
didn't scour the papers or twitch the knob. By the morning of the fourth day,
all I knew before we took our plane home was that Ingrid Bergman had died.
There's not much specifically American to say about her but I knew the lady and
I would simply like to add to the memorial pieces on her that of the hundreds
of actresses I ran into at one time or another by way of being in the
television game, she was one of the three least actressy actresses I have ever
known. No side, no showbiz gossip, no hint that she'd ever been on the stage
unless you pressed her for memories. These three were Ingrid Bergman, Celia
Johnson and Peggy Ashcroft.

Well, we'd been lucky with the weather – the luck, at this season over most of
America, being that it wasn't hideously hot and rancid with humidity. In fact,
we had a marvellous foretaste of the fall – balmy breezes, brilliant dry light
and, to a long-distance spectacle wearer, the sudden, magical ability to see
four miles and count the leaves. And then back to New York and the athletic
movement required to climb over four days newspapers banked outside the kitchen
door. Since the Sunday edition of the Times, alone, carries something like 250
pages, or the original cutting down of two saplings, the world outside Martha's
Vineyard (looked) very large.

So, hello! What's this? My secretary claims to be overcome by fatigue and an
itch to take a break in Mexico. Why Mexico? Because a month ago, and for all I
knew, today, the exchange rate was 24 pesos to the dollar. Now, it says here
incredibly, 129 to the dollar. I read on about this preposterous move. It seems
Mexico has a foreign debt of $80 billion and can't begin to repay. In fact, the
more you read about the solvency or the impending bankruptcy of small nations
and big companies, the more solvency becomes defined as the ability to pay the
interest on an unpayable debt.

Read on beyond the first paragraph of this shocker and you see that the nine
biggest banks in the United States have at least 40 per cent of their capital
and reserves on loan to Mexico alone, which last year, this year, looked like
the most stable country of the Third World, the outer world, the satellite
world or whatever you care to call the countries that are incapable, alone, of
threatening the big boys.

Well, we have to wait and see how the rescue operation goes with the banks, the
governments, the international monetary fund and anybody else who, in the
marvellous, mysterious world of international finance, is eager to lend more
billions to a country so many billions in debt. My secretary has dipped into
this strange world long enough to discover that, while Mexico depends on
tourism a great deal, it will not, at the moment – the moment that the humble
peasant's tortilla costs twice what it cost yesterday – it will not welcome
with bands and banners the visiting Yankee going on a spree with a collapsed
exchange rate. She's having second thoughts.

Then I've no sooner unpacked and settled to the usual seven o'clock half-hour
on the tube than the word comes through that Mr Reagan had sent a letter to Mr
Begin, that the letter had been leaked to the press, that it contained a
proposal for freezing the Jewish settlements in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip and linking Jordan with the idea of a Palestinian homeland, that Mr Begin
was furious at what he takes to be a double-cross of the Camp David accords,
that before Mr Begin could get on the air or proclaim his anger, Mr Reagan has
to leave his horses and his holiday in the Santa Inés mountains, rush to a
television studio outside Los Angeles and repeat for the American people and
the Israelis to hear that he does indeed look toward full autonomy for the
Palestinians now living in the West Bank and the Strip and would like to see
their autonomy supervised by Jordan.

I've so far carefully avoided all comment on the war in Lebanon because the
issues that swirl around it are so complex and are equally well understood
abroad. What has to be said now is a word about the prejudice or rumour that
riddles discussion of the subject in every club and pub in Europe, namely that
the United States government is, at all times, terrified of giving offence to
Israel, no matter what she does because of that sinister so-called Jewish lobby
in Washington, or even more vague and threatening, the Jewish vote.

There is no such thing with any separate power, except in New York City. It's
not enough to bind American policy. There are many Jews who applaud Israeli
policy, there are many who deplore it. The prevailing fact is that the United
States has sworn, through seven presidencies, to protect the sovereignty of the
state of Israel and that Israel is far and away the strongest ally of the
United States in the Middle East.

But now, the crunch has come. Under Mr Reagan and Secretary of State Shultz,
the conviction has settled in that the Palestinians, too, never mind the
separate or even mixed-in entity of the PLO, must have a land to call their
own.

I doubt that this conviction or policy will crack and sooner or later, it's
felt in Washington, Mr Begin or his successor is going to have to swallow it.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP