Reagan u-turn on economy

Last Tuesday evening, President Reagan performed what is very nearly the oldest
ritual of the American government, a form of government which has very few
rituals indeed. He delivered before both Houses of Congress, assembled in the
House of Representatives, together with the nine justices of the Supreme Court,
his Cabinet, the diplomatic corps and other distinguished visitors, the
so-called State of the Union address.

This custom was prescribed in the second article of the constitution: 'The
President shall, from time to time, give the Congress information of the state
of the union and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall
judge necessary and expedient.'

The prescription of 'from time to time' leaves it up to the president to
address both Houses whenever he feels like it but the State of the Union
address has come to be an annual affair given in January as soon as possible
after a Congress assembles for the new year's work.

George Washington, of course, gave the first State of the Union address and he
excused himself at once from recommending any measures at all. Everybody
present had been, until 14 years before, a subject of the British Empire. Now
they were nationals of a new nation, an invented system of government and
Washington spent most of his time marvelling at the great constitutional
charter 'under which you are assembled' and paid tribute to the members of this
first Congress.

For the first ten minutes or so, I should guess, he went on about the great
anxiety he felt on assuming the office of president. He'd had, he swore, to
resolve a terrible conflict between the voice of his country calling him back
to duty and his immutable decision to remain at Mount Vernon, a retreat which
'I had chosen with the fondest predilection as the asylum of my declining
years'.

The Senate responded to the first president in language equally flowery,
expressing their enormous gratitude for his decision to leave the retreat
'consecrated to the repose of your declining years'.

It seems a pretty glum note to start on but it is true that he was, by the
mortality figures of the time, an old man. He referred more than once to the
anxieties that were bound to flow from his taking on the presidency 'in the
evening of my life'. Well, let's face it, he was 57! Of the 39 succeeding
presidents, only ten have been older than Washington on the day of their
inauguration. Oldest of all in the 200 years of the republic is one Ronald
Wilson Reagan who was 70 two weeks after his inauguration and who will be 72 on
Sunday week.

Well, Mr Reagan did a great deal of 'recommending measures necessary and
expedient' and the necessity of them must have pained him because most of them
were surrenders to the opposition, which has been rising not only among the
Democrats, but in his own party as well. When he'd finished, the network
commentators descended like a flock of buzzards on the meat of his speech and
debated whether Mr Reagan will run again in 1984 which would let him out of the
White House just before his 78th birthday.

There's always a lot of such talk at the beginning of a president's third year
because it's always the time when the glitter of the new man is dimmed, when
all the glorious promises of his first days in office can be measured against
what the man has done.

I remember at the first press conference President John Kennedy held at the
beginning of his third year. A reporter for the New York Times asked him, 'Mr
President, what happened? What happened to the momentum?' The president, of
course, had to pretend that the momentum of his glory days was still there,
that he was just getting his second wind but the fact is that, at that time and
for the remaining ten months of his life, there was something like 90 bills
that Kennedy had put up to Congress which Congress had either shelved or buried
in committee or was doing little about. It's also a fact worth recalling that
within three months of Lyndon Johnson's accession to the presidency, more than
two-thirds of those bills had been brought to the floor of both Houses and
voted on. That was because Johnson had a gift – which is rare among presidents
– of cajoling and bullying Congress and persuading and buttonholing his
opponents and, as he used to say, 'sweet talking' them into voting his way.

I think you can say, as a general rule, or rather as a sad deduction from the
record, that there are two kinds of presidents. There's the burning idealist
and there's the level-headed realist. Of course, during the race for the
presidency, during the campaign, all the runners have to pretend to be
idealists and nobody seemed like a more genuine and more genuinely American
idealist at the start than Jimmy Carter. His appeal was to the simple
decencies, the rural Mark Twain shrewdness to populist sincerity. After Nixon's
Cadillac and trumpeters in skin-tight, white knee-britches, Carter banished the
trumpeters, disdained the Cadillac and walked back from his inauguration down
Pennsylvania Avenue holding his wife's hand. He looked, then, like Jefferson
after Washington.

Jefferson, who rode alone on his horse to his inauguration, tied it up, had his
say and returned to his boarding house, having expressed himself rather acidly
about George Washington's love of ceremony, his gilded coach and outriders and
a fondness for display that Jefferson thought 'tended away from Republican
simplicity and towards monarchy'.

Well, Mr Carter gave his first television address to the people dressed in a
cardigan. His aides were encouraged to sit around in jeans and open shirts. He
abandoned the old practice of having a marine band play 'Hail to the chief'
wherever he appeared. It took him less than a year to learn that the people
don't want to see their president in their own, informal guise. 'Hail to the
chief' piped out again. Mr Carter got himself up in what they used to call his
'Sunday go-to-meeting' suit.

His aides adopted collars and ties and steadily, down the accumulating troubles
and complexities of the four years, Mr Carter abandoned, too, his folksy manner
because he was too honest and intelligent about the problems that were coming
at him thick and fast. He appeared at press conferences and in television
addresses and he talked in his grey, verbose but knowledgable way about the
actual complications of the government he was in charge of. He saw four or five
possible solutions to every problem and was frozen in his stance not knowing
which way to turn. He could no longer match his simple campaign rhetoric with
the tedious facts of life he was discovering.

It seems to happen in democracies that the people crave first a world-saver and
then a humdrum sensible man. Then, possibly, back to another world-saver. After
Lincoln, Andrew Johnson. After Lloyd George, Bonar Law. After Churchill,
Attlee. After Roosevelt, Truman and, after Carter, the all-American ideal of a
clean-cut Midwestern boy, Ronald Reagan, who cut through all the awkward
complexities of social security with a plea to help your neighbour, through the
difficulties of living with the Russians with a massive arms build up, through
the labyrinth of the tax system with a yearly ten per cent cut in taxes,
slashed through the awful complications of government itself by demanding that
we 'get government off our backs' and was going to reverse the meteoric rise in
the government's budget deficits by simply shooting the budget down to earth
and declaring, by law, by a constitutional amendment, that the budget had to be
balanced.

It was all so rousing, to a nation struggling through the quagmire of Carter's
statistical reports and aching for simple answers, that Reagan came in by a
landslide.

Well, in two years, the people have discovered that there are no simple answers
– Mr Reagan, too, though he still yearns for them – but what was most
significant about the State of the Union address was not what he put into it,
but what he left out. Hardly a word about a balanced budget, except he hoped it
might happen by the end of the decade when, even if he ran and won again, he
would have been out of office for two years. Certainly, no more talk of a
constitutional amendment to make a balanced budget compulsory. He'd promised to
balance it by 1983 but, by now, there's the prospect of a $200 billion deficit.
No mention, either, of a constitutional amendment to make abortion illegal and
gone with the wind and the old rhetoric is all talk of a new federalism which
would throw the obligations of welfare and education and health care back to
the states.

As for taxes, his closest disciples in his own party have warned him that there
will have to be more taxes disguised under any other name – contingency funds,
revenue enhancements, whatever.

The most significant sentence in the whole speech, the sign of a dramatic
retreat from his old battle cry, 'Get the government off our backs' came in a
very undramatic sentence. The whole place rose to him, the Democrats by
pre-arrangement. They'd seen the text of the speech and their leaders cued them
to be ready for it. It was simply this: 'We who are in government must take the
lead in restoring the economy.'

It was a startling admission that the private sector is helpless alone, that
government has an obligation not to get off our backs, but to offer the main
helping hand and that 'government' meant the president and the Congress,
together.

The thundering response to that simple sentence must have puzzled the watching
millions until some of them, who read newspapers, learned that Mr Tip O'Neill,
the Democrat's leader in the House, who is also the speaker of the House, had
focused his wily eye on 'we, in government' and said to a caucus of his party
from both Houses, 'That's it! That's what we'll hold him to.' It's practically
an ultimatum to the president that he can have no more cuts in domestic
programmes unless he matches them with whacking cuts in the defence programme.

At the end of it, the question was aired, 'Will he run again?'

The answer seems, to me, to be fairly simple. His approval rating is now lower
than that for any president in recent history at the beginning of his third
year. If unemployment goes up through the summer, he will surely decide to
return to the mountains behind Santa Barbara to that 'retreat which he has
chosen with the fondest predilection as the asylum of his declining years'.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP