United Nations in decline

At the end of a long day of reading and writing (no arithmetic), I went off
with a friend to play a short, par-three golf course nestled on the edge of our
village. The course was deserted but as we brushed by a bend of trees going up
to the tee of the only long hole, we saw three boys banging away merrily at
balls and making lively comments. They were loose-limbed youngsters who, as an
ageing old pro once said enviously as he watched one of the type, they wind up
like snakes.

I first thought they were a mirage. They'd not been ahead of us anywhere. They
appeared from nowhere. In fact they'd appeared from over the wire fence that
separates the hallowed turf from the road. As luck would have it, who should
show up but the owner of the course. Just the right man in the right place at
the right moment and he strode off down the fairway shouting at them to be off.

He wasn't shouting as an angry man, he was shouting to be heard and when he
came close, he talked to them and told them the rule, the etiquette, rather,
'You can't cut in on the next hole if you see anybody approaching the previous
green!' To be proper, you should leave one empty hole before you jump the usual
sequence of holes. Incidentally, you're not supposed to climb over fences to
get a free game.

Well, the boys were agape more than aghast for a minute or two and then they
shuffled off. The owner is by no means a timid man. He didn't even argue with
them. He talked to them like a kindly uncle, explaining to a four-year-old what
a knife and fork are for. I said to him, 'Well, you were certainly sweet and
reasonable.' 'Have to be,' he said, 'you can't bawl 'em out or they'll come
back next time with their gang and tear up the greens.' They certainly didn't
seem like a rough-house gang but I bowed to the owner's experience. 'Trouble
is,' he said, 'you can't bet any more that they're going to listen to teacher.'

Next day, by some mental process I doubt even a neuroscientist could explain, I
picked up the text of a speech by a man who once was in charge of this
country's arms control agency and I read his conclusion and I thought what a
pity he hadn't been on the golf course and heard the last line of its owner.

The learned man's conclusion was that it's a mistake to think of arms control
as the root of national foreign policy. It should be rooted in the bodies, the
United Nations and the International Court of Justice at the Hague, that
preside over international law and set the standards of civilised behaviour
between nations. The International Court responds to cases brought by any
nation that feels its sovereign rights have been violated. The court calls in
the defendant nation. In theory, it appears, the court rules and the guilty
party goes home promising to be a good boy from then on.

This is the fiction, the ideal rationale for the court's very existence. The
big boys don't listen to teacher any more. The Soviet Union has regularly
chuckled and ignored cases brought against it before the court. Most recently,
the United States secretly mined the harbours of Nicaragua and was found guilty
of invading the rights of that sovereign nation but the United States decided
to skip the hearing.

Harbouring these dim thoughts, I watched some of the session of the United
Nations' general assembly the other day when President Reagan came to give his
annual address. It was quite like old times. Here was a president pledging his
steady devotion to peace and at the same time bemoaning the fact that the
Soviet Union will not play the game. The game, that is, of respecting
international law and the rules of civilised behaviour. And there was the chief
Soviet delegate and the new Soviet foreign secretary sitting and listening to
him, heads cocked to their translator's earphone, registering no emotion of any
recognisable kind.

At least, it was not like one old famous time when Mr Khrushchev, paying rapt
attention to a dignified bawling out from the American delegate, took off his
shoe and banged it on his desk. Mr Shevardnadze kept his cool and his shoes on
and he stayed in his seat.

For the first 20 years or so of the United Nations, we scribblers in the press
gallery used to take bets on how long it would be before Mr Gromyko walked out.
They don't walk out any more which, at first thought, might seem a sign of
improvement in manners, one to chalk up for civilised behaviour.

The truth is, however, that nobody needs to feel frightened or nervous in any
way, any longer. Walking out was a hopeful sign that the United Nations was a
body of some authority. By walking out on a speech, you made a public show of
shock, that the speaker was breaking the rules of decorum. Nobody now cares who
breaks what rule.

In the first happy years of the United Nations, we, of the West – the United
States, the United Kingdom, France, Scandinavia – and our obedient satellites
in Central and South America, we had things all our own way. There was such a
dependable majority on our side, in all votes and resolutions aimed at the
Soviet Union, and its fewer satellites, that the Russians had to invent the
walk-out to show that they counted at all.

Well, for certainly 20 of the past 40 years of the UN's life, the Africans and
the Asian nations have been coming in and the majority is heavy on the Russian
side and it drones on and on, lamenting and voting against our side with
mechanical dependability.

So United Nations' debates, so-called, are now intolerable for a sane outsider
to listen to. There is a resigned, exhausted air about them, like the clinical
whispers of a group of doctors around the bedside of a king, discussing how to
treat him when they all know he's on his deathbed.

There has not been a time when the reputation of the United Nations and public
confidence in it in many nations have been so low. Of course, everybody,
including the secretariat and the delegates, has admitted with a shrug for
years that the main purpose of the UN when it was christened with such
enthusiasm in San Francisco, the main purpose to prevent aggression through the
supreme body, the Security Council, has long ago been ignored. That purpose,
the ability to achieve it, was based in the original set-up of the Security
Council, the hope that the original big five – America, Britain, France, the
Soviet Union and China – would always agree on serious threats to peace and
stop them. Some hope.

Only America and the Soviet Union are big powers any more. China, the big boy,
is now Taiwan, the little boy, exiled off the mainland and Communist China
moved in, in its place. Even at the start, the charter allowed for the strong
possibility that the five might not always agree, so the right of any of them
to veto a decision of the other four was built in. It was used from the
beginning countless times by the Soviet Union and later by the rest of us.

The only time the Security Council had a unanimous vote was on going into
Korea. It was unanimous, the unanimity of four because the Russians said they'd
boycott the council until Communist China was let in and they were doing so and
the Russians, in those day before the jet airplane, couldn't get a top delegate
to New York in time to slap down his veto.

Real power, we all know, went into action outside the UN and it's been so for,
say, 25 years at least. Everybody forgets now the wars, little wars that could
have grown into big wars, which the UN managed to stop way back there – in
Africa and the Middle East, mainly. Even so, in previous years, the
contemptuous remarks of politicians and other public figures here and in Europe
that the United Nations was powerless, a mere public sounding board for
everyone's ideology and pet grievance, were always resented by the top officers
of the UN.

This year, the secretary-general himself says he doubts he'll run for another
five-year term. He said the other day, 'I don't see any reason why I should
preside over the collapse of the organisation. I'm a Peruvian diplomat. I don't
have to make a sacrifice and die with my ship.'

Mr Pérez de Cuéllar is no firebrand. He couldn't get elected by all factions if
he were. He's about as tactful, tolerant, patient as a diplomat can be. He was
facing the fact, however, that the United Nations is close to actual bankruptcy
and this can easily be put down to the action of the United States' Congress in
cutting America's annual dues, but first, you have to ask, cutting down from
what?

Forty years ago, the United States paid 40 per cent of the UN's entire budget,
when there were 51 members. Since 1972, when there were over a hundred member
nations – there are now 158 – the United States has paid one-quarter of the
budget. Congress has said that 20 per cent, one-fifth, must be the limit. Let
the other 157 nations do their share!

By contrast, the Soviet Union pays in only a third as much as the United States
– say, seven per cent of the UN budget. Or rather the Russians ought to be
paying so much, so little. In practice, they don't. They are $250 million
behind in their payments.

What it all means is that by the end of the next year, the fiscal year, the UN
will not be able to meet its payroll. The cuts will hurt, which they ought to,
the overblown bureaucracy of the UN but they will hurt also the
non-governmental agencies. Worst of all, to my mind, the World Health
Organisation, which is the world's only 24-hour clearing station and
early-warning headquarters of the existence of epidemic disease anywhere and
everywhere. It's due to the World Health Organisation, more than to any other
institution, that in a world in which millions of people fly every day, there
are so few carriers of disease from one country, from one continent to another.

But in spite of the dire threats and expectations, I believe the United Nations
will survive. When it comes to pronouncing the execution order, even the most
peppery opponents pause. Without the UN, we should have no world body to which,
in a terrific crisis, a massive nuclear accident, say, every nation could come
together and face, in common, a common peril.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP