Reagan being Reagan again

Here is a riddle. What is the connection between a headline saying 'Housing
Construction Up by 2.9 per cent' and President Reagan in Florida before an
audience of right-wing evangelists declaring the Soviet Union to be an evil
empire and then joining the jubilant audience in singing 'Onward Christian
Soldier'.

Taken separately, these items are startling news. The first one, about a
revival in the building of new houses and apartments, is something that the
country's been waiting for for a very long time. Along with an equally
long-awaited rise in American automobile production and a boom in municipal, in
local government, bonds and a dramatic 25 per cent drop in the price of petrol,
there's no doubt, among either the bulls or the bears, that the economy is, at
long last, pulling out of a recession – some say a depression worse than
anything we've known since the great Depression of the 1930s.

There is a difference of opinion among economic analysts, government analysts,
financial advisers and the like, about the speed and strength of this recovery
but the reasonableness of their tone in discussing this is a sure sign that
they believe the recession to be over, and there's no question that this is
good news for many more countries than the United States. On the well-known
diagnostic principle that if Wall Street sneezes, Europe catches cold, then,
when the American economy begins to sit up and take nourishment, Europe's fever
drops. If there is an axiom in international economics, this is it and I
devoutly hope that it's true this time.

Now, how does this affect Mr Reagan? Let's recall that as long ago as last
October, the president said in a fighting speech that America is recovery bound
and the world knows it. Well, the world knew no such thing, least of all the
president's own economic advisers who, like other advisers hearing of something
spunky and forthright the president had ad-libbed out on the road, they simply
groaned and got ready to prepare a statement saying that what the president
really meant was...

In the autumn, too, the president was lighting into the Soviet Union and giving
conniption fits to some of his advisers who were off to Geneva to sit down with
the Russians and talk about arms reduction. That was in the autumn, but now,
note! Go forward to the end of February and listen to his drastic change of
tone. An American news magazine commented on a speech he made to the veterans
association, the American Legion on 22 February. 'He demonstrated', the
magazine remarked, 'how much he has diluted the strongly ideological foreign
policy he carried into the White House two years ago'.

In those far-off days he made no bones about condemning the leaders in the
Kremlin as liars and cheats. It was a line, an emotional policy line, that you
could have expected him to take off on before an audience of old soldiers, but
what he said was, pursuing a policy of honesty and realism toward the Soviets
does not mean that productive relations between our nations are impossible and
that his zero option proposal was not offered on a take-it-or-leave-it basis.
But when it came out that his own director of the arms control and disarmament
agency had encouraged the initiative of a subordinate in discussing a variant
plan with a Russian, the director was fired and the subordinate was lucky not
to be fired too.

However, that seemed at the time like an aberration. On domestic matters, the
president was buckling down with his opponents in Congress – most of all with
his ideological arch enemy, Speaker Tip O'Neill. In the American system, the
speaker of the House is not simply a neutral presider over debates. He is the
political leader of the majority party in the House. So the president was
buckling down with them to soften his old ideology on many fronts, achieving a
compromise on the funding of social security, even embracing the speaker in a
very weepy, emotional truce and on other issues – taxes, public works –
abandoning his old devotion to Reaganomics, to fire-and-brimstone conservatism.

Even as I talk, many journalists and commentators are still writing about the
president's surprising willingness to retreat from the right of the road and
meet his associates in the centre, perhaps recognising, at last, what all
American politicians with ambition simply have to recognise in the end – that
on the whole and for the great mass of people, Americans distrust extremes and
like to ride the crown of the road.

This change in the president's political behaviour, if not in random samples of
his rhetoric, was so generally noticed that when his Secretary of the Interior,
Mr James Watt, cried in a speech out West two months ago, 'Let Reagan be
Reagan!' meaning let him return to his old, fiery campaign promises and
policies, many old hands thought Mr Watt was so out of touch with reality, with
the realities the president was coming to recognise, that he ought to resign
from the Cabinet. But the extreme conservatives in the Senate and the
discredited right-wing religious evangelicals took up the phrase as a battle
cry. 'Let Reagan be Reagan!'.

And last week Mr Reagan seemed to take it up himself. In his astounding
performance in Orlando, Florida, he was back to brimstone and hell fire. The
Soviet Union was 'a focus of evil'. He denounced the nuclear freeze movement,
he invoked the name of Jesus Christ as the divine protector of the United
States. He said, 'America is great because America is good – a country of such
spiritual superiority that it must terrify and ultimately triumph over those
who would enslave their fellow men'.

The invocation of the name of Jesus was very odd. You might almost say very
naive in a President of the United States since every school child learns from
the constitution that this is not a Christian country or a Jewish country or a
Mohammedan country, that it has no state religion. And the humblest politician
of any large constituency learns early on to invoke no religious leader more
specific than God – as far as they dare go, but not in states with large
numbers of orientals – is to recall us to our Judeo-Christian heritage.

A more serious flaw in the president's Florida speech which would surely occur
to the one American in four who is a Roman Catholic was that he boasted about
the spiritual superiority of Americans, evidently forgetting that 'the'
cardinal sin is spiritual pride. However, I'm not, in explaining the riddle,
going to go on about the perils to the soul of a man or a nation of frantic
boast and foolish word.

The relevant political question is, what happened to Reagan? Why is he back on
the 1980 stump-giving job to the right and anxiety to the centre? There are two
theories and the first goes directly to the news about the widespread signs of
economic recovery. He's been saying for two years in the teeth of the economic
gale that Reaganomics would work, but give him time. This theory says that he's
now convinced he was right, that the recovery is not simply a turn of events or
a traditional recovery in the nature of things, but that he did it. Therefore,
he's been given a new injection of belief in the faith that was fading. That's
all. No political motives, no secret intent to be inferred.

The second theory accepts the first but goes on to ascribe a motive. Bluntly,
it maintains that the president has now decided to run again in 1984. The
system, the philosophy, he campaigned on is working. By next spring at the
latest the recovery will be under full steam. Unemployment will drop
significantly. The four or five or six or, by then, dozen Democrats who will
have come into the race will be made to look like cautious fools or worn-out
New Dealers. Reagan will go charging into the Republican convention and in
November of next year will go romping back into the White House.

Or, in a variant of this theory, the recovery will be gradual but sure. Sure
enough for him to be certain that it will not be retarded in any serious way
and he can then say to the people, 'I was mocked at for two years, but look
what happened! We are on the right course. Give me four more years and I'll
finish the job!'.

If this theory is correct and the president is correct, and if I know Reagan,
we're going to hear again his favourite quotation from American history – the
promise that John Winthrop, picking up from Matthew, promised the first English
settlers in Massachusetts – to set up in the New World a shining city on a
hill.

Well, evidently, something has fired the president, whether it's the recovery
or something frightening about the Russians he's learned from American
intelligence, whatever it is, it's bound, I think, to reinvigorate the old
conservative right and the evangelicals and the hawks in the Pentagon. If this
is true, then one or two of the Democratic presidential runners, Mr Mondale and
John Glenn, for sure, will be able to indulge counter-blasts of rhetoric about
the dangers of Reagan and his terrible swift sword. And there are thoughtful or
dedicated or cynical Democrats who hope Mr Reagan will revert to his old
swashbuckling and embrace the right, the political right, that is, and that it
will break him.

I, myself, can only add the thought that given the mood of Congress, given the
fact that congressmen in the House, as distinct from the Senate, have only a
two-year term, that they're now already beginning to think of next year, that
they have in this session of Congress to get something specific done for their
own constituents – a new works bill, a new bridge, a crop subsidy, a federal
loan for a drug rehabilitation programme, whatever is most pressing and most
desperate in their own neck of the woods – and, given the fact that
unemployment is, in the latest government figures, exactly where it was at
eleven and a half millions, last month and the month before...

Given all this, I cannot see that the Congress will see the light as the
president sees it. They will, I'm sure, force him back to the centre where, in
the past month or two, they've compelled him to live and act.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP