Rise in drinking age

This day of July 1776 will be the most memorable epoch in the history of
America. It ought to be solemnised with pomp and parade, with shows, games,
sports, guns, bells, bonfires and illuminations from one end of this continent
to the other from this time forward for ever more.

You wouldn't think that that recipe for celebrating a national holiday could
have been written by a notably level-headed man from Massachusetts, not given
to rhetoric or show – John Adams – who was to become the second President of
the United States. It only shows how the excitability of being the little guy
who beat the champ spreads to everybody.

It was after the War of Independence had been won that every big and little
town in the United States obeyed the injunction of John Adams and let fly with
shows, games, guns, bells, etc. etc. Most of all with fireworks. We all know
that the Chinese made them and used them for public celebrations centuries
before we'd thought of them. I'm told by a learned man, learned, anyway, about
pyrotechnics, that until the nineteenth century, fireworks still used the
original element the Chinese used – saltpetre – but that the modern era began
with the use of potassium chlorate.

Well, that's enough about what produces the big bang and the light that never
was on land or sea. I'm surprised to hear from the same authority that in our
time, say, in this century, firework displays have never touched the grandeur,
the variety and the audacity of the mid-nineteenth century shows put on by the
French and the British, especially the regular displays at the Crystal Palace
that started in 1865.

I imagine the story is much the same in America though I have to say, in my
time, nothing I've seen in this country begins to match such wonders as, for
instance, at Windsor on the banks of the river one evening – I'd guess, 1959 –
when, after the usual explosions of coloured fountains and green and scarlet
rain, there emerged in the night sky a fiery Union Jack in the right colours
and then, in the middle of it, there quickly arose a remarkable likeness of the
Queen. It flared there in suspension for no more than eight or ten seconds and
then dissolved into the night. It's still more marvellous to me than the
microchip or sending a man to the moon.

Well, you can imagine that on Wednesday, the night skies from Alaska to the
Florida Keys and from the California-Mexican border to the eastern tip of Maine
were banging and flaring and whooshing away, in spite of the legal prohibition
in some states and cities against fireworks at all, at least against the
private ownership and discharge of same.

Our first genuinely national newspaper, called USA Today – I mentioned it a
month or more ago as being printed in one place, its image conveyed by
button-pressing to a satellite miles and miles up in the sky which then
reproduces the paper simultaneously in, so far, 22 cities – well this paper
devoted its 4 July edition to a whole editorial page on the perils of fireworks
and the need for tough laws to control their management. It even quoted John
Adams and wished he added to his catalogue of the things that would mark the
day, the words 'pain, misery and death'.

This newspaper, which is by no means a solemn sheet, you might have guessed it
would have gone all out on the Glorious Fourth with a gung-ho cheer, actually
began its leader with the dire sentence, 'Some of the eyes reading this
newspaper may be unable to see Thursday's edition. Thousands of Americans, most
of them children and teenagers, will be blinded, maimed, burned or deafened by
fireworks accidents over the July 4 holiday.'

Well, to any healthy, cheerful American, I'm sure that this is bugaboo prose
until, as the man warns, Thursday morning. The authenticated figures say that
more than eight thousand Americans, six thousand of them young, are injured
every year seriously enough to require hospital treatment. Considering that
something like 50 or 60 million Americans are at large and gaping into the sky
on any fine night of the Fourth, eight thousand casualties seems miraculously
few, but the editorial goes on with the steady fee-fo-fum air and its dreadful
message is reinforced by articles from a chemistry professor who's the director
of the American Pyrotechnics Association and by an ophthalmologist who says his
busiest and most distressing night of the year is that of the Fourth when, as
he puts it, 'I am the one who has to remove the eyes of people injured by
fireworks. There are', he reports, 'three thousand a year such, a thousand of
whom will suffer partial or total loss of vision.'

It seems the first national study, a warning study, was not made until 1927 and
then in the Thirties, the Depression put a damper on celebrating the singular
joy of being an American. Thirty years ago, Congress banned the shipment of
fireworks into states of which, by then, there were a dozen or more that
actually prohibited their sale. I don't think anything federal has been done
since then but the upshot of this annual cautionary crusade is to urge people
to leave fireworks alone and go off to public displays run by experts and
sanctioned by the city or state.

An odd thing, a sobering thought at any rate, about John Adams who started the
whole thing was that only one year after his appeal for bonfire shows, guns,
bells and the like, at the very first anniversary of the Declaration of
Independence, he confided to his diary that walking through the streets of
Philadelphia, he'd come on 'the most splendid illumination I ever saw'. It was
not produced by any fireworks, but by the whole city lighting up candles in its
windows. Well, this is certainly a touching and happy method of celebrating the
Fourth and is followed by prudent people, but then to children everywhere, the
excitement of fireworks or of any other escapade come to that, does not lie in
prudence. Still, there is a general move to do what 75 per cent of adult
Americans approve of, that is to ban the sale of fireworks to minors.

A much bigger to do, moving into actual legislation has been made in the past
few weeks over the drinking habits of minors – minors being defined differently
by different states. For the first time since Prohibition, the federal
government is about to do something about drinking. Since Prohibition was
repealed in 1934, it has been left to each of the states to set its own policy
about the sale, manufacture of alcohol. You must remember that though
Prohibition was repealed by a constitutional amendment, many states maintained
it until fairly recently.

I recall some years ago the outrage of the late Randolph Churchill, taking a
train from New Orleans across the continent on his way for some big reporting
assignment in San Francisco. The train slid out of New Orleans and across the
bayous of Louisiana all through the afternoon. It crossed over into Texas as
the sun's shadows were beginning to lengthen and an hour or two later across
the eastern plain, the twilight fell and, at that latitude, twilight is more of
a poetic idea than a fact. It falls very fast and no reporter I ever knew was
quicker than Randolph to get the message so movingly expressed by E. B. White,
'the most beautiful sound at twilight is the tinkle of ice'.

The rubicund and impressive Briton heard the distant echo in the club car or
thought he did and he lumbered off there, plumbed down and commanded a double
whisky. In those days, they still had Pullman porters and the amiable black
man, already got up in his blazing white jacket to begin laying the tables for
dinner, he looked at Mr Churchill as if he were demented. 'Why, bless you,
sir,' he said, 'ain't no liquor of any sort allowed till we cross the New
Mexico line. This is Texas!'

Randolph, as was his wont, bawled out the amiable waiter and demanded to know
when the line would be crossed. The man took out a fob watch and he said,
'Well, now, I should reckon it will be about four o'clock in the morning.' Mr
Churchill was purple with disgust. First, to discover that Texas is 800 miles
wide and that Texans, of all legendary hellions, should still deny themselves
the comforts of alcohol.

However, while there are still counties in the United States that sell no
alcohol, there is no state that maintains the Prohibition law. The states vary
greatly in their laws that set a minimum age for the purchase of alcoholic
beverages. In 23 states, the age is 21. Elsewhere, in the other 27 states, it
varies between 20 and 17, in only one state, Arizona.

There are six states that permit the sale at 18 and I doubt that the most
knowing student of American manners and mores could correctly call them off.
New York and Hawaii, the Big Apple and the Big Pineapple are not surprising. Or
Louisiana, cradle of jazz and lover of Bourbon. But how about the austere
Scandinavians of Wisconsin? The border state of West Virginia? How about the
dour, law-abiding Yankees of Vermont? It is 18 in all of them.

Well, now, President Reagan, of all anti-federalists, who does share
Jefferson's strong belief in as little national government as possible, Mr
Reagan has done a flip-flop. He wants a national law raising the drinking age
to 21 in order to reduce the driving accidents caused by alcohol. The new and
shocking fact is that of all accidents due to drunk driving, 42 per cent
involve adults between the ages of 16 and 24, though they are only one-fifth of
all licensed drivers. The House has already passed such a bill and it's now
before the Senate.

Apart from the moral question or the safety principle, the inducement that the
bill offers to have the states fall into line is the threat of withholding from
them government funds that go to maintain the federal highways that run through
their states.

This is a very big stick. So far, the debate has been short and sharp and the
bill seems hell bent for passage, while very few voices are heard suggesting
that compulsory seat belts reduce accidents more drastically or that, as we
discovered during Prohibition, once the apple is forbidden, many more young
people yearn for it who never cared for it much in the first place.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP