A surfeit of scandal

'Bated breath' is hardly the phrase you'd use to describe the way the American
people have been following the hearings of that joint Senate House committee
into the Iran-Contra mess and if most people by now are bored with it, it's not
because the testimony has been boring.

On the contrary, the committees have piled up an enormous record of deceit and
financial finagling and a dense mesh of details about the running of a private
army that make you think you're seeing one of the more preposterous James Bond
movies in which James Bond is played by Lawrence of Arabia, with a supporting
cast of exiled Iranians, Swiss bankers, beautiful loyal secretaries, not to
mention American ambassadors and other appointed members of the administration,
pretending they are not members of the administration.

I think there's a danger here. It's the danger of being bored by having been
fed a surfeit of scandal. Just as a drug addict increases the dosage in the
hope of increasing the pleasure, he finds that he needs more and more in order
to feel the initial kick and, in the miserable end, he can be taking huge doses
and feeling nothing at all. His senses are numbed to anything less violent than
the kick of a mule.

Now, compare this with the public response to other scandals. When 60 years ago
the first news came out about the scandals that had gone on under President
Harding, the shock was felt from coast to coast. The old soldier's pension fund
had been defrauded by its chief. He went to jail. The attorney general had torn
up – today he would have shredded – his bank records before he came to trial.
The secretary of the interior, the home secretary, had secretly leased
government oil reserves to a crony on down payment of a $100,000 bribe. He,
too, went to jail.

President Harding, himself, was in the clear. He really was a simple man, he'd
been too busy hunting the Reds to notice what was going on under his nose.
Anyway, the hearings, the trials, were swiftly conducted. The public was
shocked and the criminals were behind bars.

Nothing as bad as the Harding scandals happened until the early 1970s and
Watergate. The Senate hearings took their time too, but it had been so long
since anyone had heard of such crookery in the White House that again the
people were roused and shocked. And when it came out a year later that
President Nixon had been privy to the original break-in and had supervised some
of the subsequent shenanigans like laundered money and the secret bombing of
Cambodia, and then, when the decisive committee, the House Judiciary Committee,
heard a tape of Mr Nixon actually ordering the CIA to stop the FBI
investigating the whole mess, that was it.

Articles of impeachment were filed. Mr Nixon was told by his own men in the
Senate that in the following trial he would certainly be found guilty, so he
resigned. And the quiet, decent, uninvolved Vice President Ford succeeded and,
as Mr Carter said, 'he healed the wounds'. Anyway, he helped the country get
the foul taste out of its mouth.

And now Iran-Contra. When I talk about the danger of being bored with it, I'm
thinking that we've been fed such increasingly strong doses of trickery and
deceit that we're becoming numb, morally numb. I have good friends I like to
think of as being reasonably honest people who, whenever they comment on the
affair, say, 'Well... well, from what we've learned from all the books about
the intelligence services in this country and in Israel and Britain, maybe the
same thing is going on everywhere.'

I think this kind of neutralism is only a step away from saying, 'Well, these
people are running a private army because they thought the United States was
blind to the peril of Marxist governments taking over all of Central America.
Maybe these soldiers of fortune were not so much crooked as brave. Maybe,
after, Colonel Oliver North should be thought of as, as the president says, a
national hero.'

Well, we shall soon see whether the Congress looks on him as a crooked
adventurer or as Lawrence of Arabia. Colonel North was, admittedly, the
absolutely top man in setting up and running this private army, this
underground foreign policy. Before the first investigating committee he refused
to testify, claiming his constitutional right not to incriminate himself out of
his own mouth. He threatened a week or more ago not to testify in private
before the joint select committees. Their method has been to get the witnesses
to tell their story in private session, confront them with documents and so on,
so that when they came into public session, they would not feel they'd been
tricked with surprise evidence.

If Colonel North had so refused, he could have been cited for contempt of
Congress. No citizen subpoenaed to appear before a congressional committee can
refuse, without being cited for contempt. Maybe, it occurred to the committee
members, that's what Colonel North wanted. He'd get a simple, short prison
sentence instead of – if all the evidence they've collected proved illegality
or criminality – instead of a long prison sentence.

The last thing the committees wanted was to let Colonel North off the hook with
a contempt citation. They bargained with him and he agreed to deposit with the
committee a whole sheaf of his personal records, which he did last Tuesday,
appearing in his marine uniform, with six rows of ribbons and medals, just as a
reminder of how he sees himself.

On Wednesday, he settled down to testify in private. And when he goes public
next week, he has the comforting knowledge that nothing he says, nothing
brought out against him in these committee hearings can lead to his prosecution
because he agreed to testify only if he were granted what's called limited
immunity. As a reward for testifying at all, he will not be prosecuted whatever
he says. Whatever he says, that is, before the joint committees.

But remember, there's also in the case a special prosecutor working
independently and working, we may be sure, at full tilt, night and day. If he
produces independent, damaging evidence against the colonel, he could then be
prosecuted on that score, but it won't do if the special prosecutor confirms
damaging evidence already given to the committees by the colonel, himself. So
you see, it is a race.

Anyway, this coming week, at long last, the leading actor, the star, the
protagonist, will take the witness chair.

It's not possible that we will hear any more juicy details. The committees have
already been swamped with the juice of Colonel North's beliefs and adventures
and memos and secret safaris. We know pretty well the whole chain of command of
this extraordinary army and its exploits, the whole chain of command down from
Colonel North. But how about up?

That was the crucial question from the beginning and it remains the crucial
question at the end. Who authorised his remarkable enterprise, as he calls it.
There's only one man in the United States who has the authority to give and, of
course, that man is the President of the United States in his role as the
constitutional commander-in-chief of the armed forces.

Many of the underlings,the powerful underlings in Colonel North's private army,
or improvised foreign office, have testified that they assumed all along
Colonel North was acting if not on the president's orders, at least with his
approval. The key question inside the questions is, how much did the president
know about the diversion of funds from the Iran arms sales to the Contras?

All the Democrats on the committees, by the way, call them Contras. The
witnesses involved in the plot and most Republicans on the committees call them
freedom fighters. It's not a small point if you stop to reflect how, in the
end, the Congress and the people will come to look on the enterprise.

So, the central issue at the end is the same as the one at the beginning. The
whole bundle of evidence can be tied up in a massive volume entitled, 'What Did
the President Know?'

Some of you may recall that a fortnight ago, I talked about the welcome, to
some of us, the welcome decline in flag-waving television commercials in
pinning the adjective 'American' on the virtues of things to eat, to wear, to
drive, to buy. This decline was not due to any twinge of conscience on the part
of the advertising agencies, but to their discovery that chauvinist advertising
wasn't selling, doing the job and they concede, or say frankly in private, that
the airing of the Iran-Contra affair has had a lot to do with it.

Another vanishing act, which has not been commented on, is the first gradual
and then swift, disappearance of those posters and motorcar stickers and decals
saying, in facetious variations, 'I love New York'. Mayor Koch talks less and
less about the glories of the Big Apple. His administration, too, is depleted
of its old hearty strength by officials who have committed suicide or gone to
jail, or are facing jail.

And on Tuesday, a very chastened Mayor Koch appeared to hear the public report
of a commission he appointed on the future of the city. If by the year 2000,
the report said, something is not done about poverty and housing and public
education, New York could collapse as a world capital for business, finance,
the media, technology and the arts.

At last, the city has officially recognised what anybody with eyes to see has
seen for decades cluttering the skyline, more and more and more high-rise,
luxury apartment and office buildings and vast areas of the city with rotting
or abandoned blocks of once middle-class or working-class houses.

It's a long and complicated report touching on every ill of the big city – of
big cities – today and we'll go into it at another time. But the city has
recognised, for the first time, that its survival as a peaceful metropolis
depends on a wholesale clean-up.

A melancholy touch of humour was given to this report by an item I spotted of a
local clean-up that is not appreciated by the citizens. Downtown, in a mainly
Jewish and Italian neighbourhood, there has appeared the strange novelty in the
delicatessens of pasteurised salami.

One old man summarised the general outrage. 'Pasteurised salami, yet? It's
embarrassing. It's like a high-school girl – beautiful complexion and no
character.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP