Marcos overthrown by people power

Throughout most of last weekend, on Sunday and Monday and well into Tuesday, I
found myself, as the French say, hypnotised by a single television station
that's based not in New York or Washington or Los Angeles or any other
metropolis, but in Atlanta, Georgia.

It's a private cable station owned by one Mr Ted Turner who had the idea, a few
years go, that the country could stand having a 24-hour news station with a
staff working in three shifts like coal miners. Mr Turner was derided at the
time but that's only because most of the experts – I mean the big shots of the
big networks – imagined he would simply be reduced to chewing over the hourly
news bulletins available from the news agencies and would, therefore, most of
the time, be chewing on his cud. Moreover, how many cities, then, had cable?
Maybe 20 at most.

I went down there to Georgia shortly after the experiment got going and I was,
at the time, as they say, flogging a book and the Turner station had set up an
interview. I was alarmed when I was told the interview would take place in the
station's newsroom. A city newsroom, with its continuous din, even since they
abandoned typewriters and installed word processors, is the last place for
anyone to meditate aloud. To my relief and great surprise when I was ushered
into the newsroom, I might just as well have been walking down a cathedral
aisle to exchange some quite reflective words with the priest.

The great square room, as large and fluorescent as the newsroom in which
Woodward and Bernstein tapped out their fateful revelations about Nixon and
Watergate in the movie 'All the President's Men', the newsroom had the usual
large staff in it, but there was no sound of keys being tapped or buzzers being
buzzed. I don't know how many, maybe 20, 30 people, mostly young women, were
sitting there each in front of a large television monitor. They appeared to be
in a comfortable stupor. They were looking at blank screens, some of them.
Others, however, were watching pictures. What pictures?

A printed sign over each monitor gave the enterprise, if not the game, away.
One said Moscow, another said Tokyo, another Stockholm, another Madrid, another
Washington, Paris, Honolulu, Dallas, London and on and on. The secret of this
audacious novelty should have been clear from the outside of the building which
is a modern building in the Sixties style, clean, white lines and, as I recall,
no more than three or four storeys high. Planted around the building were
flower beds at ankle level but, high above them, many huge saucers which were
there to pick up by satellite all the images that showed up on the interior
monitors.

What Mr Turner had done was to say, 'We're not going to depend on the news
tickers or on the film crews of the three nationwide television networks, we're
going to have our own reflectors of what can be seen to be happening in scores
of cities around the globe'.

Well, by now, the station has its own correspondents, hundreds of what
newspapers used to call 'stringers', all over the place, ready for a call to or
from the Atlanta headquarters and its resident large staff to drum up a film
crew and get there. I began to pay serious attention to this station one night
in, must have been the autumn of 1984, when having watched the late night news
round-up on three networks that come on at 11 o'clock, having flicked around
the dial and being about to go off to bed, I came on a totally incomprehensible
interview from New Delhi. A youngish Indian was being interviewed about his
mother. Briefly, I must say and then we cut to a house guarded by armed
soldiers. From there we went to crowds in the streets being hemmed in by
patrolling police and soldiers. Very soon the story came shockingly clear. Mrs
Gandhi had just been assassinated by members of her own bodyguard.

Next morning on the seven o'clock, eight o'clock, nine o'clock news, all the
networks had it. Today, there are scores of cities that offer cable channels
released to independent companies which supplement the channels of the three
commercial and the public, non-commercial network. And all of them make a point
of having Ted Turner's CNN Atlanta channel available.

What's more, I notice in Chicago, in Washington, in San Francisco, in
Minneapolis, Los Angeles, wherever the three big networks have a news gathering
staff, I notice that in the headquarters of these people, whether, say, the NBC
Centre in Washington or the BBC headquarters in New York, most, if not of all,
of the offices of the staff have a television set tuned more or less
permanently to Mr Turner's station.

A famous American general once said that the great aim of a field commander was
'to get there fastest with the mostest'. That has been Mr Turner's aim and I
have joined the increasing number of my friends who, when something really
startling or unexpected is happening, ditch the big networks and stayed tuned
through the day and, last weekend, the night, to Atlanta. Its regular routine
is to do a visual round-up of the news every half-hour or 48 times every 24
hours. Last weekend we were going to Manila and their crews there whenever, it
seemed, the need arouse.

Now to some people, I suppose, this ceaseless coverage would be intolerable
either on the ground that the human mind can only take in so much at a time or
from the prejudice that what one camera can show at any given time is bound to
be only a part of the truth and usually a colourful or violent part. But when
the actual events, the really significant changes, were happening so fast, it
required patience and stamina to take it in without prejudicial theories.

Surprisingly, the Atlanta men in Manila, the CNN men, acted better than the
network men at their stated evening hours in cautioning us against making large
assumptions from the pictures we were seeing. It was one of the networks that
showed thousands of people surging into the presidential palace grounds and
then cutting to a few incensed young people tearing down pictures of Marcos and
stamping on them. The accompanying word was that the crowd, now termed a mob,
had started trashing the palace.

By that time, Atlanta had shown similar pictures but reported over them that
both the rebel generals and Mrs Aquino had ordered detachments of the army to
protect all the main rooms, to repeat Mrs Aquino's plea that this was no longer
the Marcos palace, but the people's palace, and the crowds were shepherded out
in an orderly fashion.

When it was all over and when, by Wednesday, my mind for one was racing with
jumbled images like a movie being played in double time, one or two images kept
reappearing as single faces will keep reappearing in a dream. There were two
that I shall remember for the longest time, one dialogue and one indelible
picture of a woman standing next to a nun.

The dialogue was between a network correspondent in Washington and General
Ramos, one of the two generals who first proclaimed the revolution. Did the
general think he had the power, the fire power, to resist an attack from the
Marcos loyalist forces? No, said the general, but he was trusting to people
power. The phrase had already become a slogan to the thousands chanting on the
streets. And what would that be?

Quite intensely, with a furrowed brow like a scientist explaining some knotty
theory before a conference of experts, General Ramos said, 'The power that
prevails over the military formations, the use of people confronting tanks and
armoured columns has proved successful'. Now this was either a pathetic
whistling solo in the dark or an amazing recognition of a new truth from a man
whose whole life has been in the military, the man, moreover, who reorganised
the military to enforce Marcos's long retention of martial law. Which was it?

The answer was illustrated by the second image. It was of a nun, on her knees
and, by her side, a woman standing motionless except for her two hands upraised
in prayer. In front of them was a tank at the head of an oncoming armoured
column. The tank stopped. The soldier poised for action in the turret, looked
down, confused and mum, for the moment. He looked and the woman prayed, then he
waved his arm and the tank lumbered round and the column clumsily went into
reverse. In that moment, Marcos was doomed.

So, in the end, the parallel that was drawn by that exiled Filipino foreign
minister which I mentioned last time, the parallel with what happened in
Thailand 13 years ago had exactly followed. The moment the dictator's army
wobbled and could not or would not shoot at the unarmed citizenry was the
moment of defeat.

There is, this weekend, still great rejoicing and all the ecstasy of release,
freedom, independence, but we've learned from the overthrow or even the
peaceful surrender of so many colonial regimes in Africa, that while the day of
freedom, Uhuru, is very stimulating, the grey, tough time is the morning after,
when the people who enjoyed the exhilaration of pulling the house down have to
start the long, undramatic chore of rebuilding. And in the Philippines, this is
going to be a task which two Philippines' experts here, both, and independently
called 'staggering, monumental'.

For the time being, Mrs Aquino can appoint a Cabinet more or less of the
centre, but the immense and widespread bureaucracy of the right is there and
will have to be pacified and some elements of the left must come in if the
Communists, the so-called New People's Army, is not to swell its ranks in the
hills. The guerrillas still remain the big threat to any stable democratic
regime.

A Marcos general – now we have to suppose a reformed, anti-Marcos general –
said the other day, 'We could obliterate the New People's Army in a day if they
would stand and fight'.

It was the same complaint made by the British commander in the American War of
Independence, but the Americans, too, were scattered, sneaky guerrillas and, in
imperial Rome, in the American Revolution here, against Napoleon's men in Haiti
and, most recently, in Vietnam, guerrillas have an impressive record of
confounding the mightiest war machines.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP