Florida's changing fortunes

I've just come back... I was going to say the South, but it would be more
accurate and not in the least pedantic to say I've been in Florida which, if
you go down to the Keys, is certainly as far south as you can go in the United
States. It occurs to me that that's not true either. If you want to be really
exact, Brownsville, Texas, to the west on the mainland, is actually the
southernmost point.

Anyway, the point I wish to make is that while Florida is south of the states
of the Deep South – Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi – it is 'in' but not 'of' the
South. It's practically a displaced northern state hitched on to the Deep South
because the vast majority of the people who live there came in late and came
from the north and the Midwest. Unless you go into the back country and come on
very old people who've been citrus farming there for two or three generations,
you won't hear anything easily recognisable as Southern speech in shops,
stores, restaurants, airports, hotels, everywhere. You might, judging from the
speech of the people you encounter, you might be in California or Michigan.
Certainly not in Texas, not anywhere between the Carolinas and the Gulf of
Mexico.

This is a very odd thing. It's as if you started from London and went through
the Midlands, through Crewe and noticed the speech getting more northern every
mile till you were well into Lancashire and then, as you crossed over into what
used to be Cumberland, came on everybody speaking Cockney. Well, the reason, as
I've hinted, is not far to seek. The population statistics are staggering in
growth, unlike anything in the other 49 states.

The records of such things go back to 1790. As you'd expect, Massachusetts,
being the earliest of the New England settlements, had 378,000 people. Florida
had no record. It was a vast swamp and there must have been some uncounted
Seminole Indians. Florida doesn't come on to the census records till 1830 with
34,000 people and, by then, Massachusetts had nearly 20 times as many people.
Move on quickly to 1950. By then Florida had two and three-quarter million
people and Massachusetts just over five million. Thirty years later, in 1980 –
the last count – Massachusetts has five and three-quarter million and Florida
just under ten million. In other words, Florida nearly quadrupled its
population in 30 years and the movement has quickened and may still be
quickening.

The most mind-boggling statistic of all is this. In the past ten years only,
Massachusetts has added 40,000 people. Florida has added three million. What is
the big deal, the irresistible appeal? Well, you could say, you used to be able
to say with confidence, that up to the Second War, the natives of Florida grew
oranges and lemons and made cigars and the greatly swollen winter population
came for the sun and the games. There'd been a long, steady influx of permanent
winter residents in retired old folks, farmers from the middle west most of
all.

After the Second War, it was still citrus and tourism, with a very lively beef
cattle industry developing and a continuing dribble or patter of retired people
of all classes, but in the Fifties and Sixties, that's when younger people went
there – and Puerto Ricans and Cubans and the astronauts. Today, you look at
those ten million and you wonder what they do and you find that the main
industries are services, trade, tourism.

The word 'services' used to be a benevolent word attesting to the courtesies of
selling things and to the compassionate concern of caring for the sick, the
old, the dependent, the disabled and so on. Services now covers everything from
nursing to hair styling and from punching out social security cheques, to
running automobile licensing bureaux and insurance statistics bureaux and
hospitals claims bureaux and environmental protection bureaux and the staffing
of labour union headquarters and widows compensation offices and bureaux and
bureaux and bureaux.

The welfare state has, at last, seen to it that nobody starves and that,
especially if you're very poor, you can have free medical care, but the growth
and spreading of bureaux and the secretaries and the office staffs and filing
clerks and checkers has ballooned the numbers of Americans who, when they have
to define their work, come under the general heading of services. I suppose
it's much the same in most democratic countries and even more so in thorough
going Communist countries.

By now, anyway, in the United States, more than half the working population is
in services. It's the chronic headache of anybody in government who has to do
something about the economy. Certainly, most of these services have come to be
essential and, as old George Herbert said three centuries ago, 'Who sweeps a
room as for thy laws makes that and the action fine.'

Well, it may be a service to God but it's also a fearful drag on the national
exchequer. Put it bluntly, as the Bureau of Labor Statistics puts it routinely,
and say that more than half the population is not growing anything or making
anything or inventing anything, is, in a word, non-productive. So unemployment
in Florida – 30 years ago it barely existed – is compounded by several problems
which attack other states singly.

Every state is suffering from the lay-offs of skilled workers whose skills, in
steel and automobile production most of all, has been supplanted by the skills
of foreign countries. Florida now has fewer tourists since there's less money
around and so has to lay off waiters, bath attendants, laundresses and the
like. Its huge Puerto Rican and Cuban and now Haitian immigrant populations,
which burgeoned in the past few years, are coming into a land which has little
use for their services, least of all for their farming abilities, since more
oranges and lemons and limes can be grown on fewer acres than ever before and
the general acceptance of citrus concentrate, where one part orange juice is
bottled with four parts water, actually depresses the need for oranges in bulk.

All this you can see to the general distress if you go into the basements of
the big hotels, wander around the empty condominiums on which work has stopped
and see the long, polyglot lines outside the labour exchanges.

Well, it's one of the... it's one of the nuisances of being a reporter that you
become temperamentally unable to live the sunny, high, theatrical life without
wanting to go and poke around behind the scenes. If you're a normal tourist
and, therefore, have the means to be one, you will not notice any of these
things. The ocean is there glittering blue-green, the hotels are seemingly
packed with carefree bodies tanning away with the intentness and the
concentrated frown of people stretched out on a rack. The cocktail bars tinkle
and chatter, the nightclub shows flash thighs and rows of teeth as determinedly
as ever, the golf courses gleam very green in the blinding sun and the carts
containing greying or balding old men pour relentlessly over the little hills
like a motorised battalion advancing in mufti.

But I seem to recall that the Singapore Country Club was relaxing with its
usual amenities, a nine-hole round, a gentle gin and It, one day before the
Japanese overran it.

I have to say that I had an otherwise heartless and happy week sitting, when I
was not swinging – in a technical sense – in a beautiful Spanish courtyard that
might have been in Seville, surveying the bougainvillea and smelling the
wonderful mixed scent of the orange trees and the wafting Australian pines. But
in Palm Beach, at any rate, there is one overwhelming smell. It is the smell of
money and I hope it's not snobbish to say that about a week of it is enough.

It was good to wing back from 75 degrees and brilliant sunshine to New York in
15 degrees and brilliant sunshine and zero in the suburbs, whereupon the papers
all carried pictures of people muffled up to their eyeballs and captions
saying, 'Winter Here At Last.' Half the United States would have been grimly
amused. The winter arrived with a howl and a bang and the usual blizzards two
months ago to the Sierra and the Rockies and all of the mid-continent. Which
reminds me of a slightly hilarious postscript I have to offer to my talk of a
couple of weeks ago.

For those of you who cut class, let me briefly recount the plot up to now. I
told how we had with us for Christmas with my daughter in Vermont a big bearded
friend who is one of the top art directors of Hollywood. He was up there,
surely, as a friend of the family, but also on business. He'd been going up to
Vermont for a couple of months to do the reconnaissance on a movie he's making
with Walter Matthau. It's a comedy about getting through the Arctic Vermont
winter. It's to be called, appropriately, 'The Survivors'.

Well, shooting, filming, that is, was set for 7 January. At Christmas time
there wasn't a flake of snow in sight – a disastrous freak of nature that was
to cost the state of Vermont a $125 million loss on its skiing industry. The
sets had been designed and constructed, the trailers for the cast and crew, the
locations cleared, all the enormous lighting and electrical paraphernalia, over
a hundred unemployed Vermonters hired as extras. Eventually the cast and the
crew arrived, in all 150 of them. No snow. The days went by, the loss in
salaries and unused union time mounting and mounting. So they set a deadline
for Friday 14 January.

In the meantime, my art director friend was flying off to other pastures to
make other arrangements. No snow. So they paid off the extras and arranged the
transportation for the cast and crew for Monday 16. Everything was packed and
ready for the long flight to California to Lake Tahoe in the High Sierra.

On Saturday 14, it started. By Monday morning, 24 inches had fallen and the
huge caravan of players and labourers had a frightful time making it to the
airport. They were practically snowbound. They flew off. They landed in San
Francisco and flew on to Tahoe. The temperature was a freakish 48 there. It was
raining.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP