Old hatreds

As I sit down to record this talk – a little earlier than usual, since I'm
6,000 miles away from its destination at Broadcasting House – I can't help
noticing the bizarre coincidence that it's the 1,918th talk in this series and
that it's being recorded on Monday 11. So, if this were a newspaper dispatch,
it would bear the dateline, Letter From America 1918 11 November. I suppose
that's a date which now has to be taught in schools since most of the people
who lived through it in France, in Russia, in Britain, in every part of
Australia, India, New Zealand, not to mention Germany and Austria and Turkey,
are dead and gone.

But for those of us still around, it's as solemn and as indelible as any date
in our lifetime. On the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the eleventh month
in 1918, what we called the Great War and then the World War and then,
ruefully, the First World War and now what's known to younger generations as
simply, the '14–'18 War, was all over.

I was up at the first flicker of dawn because our newspaper had promised the
day before that it would print, on the 11th, the terms of the Armistice. I took
out several pages of what we then called 'cartridge' paper and in a laborious,
but pretty fast script for a nine-year-old, I copied out the entire Armistice
terms, gummed the pages together in a long scroll, rolled it up as stage plays
and early movies had taught us to believe was the proper shape of a diplomatic
document, tied it with a little red, white and blue ribbon and marched off
around our seaside town, my left hand in my mother's hand, my right clutching
this state document.

It should have been, to the neighbours, an early-warning signal of the
emergence of a ham. It was, I recall, a crisp and sunny November day but the
only other memory which is as sharp and mouthwatering as last night's dinner is
a shop window. After our walk about on the way home, we passed by our local,
what was then called our confectioners; I imagine today they're called pastry
boutiques, just as in Paris the chicest boutique I know calls itself simply, Le
Shop.

Anyway, a confectioner's window was of all window in war time, the most barren,
the most pitifully denuded of all shops' windows. Sometimes there were two or
three loaves of brown bread and sometimes there was none, but on that still,
blissful, bright November morning, there stood glistening in the centre of the
empty window a cut-glass cake stand and on the stand stood a bun, a round bun
and on top of the bun was a circle of snow, of ice, no! – of something I'd
never seen before – white icing! It was an iced bun and it was, for the long
moment we stared at it, a thrilling symbol of the fact that we'd come through.

Well, last Monday, I paused in this reminiscence as the clock of San
Francisco's nearby Grace Cathedral struck 11. I paused and looked out down on
the graceful little rectangular park that surmounts Nob Hill. The hour struck,
but nobody else was pausing. I don't know for how many years at that hour on
that day and in how many countries everything stopped for precisely two minutes
– street cars, buses, motorcars, people, the men doffing their hats – everybody
standing stock still. The most unearthly silence in all great cities and two
minutes later, everything started up again and soon the cities were roaring
again.

It must be... it must be 20 years at least since this stunning and admirable
custom ended. Perhaps it isn't admirable. After all, or after a time, to forget
old enmities, old wars is necessary for the sanity of the living. At any rate,
the two-minute silence is long gone and I should guess forgotten by most of the
world's peoples.

You can't go on forever calling 11 November Armistice Day. In this country,
it's been rechristened Veterans Day to commemorate the veterans of all the
American wars from the first, the triumphant one which ended 200 years ago to
the last, Vietnam, the bitterest one.

And on Sunday in Washington on a balmy morning, when it seemed everybody was
out craning for a glimpse of the Royal couple, several thousand men and women
and children, a silent troop of unforgetting mothers and widows and sisters and
fathers took their turn to touch what is surely the boldest and most sombre of
all war memorials, the vast, black stone wall on which are chiselled 58,022
names, the men who died in combat in Vietnam.

In the past day or two, I've read a lot of newspapers – because of its place in
the time zone, San Francisco can offer you at breakfast not only the local
papers and the Los Angeles Times, but also that morning's New York Times and
London Times. I have read or scanned hundreds of pages but, only here, in the
San Francisco Chronicle, have I seen a piece devoted entirely to recalling the
first Armistice Day, 11 November and what it meant to a generation or two that
is now white-haired or gone for good.

This was a piece by Herb Caen, a local columnist who is San Francisco's
resident Mr Pepys. He remarked on how the importance of the day has waned and
added, regretfully, that too many of our holidays are disappearing or becoming
homogenised. As school kids we were so proud to remember 12 February as
Lincoln's birthday and February 22 as Washington's, but now they've been
telescoped into a long weekend. So much better for business, so much more
convenient.

This is literally true. Whatever day of the week 22 February fell on, the
entire nation used to close its businesses and schools and store windows
displayed pictures or busts of George Washington and gave him a swag or drape
of the Stars and Stripes. I ought to tell you, though, that while on Lincoln's
birthday many states performed the same obeisance for old Abe, 12 February was
never a national holiday and no president dared proclaim it as such, so long as
the South retained its own resentful image of Lincoln as a tyrant at worst, at
best, a northern conqueror. And, to this day, 120 years after the end of the
Civil War, most Southern cities and towns – and they're embraced by a third of
the nation's geography – don't exactly make a fetish of ignoring Lincoln's
birthday, they pay it the passing tribute of a nod and go about their business.

So, it seems while many decent, solemn dates dim and vanish, the bitter taste
of others keeps its tang. I noticed in the long spring commemoration of the end
of the Second World War in Europe, the hideous fate of the Jews in the
Holocaust was properly retold and mourned over, till however there came a point
when I, for one, began to feel uneasy that this necessary but prolonged act of
remembrance might have the opposite effect to what was intended, to stir in
sullen or bigotted people their old anti-Semitic impulses.

Now this is not the sort of fear that respectable commentators put into print
or over the air but I mention it because several friends, mostly Jewish
friends, confidentially felt the same way. And this fear came very vivid to me
when, after one of the many documentaries we saw about six million people being
treated like pigs on a spit, one New York television station showed a family of
Armenian Americans celebrating or bemoaning their own particular annual
festival.

It was the seventieth anniversary of the infamous massacre of the Armenians by
their Turkish conqueror. It had been going on since the 1890s but, in 1915, the
Turks, in a final spasm of hatred, slaughtered all the able-bodied Armenians in
sight and drove the rest out into the Syrian desert on the wholesale charge
that all Armenians existed to help the Russian armies. Hundreds of thousands of
Armenians died in the desert of starvation and/or sunstroke and, in the end,
the official estimate of the Armenian dead was over one million.

This outrage was, of course, thoroughly reported at the time in Britain, all
the more colourfully since Turkey was a fighting enemy, but after the war, the
indignation cooled and the war hatreds eventually languished and died. In
Britain, I mean, but not in America where there were, and are, always large
colonies of immigrants, from every part of southern and central and eastern
Europe. They feel acutely the sufferings of their relatives, partly, no doubt,
from the guilt of not being there to share them.

When I came to this country in the early Thirties, small children everywhere
were scolded for not cleaning their plates. 'Think', the parents used to say,
'of the starving Armenians!' And in several great cities and in one valley of
California, almost entirely populated by Armenian immigrants, the old grievance
against the Turks was nursed and kept green, but not, I should have thought,
into 1985.

However, on the television programme I mentioned, a great-grandfather and a
grandfather were on a night last spring instructing their small grandchildren,
slowly, patiently, as you might teach them a nursery rhyme, instructing them in
hatred of the Turks. I don't know why this scene horrified me, whereas the
recall of the Nazi Holocaust seemed timely and right. Do an extra 30 years make
all the difference? When will the Germans feel free from the stigma of the
swastika? They are, to me, unanswerable questions.

But one thing was painfully clear last weekend. The war in Vietnam ended ten
years ago but the wound to American morale is only partly healed. It was the
first, great military defeat in the country's history. The veterans'
administration calculates that between 300 and 400,000 of the men who served
are still afflicted with what they call 'post trauma stress disorder' – what in
the First World War was more bluntly called 'shell shock'.

One veteran who touched the black stone last weekend called it a memorial to
desolation. So, Veterans' Day this year did, at least, remind us of the
tenacity of old hatreds and leave us with the uncomfortable question, when will
the Turks and the Germans and the Vietnamese be welcomed as equal members of
the human family?

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP