Recession may finish Carter

Where to begin? Most weeks one or two things happen and start two trains of
thought and I decide to ride the train most likely to interest most people
outside the United States. It's not a question of picking the most serious or
dramatic of two events, two happenings, two statements.

Sometimes, as you'll have noticed, I'm shocked by some tiny happening into
realising how ignorant I've been for so long about a radical American
characteristic. Some of you may recall, as I shall always recall, the moment
when my daughter was a tot. I was settling to my talk and I blew my nose. There
was a scutter of little footsteps down the hallway. My four-year old appeared
at my study door. 'What's going on?' she cried. It was the first time it struck
me in 20 years that while Englishmen blow their noses, Americans wipe them. Let
no foreign affairs expert or other double-dome intellect belittle this blinding
insight.

Well, this has been a week in which so many things have happened, seemingly big
and small, which could radically affect the way America is to move socially,
economically, politically in foreign affairs that to pick out the most
significant train of thought becomes a personal choice. I'll list some of these
things and it may be that you'll choose your own train to ride.

In a humdrum week, any one of them would have been the compulsory topic to talk
about: Marshal, President, Tito died at last, and the papers and the airwaves
were dense with discussions of whether the great range of Yugoslavia's ethnic
and language divisions could be held by a collective presidency or whether the
Soviet Union would begin, first by infiltration, to try to retrieve Yugoslavia
as a Russian satellite.

Into Key West, Florida, first the inhabitants of that southernmost town were
alarmed and then the navy and then the coastguard and then the State Department
and then the White House at an invasion of Cuban refugees to the extent of over
16,000 in two weeks, which forced the newcomers to be corralled, if they were
lucky, in tent cities, in schoolrooms. If they were unlucky, on open ground
without political status, without any visible place to go; without, in some
places, ordinary sanitation.

There were four more presidential primaries and they left Mr Carter and Mr
Reagan so close to the necessary majorities they need to get for the
presidential nomination of their parties that the coming conventions began to
look not like the battlefronts or chessboards they were meant to be, but more
like coronation ceremonies and this at a time when less than one American in
three wants Mr Carter back in the White House and some fewer than that want Mr
Reagan to enter it.

Mr Cy Vance, having given his all for President Carter, including the
unpleasant task of lying to America's allies about economic sanctions against
Iran as a sure guarantee that no military exploit of any sort would be
attempted, Mr Vance couldn't bear the rub of his conscience and resigned as
Secretary of State, to be followed by a man who had nudged the White House a
long time ago with the suggestion that any time Mr Vance chose to leave the
State Department, he would like to move in – Senator Edmund Muskie of the
rock-bound, tight-lipped state of Maine. He's surely worth a profile but we
shall have to wait and see if his convictions coincide with his loyalty to Mr
Carter and the Democratic party. For the moment, he's treading water.

From London came the crackling news of the brilliant manoeuvre of the Special
Air Services regiment in rescuing the Iranian hostages, an exploit that would
certainly receive a ringing tribute from John Wayne, if he were alive and one
that invites, is inviting, all sorts of odious comparisons with the American
fiasco in the desert, comparisons which, the more you think about them, are
irrelevant and even absurd, but the ironic twist which made Americans wince was
the prompt act of the Iranian government in congratulating the British
government for rescuing hostages illegally held, quote, 'against all the tenets
of international law' – a phrase we seem to have been hearing from Mr Carter
since the beginning of November.

In the meantime, both the Congress and the Pentagon have started their own
separate investigations into what went wrong in the Iranian desert. Hundreds of
thousands of words of testimony will be given to the congressional committee
that's looking into it and, in the end, they will be printed in fat booklets
and I doubt we shall be any the wiser.

Yet, with all these things happening or impending, most Americans believe that
there are two things which will most seriously affect their welfare this year
and the outcome of the presidential election. Those two things are linked in
gloom. The unchecked inflation and, suddenly, the beginning of the long lines
of unemployed. The sure sign that the recession we've talked about, hinted at,
denied, is really here. Six months ago, economists and financial men told the
president that his policy of raising interest rates would surely end in a
recession, perhaps a deep one and Mr Carter replied, with characteristic calm
that the policy would, in the long run, defeat inflation but in the short run,
he granted, produce a recession; one, however, that would be, he said, mild and
brief.

Well, now that the banks have started lowering their interest rates by as much
as a full point from a month ago, President Carter has a smile on his face and
is saying that inflation will pause and wilt this summer and give us a clear
sign that the United States has 'turned the corner'. That was his actual phrase
and it sends little shivers down the spine of Americans old enough to recall
the same phrase and similar ones used by President Hoover only weeks before the
Wall Street Crash of 1929.

You may well wonder why it is that President Carter, when exposed to the
referendum of Democratic voters in state after state, goes on serenely winning
majorities, piling up a number of delegates pledged to vote for him come the
Democratic convention here this summer. As an old student and reporter of
nominating conventions, I tried to explain some time ago how the new emphasis,
especially of the media, on the primaries has spread the popular belief that
they, alone, will decide the nominees before the conventions assemble.

The old days are plainly gone for ever when, in spite of primary victories and
defeats and surprises, the main battle was joined on the convention floor. So
that as the last, most dramatic, example, the Republicans could gather in
Philadelphia in 1940, more or less convinced that the fight would be between
the two giants of the primaries, one Governor Dewey of New York and one Senator
Taft of Ohio, but a man who had never entered a primary, a man who had never
voted Republican, of all political innocence, a Wall Street lawyer, had caught
the ear, not even the eye, of the people on a popular, though rather highbrow
radio quiz show. Now, surely, there were politically minded men, though
political amateurs, who saw in Wendell Willkie the prospect of a new policy, a
new man and began to muster a new force. They were pooh-poohed and on the first
two ballots in Philadelphia, the armies of Dewey and Taft moved confidently
into battle.

They ended in a collision and on the fifth ballot, there occurred what, to me,
has remained the single, most thrilling moment in my experience of radio or
what the BBC used to call 'outside broadcasts'. To the astonishment of the
Dewey and Taft armies, neither of them could establish a majority at the end of
the fourth ballot and Wendell Willkie, the shambling bear of a man from Indiana
whom the Democrats derided as 'the poor, barefoot boy from Wall Street' was
moving up in the voting.

In the middle of the fifth ballot, Kansas was called on for its vote. The
leader, the chairman of the Kansas delegation was former Governor Alfred Landon
and he, obviously, carried great weight in the convention for he'd been the
Republican presidential candidate four years before. When Kansas was called
twice, there was a large rustling sound over the radio. The chairman of the
convention said, in an aside, 'What was that?' and then cried out, 'The
chairman of the Kansas delegation wishes to make a statement. He will please
come to the rostrum.' Through a rising wave of mixed cheers and mutterings, the
file of microphones in the aisles picked up the footsteps of the Kansas
chairman as he walked to the rostrum.

Alfred Landon, it seemed, had bought himself a pair of new shoes. As he walked,
with a light and measured tread down the aisle, his shoes gave off to the
listening nation a 'squeak, squeak, squeak', all the way to the rostrum. It was
a touch worthy of Alfred Hitchcock.

There was a great receding wave of cheers and then silence. In his thin,
high-pitched Midwestern voice, Landon announced, 'The great state of Kansas
gives all its votes to the next President of the United States, Wendell
Willkie.' After that, the roof fell in and, with it, the candidacies of Taft
and Dewey.

Could anything like that happen again even in the day of the arithmetical
procession of the primaries? Well, the pundits and the politicians say,
'Absolutely not! It's all over,' they say, 'bar the coronation of Carter and
Reagan.' I still wonder whether a gathering recession, the Iranian debacle and
the possibility of more tumbles in the reputation of Mr Carter may not produce
another unpredictable precedent. Certainly, something happened this week which
could produce a chaotic split on the floor of the Democratic convention.

Governor Hugh Carey of New York – who owns, so to speak, the New York
Democratic delegation, though he's chosen not to be an actual delegate –
Governor Carey deserted President Carter. Under his leadership, the governor
said, the nation is in trouble and he asked both the president and Senator
Kennedy to release all their delegates from their pledged allegiance to one or
the other and hold a totally open convention.

The national chairman of the Democrats was quick to wring his hands and predict
that if the delegates were free to think again on the convention floor, they
could stage an unholy battle and, in the end, throw New York State and the
election to Ronald Reagan. It's nothing but the truth.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP