Supreme Court changes

President Reagan always manages to appear relaxed, even when the news he's
announcing is tense. He was truly relaxed last Tuesday morning and he had in
his eye a small glint of triumph.

For once, he was about to announce something that would make banner headlines
and the top television story, something he'd known about for three weeks and
yet, for, I should guess, the first time since he went to the White House, he
had a piece of tremendous news that no reporter from television, radio,
newspaper, appeared to have an inkling about.

You know, since Watergate and the fame of the two men who unmasked it –
Woodward and Bernstein – every fledgling reporter has had the itch to flap his
wings in public and become famous as an investigative reporter. The result has
been an army of reporters from all the media tunnelling under the White House
and the Pentagon and the Department of Justice to make a channel for a stream,
or driblet, of leaks and very little that happens, theoretically, behind closed
doors in those sacred precincts, fails to get in the papers or out on the tube
before the president or Secretary Weinberger or Attorney General Meese is ready
to announce it.

On Tuesday it was different. The president called in the press. He appeared as
brisk and cheerful as ever, but with, as I say, the satisfied grin of the
Cheshire Cat. He at once tossed the unpredicted thunderbolt at the gasping
press. At the end of May, Mr Warren Burger, the chief justice of the United
States, had advised the president that he wanted to devote his full energies in
the coming year to his work on the commission which, in 1987, will celebrate
the 200th anniversary of the writing of the Constitution of the United States.

The chief justice was, therefore, resigning from the court. In his place, the
president would elevate Justice William Rehnquist and to fill Justice
Rehnquist's place, the president intends to nominate a judge, one Antonin
Scalia who is, at present, on the United States court of appeals for the
District of Columbia circuit. So there.

Notice that the president 'intends' to nominate. He cannot appoint anybody to
the court without the confirmation, the advice and consent – as the
constitution puts it – of the Senate. President Johnson failed once and Mr
Nixon twice to get an appointee confirmed. There's little doubt, however, that
Mr Reagan's choices will be confirmed.

The appointment of a new judge to the United States Supreme Court is always a
matter not merely of great public interest, but of great relevance to the
running of the country. The choice of one man can, indeed, turn around the
direction of American society and the movement of the law because the Supreme
Court is the final arbiter not between the laws of one state and another, not
between the government and the rest of us, it's there to interpret the
constitution as it defends the rights of all American individuals.

This can mean that the court will uphold a worker against his company, a
company against a worker, a township against its state laws, even the
government against the president. In one of its most recent historic judgments,
the court sustained the right of an eight-year-old black girl against her city
school board to go to a neighbouring white school and, thereby, the court
sparked the black revolution of the past 30 years.

And, as few of us beyond the age of puberty will ever forget, the court, under
Chief Justice Burger, forced President Nixon to turn over to the House the
secretly taped conversations that revealed, finally, his two-year cover-up of
his knowledge of the Watergate burglary and all its subsequent criminal squalor
and doomed him to exile.

But usually, in less dramatic incidences, the appointment of a new judge can
affect the political balance of the court. Of course the justices are supposed
to be above and beyond politics and are there to interpret the constitution,
not to make law. Naturally, since people are always arguing about the justice
of a new law or the relevance to our day of an old one, the court is always
having to consider whether some law or other – federal or state or city – is
now to be considered fair, constitutional, in what Mr Justice Holmes called
'the moral climate of the time'.

Many times, years apart, the court has reversed itself. Once upon a time, it
ruled that there was a constitutional right of a ten-year-old child to work a
12-hour day. Many years later, the court decided that such servitude was cruel
and unconstitutional.

But even justices of the Supreme Court, for all their grandeur and their
determined sincerity to interpret the constitution in the light of their own
day, are human beings. If they weren't, they would be superhuman intelligences
who never disagreed. Every ruling would be unanimous. As one old chief justice
put it, 'The constitution is what the judges say it is.'

In practice, the constitution is what a majority of one says it is. For
example, 13 years ago, the court struck down the law of one state that banned
abortion. The court ruled that the constitution guarantees a right to abortion.
The vote of the nine old men was seven to two. Now ever since Mr Reagan came to
the White House, indeed, long before, he's been chiding the court and urging
it, whenever a new case came up, to reverse the 1972 judgement and ban
abortion.

In the debate which blows steadily across the country like a prevailing wind,
sometimes rising to gale force, Mr Reagan is unwaveringly on the side of the
Right to Lifers against the Freedom of Choice advocates. So far the court has
stood firm. Only last week, the court struck down a Pennsylvania law that would
regulate the right to an abortion by allowing doctors to bring their expert
weight to bear on saying why a pregnancy should be continued. This was not the
same as allowing abortion on demand or banning it. The court evidently felt the
Pennsylvania law hedged the main question and struck it down.

But, note, this time by only a five to four majority. One man's change of mind
could have opened the door to other suits requiring the 1972 decision approving
abortion to be looked at all over again.

The increase in that case, and the number of dissenting judges from two to
four, was enough to make a lot of people – liberals and feminists mainly –
fear, and a lot of other people – conservatives and Reagan allies mainly – hope
that some time soon one of the so-called liberals on the court would retire or,
save the word, die and allow President Reagan to appoint a judge with
conservative leanings. Most of the judges are well along in their seventies.
It's an annoying fact of life to presidents saddled with an unsympathetic court
that most Supreme Court judges seem to live as long as orchestra conductors.

Well, we were in the middle of all these speculations, guiltily looking at the
ages of the judges we like or don't like and hoping or fearing that the present
court would or would not get through to 1989 and outlast the Reagan presidency,
when in pops the president with his startling announcement about Chief Justice
Burger's resignation.

Chief Justice Burger has been, on the whole, of a conservative bent. Justice
Rehnquist, the new chief justice, has been positively of a conservative bent.
The new man, Judge Antonin Scalia, is not known at all to the general public
but he is known and greatly admired by lawyers who are close to the federal
court system. Naturally, newspaper reporters who'd never heard of him were
eager, not to say anxious, to know what label to slap on him – conservative,
liberal, constructionist, reformist. After all, they had to write a quick piece
promising or threatening the demise of the old liberal court and the
buttressing of Mr Reagan's conservative views by a loyal conservative court.

It turns out that Judge Scalia is a mere 50-year old called, by a liberal
colleague, conservative but not anti-government; by a conservative colleague,
essentially a consensus builder. He is a profound scholar of the Supreme Court
and all the available evidence seems to show that nobody should prejudge the
way he's likely to jump on any issue.

In the end, I think, it comes down to one home truth and to one historical fact
about the court that rarely gets recalled during the changing of the guard. The
home truth is the fact that all presidents choose judges they believe to be of
their own political bias. Nobody did this more blatantly than Franklin
Roosevelt. He even tried to pack the court with liberal judges by putting up a
bill to Congress that would increase the court from nine to 15 judges. The bill
was quietly buried by the Senate.

The historical fact is that while all presidents think they are appointing
ventriloquist's dolls, they sooner or later discover that some of their most
trustworthy dolls turn into men (there's one woman), men of independent mind. A
new justice of the Supreme Court, after all, suddenly discovers that he's well
paid, he's there for life, he's never up for election, he can look over his
life and revise his political ideas. He can truly think for himself. He can
become his own man.

And sometimes that new man deeply pains the president who chose him. Felix
Frankfurter, who was one of the New Deal's crusading liberal lawyers, he got on
the court and became an almost pedantic conservative. Earl Warren was a
California district attorney, a Republican governor, a sunny, affable,
country-club conservative. Loved baseball. Just the type for President
Eisenhower to make chief justice of the United States. Wonderful.

Warren turned into the leader of the liberal Warren court, effecting great and
permanent changes in criminal procedure and the legal rights of criminals and,
especially, in the relations between the races. Said Eisenhower later, 'The
biggest damn fool mistake I ever made'.

So the conservatives and the liberals this weekend are much in the position of
two parents who've been wondering when their daughter would settle down. The
father goes around smiling at the thought that his daughter is, after all,
going to marry the right man. The mother is glum at the thought that, on the
contrary, she's marrying the wrong man.

They're both wrong in the sense that nobody on the outside of a marriage – or
for that matter on the inside – can ever be sure how it's going to turn out.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP