Cholesterol discovery wins Nobel prize

This is the week when, as usual, the Americans gobble up the Nobel Prizes for
science or medicine, or both, though as often as not one one of them turns out
to have been a refugee from Hitler's insane persecution of Jews and liberals,
the only consoling result of which was to drive so many brilliant men to
America and, let us not forget, with the aid of Einstein, Szilard, Teller and
Wigner, get the atom bomb before Hitler did.

First came the news, though, that two native Americans, Michael Brown and
Joseph Holstein who've been collaborating for 20 years or so at the University
of Texas, had won the medical prize for discovering more accurately than
anybody before how cholesterol works. And about time! I don't know how it is in
your country, but for the past 25 years, at least, Americans have been obsessed
with cholesterol, the fatty substance created, we were told, in the bloodstream
by carbohydrates and animal fats and leading, sooner or later, to snags like
silt piling up along a riverbed that could lead to a blockage or clot and give
you a heart attack or a stroke or arteriosclerosis.

Well, I tell you, no sooner had this theory been seized on by the newspapers
than the word 'cholesterol' gibbered through the land and there was a national
retreat from pastries and beef and a parallel rush to eat only vegetable fats
laced with soya bean. Then it was pointed out that soya bean was practically
pure distilled salt, also lethal and the salt-free diet became the big thing.
It still is. Then some perverse medical researcher found great virtue in
carbohydrates and there was a special diet for that, too.

These dissenting voices led the doctors to withdraw their warnings about
cholesterol – but not for long. The word is still as ominous as the word
'poison' on a bottle. And it's now part of the general, popular wisdom that the
less fried foods, fats – especially animal fats – you eat, the quicker you will
lower your cholesterol. In the past ten years, there has been a 15 per cent
drop in the American consumption of meat.

The reminder, or the contention, of a doctor in California that the best a diet
can do is reduce your cholesterol by about ten per cent only has not yet hit
the populace. Nor has the fact that the body, itself, manufactures cholesterol;
nor, certainly that some doctors attach more importance to the level of
triglycerides than cholesterol. Triglycerides are not mentioned in the current
Oxford Dictionary, nor even in my edition of the Churchill Livingstone Medical
Dictionary, so let's not bring that up and start another national pandemonium.

Anyway, to cut short this painful – to beef lovers – painful subject, I ought
to say that the Messrs Brown and Goldstein were apparently the first to suspect
that high blood cholesterol could be inherited through those good old genes
that seem to explain the puzzling longevity of sinners, as well as hinting at
the even more puzzling origin of genius.

Now, even though they were looking into a condition that afflicts only about
one in every 500 humans, by poking and dredging away at the bloodstream of
victims and of the other 499, they discovered an important difference in the
cells. Cholesterol is carried by a combination of fats and proteins. Let's call
it just 'the carriers'. Now Brown and Goldstein discovered, and this was really
new, that the cells of the human body have trappers lying in wait, or maybe
hunting around, to catch the carriers of cholesterol and absorb its particles.
People who have inherited high blood cholesterol either don't have these
trappers, called now receptors, or have fewer of them. That's the whole story
in a nutshell or a carrier. I hope we're all properly agog.

One of the world's leading molecular biologists said on Tuesday that the Brown
and Goldstein discovery of receptors was magnificent and fundamental and has
shed a great light revealing, for the first time, that the real problem turned
out not to be in blood, but in cells and, in ways we don't luckily have to go
into, the receptor discovery could lead to effective drugs for treating heart
attacks and arteriosclerosis. Bully for Brown and Goldstein!

The next day we heard that another American, Dr Franco Modigliani, this time a
refugee in 1939 from the other blusterer, Mussolini, had won the Nobel
Economics Prize for – what do you think? – his pioneer work on finding out
whether a company's financial worth is what it says it is and, also, for
original work on when people save money and when they don't.

Now the mention of these two prizes may not seem anything like a coincidence to
you, but to me, reported only a day apart, they immediately moulded into a, or
melded, into a vivid picture a happy reflection of one of my closest friends.
Let's call him Peter. A man who combines a passion for Mr Modigliani's
specialty and a blissful indifference to the wisdom and expertise of the Messrs
Brown and Goldstein.

Let's begin by saying he is dark and swarthy, full of gristle and energy, of a
benevolent, almost slap-happy nature whose only grouch is that Japanese cameras
are not what they're cracked up to be. Every picture they take, he complains,
makes me look bald. He has been as bald as a bullet since about the age of 21.
Being restless and playful, he hates to get into a golf game with old men and
one day, last year, when I was otherwise occupied, he had to join a threesome
of strangers. 'It was awful!' he said, 'There wasn't a guy under 60.'

He, by the way, is 80 but his rollicking, almost offensive, good health is due,
I believe, to something for which there has not yet been a Nobel Prize. A study
of how what you think you are affects the way you are. In Peter's case this
means that without ever giving it a thought, he assumes he's about 45 and
sometimes acts like a five-year-old, leaping – without permission of anybody
around – into a hamburger and a glut of French fried potatoes the moment they
appear.

His diet, indeed, consists mainly of meat and potatoes and bread and butter and
milk and cheese and coffee and the random candy bars that other five-year-olds
rattle out of slot machines. By all the cautionary theories of the doctors, for
the past quarter-century, he should have exploded in a stroke or been slammed
by a heart attack or, by now, be a heart-rending case of creeping paralysis.

In fact, he likes to hack away pruning trees and whatever length he delivers to
a golf ball comes from forearms as thick as a blacksmiths. Whereas the late
Bernard Darwin said about the immortal Bobby Jones that his golf swing had 'all
the drowsy beauty of an English summer day', Peter's golf swing, it has often
struck me, has all the drowsy beauty of a pneumatic drill.

The word 'cholesterol' has not the slightest interest for him and wouldn't have
unless it signified, say, in the Wall Street Journal or the Financial Times, a
new word for collateral. Peter has been an investment banker now for over 50
years and he's heard about retirement but doesn't practise it. He once told me
that if he had his life to go over again and, he added, I see no reason why
not, he would choose exactly the same profession which he found absorbing from
the start and still finds more exciting than anything, except possibly a
12-course meal at a Chinese restaurant.

Not just investment alone, but the whole business of budgeting money,
especially by governments. Most of all, by the United States' government. Like
many another, cheerful old codger, he sleeps, he says, about four hours a
night. This, I believe, to be true. He forgets that, like Napoleon, he can take
long, deep catnaps, ten minutes, fifteen, half an hour, an hour, at almost any
hour of the day. The four hours at night is something of an automatic limit
triggered to end by his concern for the United States' budget. I mean he gets
up, marches – he is oblivious to the life around him, like a sleeping wife and
so is incapable of tiptoeing – he marches into the sitting room, takes out the
New York Times of the previous days whose editorial on the president's budget
and the need to cut military spending he has deplored for the past 24 hours. He
checks the figures in the editorial with the figures from the Pentagon, from
the Bureau of Labor Statistics – he collects statistics as other youngsters
collect rock tapes – and then he sits down and types a shrewd and ironical
letter to the Times, pointing out, say, that the Times and the Democrats raise
a fearful hullabaloo about the president's increasing military spending from 22
per cent to 28 per cent, but under John F. Kennedy every tax dollar included
about 48 cents for military spending, but Kennedy was the peacemaker on the new
frontier, while Reagan is a warmonger.

These letters, always about the Times's misunderstanding or deceptive reporting
of budget matters are written about once a week. Peter has, in the dark watches
of the night, relieved himself in the most agreeable way of any bile he has in
his system. The administration has been defended, the managing editor chuckles,
none of these letters is ever printed. They've been going on for ten years.

I once had to inform Peter on the phone of a dreadful accident to a friend. He
was deeply horrified. I called back later to tell him it was nothing like so
bad as we'd feared. He was taking a nap. I told his wife not to worry. 'About
what?' she said. He had forgotten to tell her a thing about it. 'Good grief!' I
said, 'Doesn't he think about anybody but you?' 'He doesn't think about me,'
she said, 'he thinks only about the budget.'

What fascinates me, in the end, about Peter is his triumphant defiance of the
accumulated wisdom of the medical profession through, no doubt, God-given
genes, but also through his being too dumb to know or act his age and mainly
through his unflagging enthusiasm for one odd specialty.

People's odd enthusiasms always fascinate me as well as our boredom with them.
I remember Mrs Patrick Campbell's finding herself at dinner next to a professor
who was a world expert on ants and at dinner could talk of nothing else. 'Not
only', he went on, 'do they have slaves and carriers and apprentices and
managers, they also have an army.'

She looked at him with a disdainful nostril. She said, 'No navy, I presume?'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP