New York immigrants

A couple of nights ago, three or four of us were sitting around performing the
usual inquest on the news we'd just seen, the first ten minutes of which on any
given evening is stuck in a groove, almost as monotonous as it was in the
spring during the Battle of the Falklands, but now it's Mr Begin and Mr Sharon
and Mr Habib back to his thankless air shuttle and Mr Arafat being welcome in
various cities, lacking only a chariot to have him mistaken for Caesar return
to Rome in triumph.

There was one lady present. A practical type who is not insensitive to politics
but possibly too sensitive to dwell on its present obscenities whenever she
feels she can do nothing about it. I like to think, from the evidence of her
name that she had north country, English north country, forebears and lived by
the bleak but sensible philosophy of Gertrude Morel in D. H. Lawrence's novel,
'If you can alter things, alter them! If you can't, put up with them!'

Well, she relieved the general despair about any prospect of peace in the
Middle East by suddenly saying, 'Did you see that photograph in the paper of...
?' and she named a movie star, an actor whom I won't identify for reasons that
will appear. It was a picture of him at some New York social party, the sort
which excuses the vast amounts of money poured out on the food and the
decorations and the women's fashions by donating a fraction of this expense to
some worthy charity. 'He looks,' the lady said, 'as if he were playing a
Chinese warlord.'

What she was saying was that he'd plainly had a facelift and the tying up of
the muscles around the eyes had given him that slant-eyed look. I recalled an
actor I knew, a very amiable fellow who disappeared once for about three weeks
and at the end of it he came out looking like his brother, if he'd had a
brother. For some reason that was never clear, the lady became very vehement
about facelifts, maintaining that you can always tell when it's been done and
that they're always bad, they always change the character of a face, at which
point I remembered the comment of another lady not present.

'They are not all bad,' she said, 'you only notice the bad jobs' and this
disposed of the argument with a simple flash of intelligence as obvious and
memorable as that remark made by a Greek 2300 years ago. A play, he noticed,
has to have a beginning, a middle and an end. Nobody had noticed this before
and it guaranteed Aristotle's immortality.

Well, we yearn for such a flash of insight into the problems of our domestic
economy, in the Middle East, in the disarmament talks between the Americans and
the Russians which are now going on in Geneva, which have been going on for
years and which threaten to go on until the mounting pile of nuclear weapons
explodes. I'm not deriding the men who sit there, men of great knowledge and
expertise and, some of them, men of powerful intellect but intellect, you may
have noticed, is no guarantee of intelligence which is no respecter of persons
or classes or even of education. In fact, to use a useful word we seem to have
lost, a highbrow is almost always a person educated above his intelligence.

Well, all this is by way of saying that we, all of us I think, fall victim to
what is called 'the conventional wisdom' about politics, medicine, national
character which goes on being the accepted truth long after the facts on which
the wisdom was based have changed. Seventy years ago, the government of New
York City was run on the assumption that the people of Anglo-Saxon origins and
the Irish were mainstay of the city population and that they were the people
who ought to run its politics.

It took not the political scientists, but a famous muck-raking journalist and a
Danish photographer to go round the city and show how the city fathers had
failed to take account of a wave of immigration from southern and central
Europe that would soon turn into a flood. Between about 1902 and 1920, 13
million European immigrants poured into New York and several millions of them
stayed. It took about another ten years for the politicians to discover that
any slate of candidates for election to city office had to contain, as well as
two Irishmen and two Anglos, at least one Italian and one Jew. Today, no party
would think of running a team in the coming November election that didn't
contain at least two Puerto Ricans.

The conventional wisdom has taken root in New York in the general belief that a
successful political slate, today, is made up of two Irishmen, two Jews, two
Hispanics. Anglos can apply but are no longer essential.

But we've just had a document put out by the immigration and naturalisation
service which will shake the politicians to their marrow. If you'd asked me,
even as late as a month ago, about the distribution, the number of people of
foreign origin – I mean literally people born abroad of foreign parents – in
this city, I would have guessed that maybe there were a hundred thousand.
Enough, anyway, to still the fears of an old, a young, English television
director of mine who, ten years ago, when we were doing a programme on the
immigrants of New York, doubted if by now we'd be able to find and record
enough people with, what he called, 'a broken accent', meaning non American. He
needn't have worried. Down in and around the tenements and the clothing and
food stalls of the Lower East Side, almost everybody over 60 talked American
with a German accent or an Irish accent or a Russian accent or an Italian
accent.

But I've noticed, in the past year or so, that when I take a taxi, as often as
not the driver is not an aged Italian or German or Irishman, but a young
Hungarian or Czech or Israeli or Jamaican or Indian or Korean or Vietnamese
and, of course, there are scads of Puerto Ricans. They, in particular, were
welcomed in the late 1940s by the mayor of New York who meant to make them feel
good by pointing out that, as natives of an overseas American territory, they
could enjoy the privileges of American citizenship. Well, this long-gone mayor
told me once that he expected as many as 20,000 might take him up on his
invitation. He never expected, nor did anybody else, that by 1970 there'd be
three-quarters of a million of them, mostly staying in New York and packing
into the stews of Harlem.

Well, I don't believe that any of us outside the people in the immigration
service who've been working on this study would ever have guessed at its
findings. It says that here, in a city of seven millions, there are now one and
a half millions of Hispanic origin – first from Puerto Rico, then from
Columbia, Haiti, Cuba and so on – just about equalling the total population of
blacks. Many of these Hispanics, of course, were born here since the original
Caribbean flood poured in over 30 years ago but the really staggering statistic
is the one that tots up the presence of actual immigrants. It all began, we now
hear, 17 years ago in 1965 with a loosening of the immigration laws.

The report says, 'The immigrants have come from virtually every nation and make
up a volume not seen since the last great wave of immigration that ended in the
1920s.' In all there are now more than one million new immigrants living in
this city. What is more stunning is the report that while the immigration laws
may have been loosened, they have not been tight enough to catch illegals.
There are over 650,000 legal immigrants but there are, the service estimate,
over 750,000 illegal immigrants. They come mainly from Central and South
America, from the Caribbean, from Italy, India, China, Korea and the Soviet
Union.

Only a week or two ago, I had a cab driver, remarkably pleasant and courteous
and forthcoming, I should guess about 30 years of age, who spoke good English.
I asked him when he'd left the Soviet Union. 'Eighteen months ago,' he said.
And the next week I was fascinated by a name on a registration card and by the
accent of the driver. He was a young Romanian. I asked him how he was making
out here and what he missed of life in Romania. He said, 'Nothing. I forget
Romania. Life in New York noisy but free. You make argument, you call the
government bad names, nobody mind much. Right?' 'Right!' I said.

The man who's job it is to analyse immigration statistics for the city's
planning commission – not the most enviable job in city government – was asked
to bottle the reason for this tidal wave. 'Well,' he said, 'the word has leaked
out. You can make a living in this city and you might even make it big.' It's a
remark that might have been made in the 1910s, a remark that would cushion the
incoming millions against the heartbreak of the discovery that no single
sidewalk of the far spreading slums was paved with anything like gold.

The unlikely model, or prototype, of these new immigrant communities is a newly
transformed town in the borough of Queens called Elmhurst, population 30,000;
20,000 immigrants from 110 countries. In any given neighbourhood, the grocer is
Korean, the baker is a Columbian, the butcher from Argentina. The restaurant
and lunch counters are Indian, Greek, Chinese, Thai, Ecuadorian, Italian,
Korean and Pakistani. A Greek runs a pizza parlour, the Dutch Reformed Church
conducts services in Taiwanese. A desperate Nigerian woman who came here to
learn English says that she and her children hear no English. 'I don't know',
she says, 'whether I'm in Spain or China.'

The big difference from the 1910s is that the old immigrants retreated into
compounds or quarters of their own kind. Today, they throw themselves into one
pot and the astonishing fact is that, in a generation or so, the brew will
melt.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP