Sanctions against Libya

Waking up in the morning and humming a tune is surely as common an experience
as waking up and receiving a signal from the stomach that says, 'Breakfast
time!' But the tune I went on humming this morning was one I haven't heard for
at least ten years. It was one of the two musical themes that introduced
'Upstairs Downstairs'. The words to the tune were, 'What are we going to do
with Uncle Arthur?'

And in the second of recalling them, I had a mental picture of a face, a very
terrifying face, and I almost heard myself singing, 'What are we going to do
with old Gaddafi?' A very flip introduction to a very awful subject, but old
Freud said that the unconscious works in mysterious ways its wonders to
perform, and it became clear to me that this past week, even when we've had a
score of other topics on, as we say, our mind, Gaddafi has been very much and
naggingly at the back of it.

This has been one of those weeks when I, for one, would least wish to be
President of the United States. First, let's hear how a range of ordinary
American citizens answered the question. If you have no responsibility for
answering it, it's easy to be forthright and downright. Our one national
newspaper – in the physical sense that it appears on newsstands and in slot
machines on the streets of hundreds of cities across the country – it
questioned ordinary people from New York to California.

Thus, a businessman in Oklahoma said, 'Our policy should be one of retaliation.
Words and threats are not enough any more.' A waitress in Upstate New York
said, 'The USA should crack down hard on terrorists and nations that help
them.' A woman lawyer in South Dakota said rather vaguely that she wouldn't
want to board an international flight just now, she was tired of seeing dead
bodies in airports and thought the media should take a more aggressive
approach.

Well, without figuring out exactly what that means, let's move on to a clerk in
Illinois who thinks that, 'I don't think fighting back with physical force is
the answer. We have to take more security precautions.' A housewife in Michigan
who says she's as concerned as anybody says prayer is the answer, God has a way
of solving problems that we will never be able to match.

Most, however, seem to agree with the attitude of a retired navy commander in
California – how fortunate for him he's retired – who says right out, 'What
should we do? Line up the terrorists and shoot every one of them?' That's, of
course, what the White House, as much as anybody, would like to do and I'm sure
they'd give the navy commander the Congressional Medal of Honour if he'd call
the president and tell him who, in any given incident, the terrorists are,
where they are and how they can be lined up.

This was always, and remains, the maddening problem. If only the actual
terrorists from many terrorist organisations around the world would be kind
enough to hold a convention in one camp, thoughtfully isolated from a city and
put up a flag or a big sign at the gate saying 'International Conference of
Terrorists, Entry Prohibited', there would be no problem at all and if this is
a foolish fantasy, it's no more foolish than the instinctive response of all
these manly types who, like General Mitchener, in Shaw's play about
suffragettes, say, 'The problem is simple. Shoot 'em down!'.

Probably President Reagan was wrong some time ago in blabbing forth an
instinctive response and promising to hit the terrorists good and hard and in
one of his memorable lines – which, by the way, like so many of his memorable
lines are quotations from old movie heroes – he said, 'You can run, but you
can't hide!' Unfortunately, they, whoever they may be, can both run and hide.

However, between the angry, instant response and the formulating of a policy,
there is a long and knotty period of weighing the choices, or what we now call
the options. The United States was perhaps misled by good luck in the case of
the Achille Lauro, the cruise ship in which the terrorists were hemmed in with
their victims and when they got off the ship and were seen and put on a plane,
the plane could be tracked and intercepted and brought down. That was a unique
case and the president got resounding credit for it, but in just about every
other incident, the terrorists either sacrificed themselves in the act or do
their hideous work, flee and the embassy and intelligence services spend the
next week or month guessing which of a dozen or more possible sponsors, in or
out of the Arab world, might be the culprit.

After the latest – the latest, as I talk – atrocity in the Rome and Vienna
airports, official suspicion fell on the self-proclaimed Palestinian terrorist
Abu Nidal, a man who actually boasts about murdering his relations and who has
announced that his hit list includes President Reagan, Mrs Thatcher, King
Hussein, Yasser Arafat and President Mubarak of Egypt.

He gave an interview to a West German magazine in which he called himself the
answer to the misfortunes of the Arabs. His group has disposed of moderate
Palestinians, worshipping Jews, civilians in airports. Israel says he's
responsible for over a hundred attacks in the past decade and the United States
State Department counts, in the past two years, 180 dead people and over 200
wounded as victims of Nidal's so-called Revolutionary Council. The best guess
is that it is composed of about 500 followers.

Abu Nidal's links with Colonel Gaddafi are well-established, not least by
himself, who claims a deep and strong friendship with the Libyan dictator. But,
while the State Department, for one, yearns to believe his training bases are
in Libya, there's no proof of it and, so far, there's no unquestioned proof of
his connection with the bombings at the Rome and Vienna airports. The White
House and the State Department were obviously convinced that the arch-protector
of Nidal and other terrorists is Colonel Gaddafi, which is why President Reagan
singled him out as the villain in his press conference on Tuesday.

Both the colonel and Abu Nidal are quite firm about identifying themselves not
as random street terrorists, but as saviours of the Arab world. Colonel Gaddafi
himself says he has launched on a holy war. Abu Nidal's aim, he says, is to
ignite a huge fire in the Middle East.

The president, and the Western governments who might secretly long to join the
president in some big, bold, attacking strategy, must take these two at their
word and that word gave the first long pause to military retaliation. The fact
that the Revolutionary Council, like a dozen other terrorist groups in Europe
and the Middle East, is expert at scattering and hiding its assassins is
another reason for a second impulse of caution on our part. Massive, or even
selective, retaliation on a base, a camp, a city, a compound, would be almost
certain to bomb the haystack and still miss the needle.

So what, after the first disgusted response, could the president do? What were
his options? There's been a headlong tendency in the press, both here and
abroad, to picture Mr Reagan as the brave hothead, cooled by wiser minds. On
the contrary, it is President Reagan who, before a given policy has been
discussed, has laid down the precautions. No civilians must be harmed. No cause
should be given to seize the thousand, fifteen hundred Americans in Libya as
hostages. The target of an attack must be identified beyond doubt with the
perpetrators of any given atrocity.

And, more recently, bearing in mind Gaddafi's and Abu Nadal's grandiose
threats, he has added another prohibition – no pretext for anybody starting a
general, let alone a third, world war. If this seems a lurid precaution,
remember that the big snag the president has in mind is the thousands of Soviet
military men in Libya who are uniformed advisers to Gaddafi and the Soviet
planes and weapons that continue to bolster the Libyan armed forces.

The president had also in mind, on Tuesday night, a resolution passed that day
by the foreign ministers of Muslim governments, from Iran to pro-Western
Kuwait, promising support for Colonel Gaddafi in any confrontation with the
United States and declaring what it called 'the imperialist Zionist threat' to
Libya, a threat to all Muslim countries.

Any American attack on Libya holds out the dreadful promise of a war with those
nations, with Soviet allies, but also a free-for-all orgy of terrorism
throughout the Middle East and, by way of warning, Europe, as well.

So the president could not go on the air and say, 'For the moment, we do
nothing'. Well knowing the generally miserable ineffectiveness of economic
sanctions, he had to flex an economic muscle and give as much of the appearance
of an avenger to ensure big headlines next day proclaiming, 'President breaks
all economic ties with Libya, freezes all Libyan assets, calls Americans home'.
He knew, as well as you do, that a quarter of Italy's oil comes from Libya,
that West Germany is the second strongest European trading partner of Libya,
that Spain comes third and that 49 per cent of Spain's young people are out of
work, that France and Britain would not join an economic boycott.

Even so, the presidential order is limited to Libyan government assets. It does
not affect private holdings. The American officials and workers in the
oilfields can easily be replaced by other nationals. As for American exports,
their denial can always be bypassed by the well-known curse of trans-shipment.
They go on legitimate order from other countries which then trans-ship them to
Libya.

It's a sad story. America's allies who need the trade, also, don't need any
provocation that would bring Libyan terrorism to their own cities and airports.
They, understandably, if sheepishly, back away.

And, behind the lament 'economic sanctions don't work' can be heard the strong
sigh of relief that, unlike the leader of the free world, they are not called
on to do anything but deplore the colonel and his holy war.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP