Ukraine nuclear disaster

Do you remember – I was going to say about six years ago but I looked it up and
it's almost exactly ten years ago – I did a talk about it at the time, one
morning in July 1976 we woke up to read that in meteorological stations and
observatories around the world, the seismographs had registered an earthquake
somewhere of an intensity that few of the experts could match in their memory
of modern times.

So, long before 1976, an expert in Sweden or Edinburgh or Tokyo or California
could tell where an earthquake was happening and this one was pinpointed in the
Chinese industrial city of Tangshan between Peking and the sea. Peking was also
badly shaken. The Chinese admitted that it was a severe earthquake but declined
all foreign aid which was offered from several countries at once. They had the
experts, the medical know-how, the rescue resources to handle it. Beyond that
they would not go.

Westerners began to guess at casualties as high as 100,000. The Chinese were
mum. Such guesses were simply Western or bourgeois propaganda.

I remember remarking at the time that for any country under any system of
government, this was an odd exercise of pride. Earthquakes do not recognise
political ideology. Eventually the catastrophe slipped out of the headlines and
then out of the news. Westerners and Japanese scientists went on saying that it
was as bad as anything that had been known in at least a dozen years. I believe
the Chinese put out a casualty figure of several thousands. The possibility
that things were very much worse was reinforced by reports from visitors and
foreign embassies. One report, reluctantly confirmed later by the Chinese, was
that millions – millions – of the people of Peking had camped outdoors for
weeks.

I don't know if we ever had a final official casualty figure from the Chinese
government but years later they blandly settled for 242,000. In one almanac
I've consulted, the figure is put at 660,000. In another at 800,000 but since
these are English and American almanacs, no doubt you can put down the more
alarming figures to bourgeois propaganda. However, a quarter of a million is
appalling enough and it has remained a mystery to this day why the Chinese
didn't come clean at the start and actively seek outside help.

I think their silence is more of a mystery than the silence or, shall we say,
the reticence, of the Soviet government about the disaster in the Ukraine. A
nuclear power plant is, after all, a work of man and as far as we can think
back, the Russians have always maintained that in scientific matters of any
kind, they are perfectly capable of equalling, if not surpassing, any expertise
of the West.

The failure of a nuclear reactor is about as bad an admission of human defeat
as we can show on this planet and we've seen, enumerable times in the past,
it's not a quirk of the Soviet system that the government should clamp down on
any information about its failures. It is an essential discipline of the
system.

As a former Soviet official put it the other night, the government is not, as
it is in democracies, only one source of information, it is the sole source.
Its view of the stability of the state dictates that there shall not be
different and competing views of the facts. If you allow that you will get
newspapers competing for different points of view and, pretty soon, you'd get
political parties and people arguing and eventually taking to the streets and
so on. To the Soviets, that would mean the end of a stable society.

I suppose, like many of you, I have, in the past several days and nights, been
flooded with the comments of every sort of expert – American, French, English,
Swedish, Austrian, German and Russian – Russians here, who are either European
or American experts on Communism or defectors. I don't mean, of course, just
political experts, but physicists and medical men and radiologists, including
the inspectors who went about cleaning up the American nuclear accident at
Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania in 1979, which, by the way, the Russians
brought up this week in an English-language broadcast from Moscow to show, I
guess, that even the vaunted American safety system is not foolproof or
expert-proof.

They didn't mention that while there was a large evacuation of people from the
neighbourhood of the reactor, there were no casualties. Nor – the main point of
difference – that the federal government gave out elaborate details of the
accident at once, that the Senate instantly started an open investigation, that
science reporters went to the place and wrote what they chose.

The one thing the Russian broadcast did stress was that there were, almost
immediately, protest marches in Pennsylvania and in many other places close by
nuclear reactors. You see, they were saying, the American people don't trust
their government, whereas we have had no protest marches and they're not going
to either.

I suppose we could go on for weeks guessing at the reasons for the
extraordinary restriction of news from Moscow, apart from recognising that it
is a function of their system. I think we can say that, for once, staying with
the system will turn out to be a blunder, especially for the international
reputation of Mr Gorbachev who came in promising much more open disclosure of
the way his government was working or wasn't working.

As Senator John Glenn, the former astronaut, said the other night, 'Open
disclosure has gone down the drain and it's going to make it all the harder to
attempt an arms agreement or to trust it'.

Why should the usual, old-fashioned, tight-lipped performance be a mistake?
Because, I suggest, this is one kind of disaster that the rest of the world is
perfectly capable of measuring, and has done so, not just the well-known fact
that a graphite fire burns and burns and is almost impossible to put out, not
just careful guesses about the number of casualties which are everywhere at
brutal variants with the official Russian figure. But the thing that first
rankled the Swedes and then outraged nations on the outside, whether they are
inclined to be pro or anti-Soviet, is that this was one disaster which, unlike
an earthquake, can seriously affect the lives of millions of people outside the
centre, the Soviet Union.

In other words, the fatal blunder which, as I talk, is being stubbornly
maintained, is the refusal to tell the truth about the likely amounts of
radiation in the clouds that were spewed into the atmosphere and carried by the
winds, first north and west and then, in an atmospheric shift, to the south and
east, and then where?

When time allows the disaster to fade away, we may then expect the Russians to
follow the usual epilogue to a disaster in which they were involved. Do you
remember the South Korean airliner that was off course in the Pacific and was
shot down September 1983? First, the Russians said nothing. Then, they
indignantly denied that they had played any part in the accident but, what they
evidently forgot, there were satellite pictures of the secret strategic base
towards which the plane was approaching, there was salvaged tapes of dialogues
between the Korean crew and two control towers, which revealed what surely a
pilot in dire trouble would not invent, that he'd been challenged by a Russian
plane.

It took six days for the Russians to concede that they had, indeed, shot down
the plane. They maintained to the end and, I imagine, to this day that the
Korean airliner was a disguised American spy plane craftily using hundreds of
innocent Korean travellers as covers.

One consequence of the whole thing, which is unpleasant to talk about but it
happened, is the rocketing performance in Chicago this week of the commodity
market. Prices for wheat and maize, for sugar beet and for cattle, suddenly
went the limit when the news came through about the movement of the clouds
across the Ukraine and up towards Poland. The boys on the commodity exchange
figured that the summer crops of Eastern Europe might be contaminated or have
to be destroyed and that the Russians winter wheat might also be affected.

This country has many, many millions of tons of surplus grain and the
calculation is that Eastern Europe, Russia included, may need them.

On the contrary, last Tuesday, the stock market registered the biggest drop in
one day in history – 42 points. For an hour or two in the evening, investment
experts played the old record which recites that any steep decline in the stock
market is a healthy shake-out of a market grown too fat, but pretty soon it was
seen that the stocks which had taken the steepest dive were public utilities
and especially industries that use nuclear power. Those stocks fell as much as
60 points.

A sober-faced Wall Streeter said that the nuclear power business faces a grim
future. It was inevitable, indeed, if there had been no disaster in the
Ukraine, the industry was facing a grim future. It has been seven years since
the Three Mile Island accident which never came to a meltdown, which was under
control by the evening when, however, government experts picked up and
announced some signs of radioactivity in the neighbourhood air caused by vented
steam.

There were no casualties and the medical teams believe it is very unlikely that
even one person will reveal, years from now, a cancer but the public outcry
across the whole country was enormous and the sit-downs at sites chosen for
more plants went on and on.

By that time, there were about a hundred plants licensed to produce nuclear
power. Since that time, 87 applications have been refused by the government.

The Ukraine disaster only aggravates here a storm of controversy about nuclear
reactors that has been going on for seven years. That's what comes of telling
the people all the facts, all the time.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP