Illinois crucial in presidential race

For many weeks now the politicians and the columnists and the television
commentators have been saying that the presidential primary election in
Illinois might be decisive in isolating the two men from whom, in November, the
voters would choose the president.

I'd better say at once that nothing is decisive until the delegates of the 50
states meet in their conventions in the summer and pick their men.

Too much has happened in the past, and the recent past, between the primary
victories and the conventions to lay safe bets on any one man, or any two men.
But the Illinois primary which took place on Tuesday was seen as a crucial
trial heat for the three men left in the Republican race – Reagan, Bush and
Anderson – and the two men left in the Democratic race, Carter and Kennedy. Why
should this be so?

Well, I've been desperately fishing in my mind for an analogy in sport that is
not golf and some people will rejoice to hear that I've found one. Everybody
knows that in the draw for the FA Cup it's a great advantage to play on your
home ground. Well, in Massachusetts, Senator Kennedy was on his home ground and
beat Carter. New Hampshire and Vermont were thought to be his alternative home
grounds, being New England states with a prejudice in favour of native New
Englanders, but he lost to Carter there. He didn't bother much with Georgia and
Alabama which are southern states and, inevitably, Carter's home ground and
Kennedy lost badly there.

But Illinois is neither northern nor southern – the heart of the middle west –
the fifth largest state, sometimes called 'the big average state' meaning it is
a typical, archetypal mixture of industry and agriculture, blacks, whites,
Catholics, Jews, WASPS, the whole melting pot.

Down-state, the farming country is on the whole conservative. Chicago, where
about a quarter of the whole 11 millions live tends, or has tended, to be
liberal. It was Chicago that put Illinois over for Franklin Roosevelt four
times, Truman his one time, John Kennedy his time, Lyndon Johnson his once, and
this Democratic bias has always been attributed to the efficiency, often the
ruthless efficiency, of the Democratic political machine over which, for so
long, Mayor Richard Daley presided. But Mayor Daley is dead and gone and on the
showing of last Tuesday, his successor, the Irish American lady, Jane Byrne,
has nothing like the same control, though she forsook President Carter and
endorsed Senator Kennedy some time ago.

The political pros did not expect her to carry anything like Mayor Daley's
weight. Among other things, she's made herself unpopular by defying the city
firemen in a long strike – settled, I may say, just before the primary. Even
so, most pros who know Illinois well and Chicago better were looking to
Tuesday's primary as THE crucial test of Senator Kennedy's national appeal
because of Chicago's liberal tradition, because there's a machine backing
Kennedy to enforce it and because Senator Kennedy's battle hymn in this
campaign has been an echo of the old fighting songs of the Democrats in their
liberal heyday. His standard speech might have come from Lyndon Johnson in
1964, some of it from Harry Truman in 1948 and it's rhetoric from Franklin
Roosevelt any time.

Kennedy has talked at all times about his concern for the poor, for the blacks,
for the old on pensions. He wants wage and price controls, he wants a
full-blown national health – that is, say, national sickness – programme. He
sees the oil companies as something not unlike the old robber barons. He's
leapt on the president's blunder over the switched vote in the United Nations
which had the United States supporting a resolution to forbid Israeli
settlements in the occupied West Bank and then quickly saying it hadn't meant
to vote that way. Senator Kennedy has declared this to be a shocking betrayal
of Israel which is to say, for his campaigning purposes, a betrayal of the
Jewish vote in this country. There's a very sizeable Jewish vote in Illinois.
There are in Chicago a great number of blacks, there are many poor people,
there are very many Catholics.

So, Illinois might not be his native ground but Chicago appeared to be his
spiritual home, his ideological stamping ground. What happened?

First, I should explain that Illinois is one of the few states with primaries
that has what is called 'a crossover vote'. In most states, the people who vote
in the primaries are either registered Republicans or registered Democrats.
When they go into the polling booth, they pick up the ballot of their party and
vote twice, once for the man they prefer for president and then for a slate of
delegates pledged to vote at the convention for a particular man.

However, in Illinois, the so-called 'crossover' custom allows you to vote on
any ballot you choose. You can go in as a registered Democrat and if you don't
like either Carter or Kennedy, you can vote for a Republican as your
presidential preference. This procedure scrambles the voters loyalties and
makes it all the harder to draw any national conclusions, for what it does is
to give a candidate quite a sizeable popular vote as your choice for president
but it doesn't follow that your choice is going to get a proportionate number
of delegates to the convention.

In other words, a lot of people might vote for Kennedy as their choice over
Carter but, on the delegate vote, more people might still vote for the pledged
Carter delegates. That's what happened! That and worse for Kennedy.

Carter got 65 per cent of the popular vote in the so-called 'beauty contest'.
Kennedy got only 30 per cent but Carter wound up with eight times the number of
Kennedy's delegates. Kennedy himself did not care to offer an explanation for
this debacle but the election analysts – the computer statisticians, rather –
they had several answers, all of them devastating to the morale and the
prospects of the Kennedy campaign.

Kennedy, the black man's friend, did badly among the blacks. Kennedy, the
ancestral Irish Catholic, did badly among the Catholics. Among the Jews, well,
there's one town in Illinois which is almost a symbolic immigrant town, it's
called Skokie, a fairly new town built on drained marshland. It's heavily
populated with German and Polish Jews who suffered in Nazi concentration camps,
many of whose families were murdered there.

Skokie followed other Jewish districts in coming out two to one for Carter and,
in spite of the palpable fact that inflation is the first, the raging, issue in
the country and in spite of the proof of the polls that most people don't think
Carter's new budget message will arrest inflation, Carter won – among the poor,
the whites, the blacks, the Jews, the rich, the farmers, north, east, south and
west. Quite apart from this stunning damage he's done to Kennedy's candidacy,
the Carter victory in itself is a political puzzle.

As I talk, adding up the results of the ten primaries so far, Carter has 496
delegates and Kennedy 198. There are, however, 28 primaries still to go, five
of them with massive gifts of delegates – New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Texas
and California but only New York is looked on a possible hunting ground for
Kennedy votes. New York's primary is next Tuesday and if Kennedy loses there,
surely his cause is done for.

There's just one other curious note to mention about the analysis of the
Illinois Democratic vote, or rather two notes. One is that even among the
Democratic voters who backed Kennedy's plea for wage and price controls, 61 per
cent voted for Carter. The other note, a sombre one, is more telling still. A
statistical sample was taken of the Democrats who either didn't vote for
Kennedy or didn't like Carter and crossed over to vote Republican, something
like one in three of these people said they couldn't vote for Kennedy because
they didn't trust him. An alarming high number of them simply spoke one word,
'Chappaquiddick'.

On the Republican side, Illinois added a fifth to the four straight primaries
won by Ronald Reagan. The Republicans started out in the primaries with seven
campaigning candidates – Reagan, George Bush, ex-CIA head, ex-US representative
in Peking, ex-ambassador to the United Nations, the jaunty little liberal
Republican congressman John Anderson, Robert Dole of Kansas, Philip Crane,
another congressman, Senator Howard Baker, the Republican's leader in the
Senate, former governor John Connally of Texas, a renegade Democrat.

One thing you have to say for the new intensity of campaigning in the primaries
and the new urgency that television coverage has given them is that they
produce, every other week, a sort of dramatic preview of the election. They
dramatise, certainly, the relative appeal of the men in the running and so
dishearten the losers early on instead of waiting for them to lose their
illusions at the convention itself. After ten primaries, Mr Doe, Senator Baker
and Governor Connally have quit. Mr Crane – with, I think, no delegates – hangs
on, don't ask me why. Former President Ford has taken himself out.

It has come down to three men, Ronald Reagan, George Bush and John Anderson.
Anderson is, for the moment, the most engaging figure. I don't mean personally
engaging, though he is that, but engaging as a political phenomenon. He drew
masses of independents in Massachusetts which he just lost. In Illinois he got
38 per cent of the popular vote to Reagan's 48 per cent. His strength came
almost wholly from liberal Republicans, from Democrats disillusioned with
Carter and from declared independents.

However, the Republican convention this summer will not be a convention of
independents and disappointed Democrats and among regular Republicans, Anderson
did very badly indeed. He may fire the young, the independents, the liberals
everywhere but unless they run their own conventions, he has nowhere to go for
a nomination.

So, against all my instincts and promises, I'd say that now it looks very much
like Carter versus Reagan in November in spite of the stunning evidence of the
Harris poll that Reagan would lose handsomely. But, as I say, there are 28
primaries and two conventions to go – 30 horse races and, as Mark Twain said,
'a difference of opinion is what makes horse races'.

There is time for opinions, even among 80 million voters, to differ and switch.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP