Misleading headlines

My son called me the other day. He lives in Wyoming and he was apologising for
not having kept a promise to come east about now and renew his boyhood
pleasures down at the end of Long Island, swimming, sunning, fishing the bay
for weakfish and blues – not many around now, but always coming up, especially
in hot weather with the poor, dumb porgy, which flaps sluggishly along the
seabed in the foolish belief that he's safe down there.

He, my son, was sorry he couldn't be with me. I told him he was wrong. He was
lucky, since we were then in the thick of what, by American standards, is an
early heatwave – temperatures in the high nineties and the sweat dropping like
a leaky tap from the collarbone to the toenails. I said, on the contrary, I
wish I were out there with him in the crunchy snows of the mountains. He told
me I was wrong. 'Looks like,' he said, 'I've had the last of the skiing. The
snows are gone or going and today it's a shivering or hot 55.' So you see what
a different sort of Letter From America you'd be getting if he was doing it.

Well, after the longest, wettest spring on record – in the north-east, that is
– we then had this abominable heat and now, as I talk anyway, we're soothed
every evening by the weather boys on the telly who promise and deliver
delicious days, what they call mild temperatures, in the mid eighties, that is.
Hallelujah! So now we can try to face some of the many knotty problems that
disturb Americans and hope to untangle them.

This week I want to talk about two topics that are never out of the news or the
wrestling minds of the pundits and never out of the mouth of President Reagan,
who is privately riled by what he takes to be wide public misunderstanding of
these two issues, though it is one of the president's most effective political
gifts that he rarely seems riled in public about anything. He must be the
chucklingest president in history. This enrages a lot of people who see the
chuckle as a crinkly reflection of complacency, but I suspect that for many
more people going to bed nagged by thoughts of El Salvador, wobbling banks,
foreclosed mortgages, not to mention the Russians, Mr Reagan's smile has the
effect of the old night watchman going his rounds chanting, 'Eleven o'clock and
all is well'.

We've not talked much about El Salvador, Nicaragua and the administration's
overall policy in Central America, except to say that the president has had a
victory, in Congress anyway, in the sense that reluctantly, frettingly, it has
gone along with him on the money he wants to pump in down there, two-thirds of
it for economic help, one-third for arms.

Well, about El Salvador. I came on a figure which I'm sure would astonish most
Americans who think this country is fuming and arguing over Central America.
People, for instance, who would readily believe a headline, the other day, in
the New York Times which read, 'Poll Finds a Lack of Support for
Administration's Latin Policy'. The lead sentence of the piece was this, 'Only
one American in three supports President Reagan's policies in Central America'.
Well, I would have guessed the support was touch and go, but not thought it
would be so drastically small.

This first sentence was reinforced by the remark which seems fair enough that,
and I quote, 'the findings of this poll of 1,367 adults – and, of course, they
were not randomly picked, they constituted a statistical cross-section of the
United States – the findings reflect a general unease towards Mr Reagan's
conduct of foreign affairs'.

Now in the body of the story we come to the gist, the nitty-gritty, the actual
figures of the poll. Remember – only one American in three supports the
president's policy in Central America. But now look – 62 per cent of those
interviewed said they had not been following events in the region carefully
enough to identify which side the United States supported.

So, now if you put together the 33 per cent who support the president and 62
per cent who say they don't know enough to have an opinion, what you get is 95
per cent of all Americans. That leaves five Americans in a hundred who are
opposed to the administration policy, as against 33 per cent who support him.
Hardly evidence for supporting a headline saying 'Lack of Support for Latin
Policy'.

It's only one example of the mischief, maybe quite unwitting, that can be
spread by headline writers. A truer headline, based on the actual story printed
below would have been 'Only 5 Per Cent of Americans Opposed to Central American
Policy'. No wonder the president can smile and smile. He knows something that
the headline writers of the Times don't know, or wish weren't true.

The other bit of misinformation or, rather, glaring misinterpretation came from
an equally distinguished newspaper and had to do with another hobby horse which
the president's critics like to ride. This has to do with unemployment. Now,
the government issues once a month a report which you can get free from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics. It's an enlightening bit of reading, sometimes even
funny since you learn not only how many people are employed, how many aren't,
who's switching jobs, how many hairstylists have gone out of business, how many
young people are coming in, who's taking holidays, how many young women are on
maternity leave, and so on. By the way, two states now have laws requiring
employers to grant unpaid paternity leave to, naturally, fathers, for as long
as two months.

Well, on the basis of the latest government report, which is always entitled
'The Employment Situation', this distinguished paper reported that unemployment
was down but only by a fraction of one percentage figure. The story was mainly
about the chronic persistence of unemployment. It was what in the newspaper
trade they call a 'jump' story, that's to say if you're interested enough, the
only way you can follow the story from the front page is to jump to page 29 and
there you could read an amazing figure.

The total number of Americans with jobs, it says, now stands at 106,978,000. In
other words not expressed, more Americans are at work than at any time in
history. Of course, you could rightly argue that when the population of any
country keeps going up and up, there had better be more, absolutely more,
people employed or the country would be in deep trouble. Unless a country is in
appalling depression or has a declining population, there are bound to be more
people employed than there were, say, 30 years ago.

But, on that same page, there's another figure which, perhaps in another
newspaper could have been the lead sentence of the piece and inspired a blazing
headline. This is it. 'In the past month alone, there has been a gain in
employment of 886,000 jobs'. Now this really is the biggest single monthly gain
in American history. The reporter slips in the thought on page 29 that this is,
'perhaps the most eye-catching figure in today's report'.

Well, I must say it caught his eye awfully late in the day. The most
eye-catching fact of any story you might think would be reported in the first
sentence so as to catch the eye. So there you have it. A piece on the
persistence of unemployment which is down slightly and no emphasis at all on an
historic, all-time record increase in employment.

Now I'm not saying that intelligent people ought not to criticise or have not
good cause to criticise the president's policies on Central America and
unemployment. I am saying that in order to do so, they ought to adduce true and
scary facts and I have to say that the Democrats, who certainly are the
president's most vocal critics on these two issues, had better rouse themselves
and do some better homework. They're losing the November election every week by
ignoring awkward facts that run in Mr Reagan's favour and stoking their
rhetoric with wishful thinking.

There's something about presidential candidates, especially in opposition to
the incumbent, that makes them terrified of conceding that their opponent is
right about anything. How different from that immensely wily politician – but
grittily honest man – Abraham Lincoln, who has gone down as a legendary saviour
of the black people, so that all the schoolbooks tell you in pious prose how
devoted from the start he was to a single aim to free the slaves, how he ran on
that promise, how the Civil War was fought exclusively with that noble purpose
in mind.

Well, the truth is quite different. For one thing, the historic, the sainted,
proclamation by Lincoln which emancipated the slaves applied only to the
Southern states and not to the slave-owning border states, the ones that are
neither in the South nor the north – Maryland, West Virginia, Kentucky,
Delaware, Missouri. But on the main point, Lincoln, during the war, made his
aim brutally clear. 'If I could save the union without freeing any slave, I
would do it and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves, I would do it.
And if I could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone, I would do it.
The thing is to save the union.'

If the Democrats could find a man who said, 'The president is right in some
things and wrong in others and it's the wrongs we must right', he might seem,
and sound, like a Daniel come to judgement.

Talking about my son in Wyoming, I have a word from out there that brings an
exciting echo from a century ago but it echoes a still-persistent scandal –
cattle rustling in Sweetwater county. It's gone professional and it's now done
mostly at night with big trucks taking off along eight-lane highways. There's a
deputy sheriff out there, one stoical, tooth-sucking Ed Cantrell. He tries to
police 10,000 square miles – the area of his county. He says a successful night
rustle can swipe between 20 and 30 thousand dollars' worth of cattle and some
blue-eyed reporter asked him if there was any way to stop it.

'Sure,' said Ed Cantrell, sucking on his teeth, 'you could move the 82nd
Airborne Division in here. I guess that would stop it.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP