The Third Man

If these talks had to carry titles, as even the most humdrum television news
documentaries must do, as a come-on for the viewer, I should call this one 'The
Third Man'.

I'll say, right away, that the third man is a man that most of you have
probably never heard of, Bernard Kalb, official spokesman for the State
Department, now former spokesman for the State Department. On Wednesday he
resigned, certainly at a time that delivered an embarrassing blow to the
president, just before he set off for Iceland.

I'll begin first by saying why the title 'The Third Man', came to mind. The
moment Mr Kalb's resignation was announced on the nightly TV news on Wednesday
and then on the front pages of Thursday's newspapers, two names sprang to mind
which, in this context, would represent the first man and the second man.

The first man has a name which may also mean very little. Even Americans, by
now, may have to think twice to identify him. His name is Cyrus Vance. He was
secretary of state under Jimmy Carter. A good man, a determined Democrat (with
a capital D as also, of course, with a small d) a loyal member of President
Carter's team until there came a day when the president and the small circle of
advisers that constitutes the National Security Council met in great and
successful secrecy to ponder a plan which, if properly executed, might lift off
President Carter's shoulders the albatross that had weighed him down for the
previous six months and, in the end, would doom his presidency.

The plan was to rescue the 52 American hostages held in Tehran by a daring
raid, a flight of helicopters carrying special troops who would overwhelm the
fortress where the hostages were held and carry them off to safety. It was a
hair-raising plan and when it failed it was called hair-brained. I'm sure that
very many of you now remember that appalling episode, how the failure in the
desert of two of the raiding helicopters killed two Americans, I think, but
also strangled the adventure at birth.

When it was being planned, Secretary of State Vance was, of course, privy to it
and he was against it. He could have stayed mum, saying to the president and
his security council or just mumbling to himself, 'It'll never work'.
Unfortunately, as secretary of state, he was off on a necessary jaunt to Europe
and to all questions about the intentions of his own boss, President Carter, he
had to assure the allies that what could be done through diplomatic channels to
get the hostages released was being done, that no other plan was in the works.

When the adventure did fail, shamefully and tragically, Mr Vance resigned, not
because it had failed and he'd been against it from the start, but because he
hated having to disguise the truth from America's allies. In a word, he hated
having to lie, therefore, he resigned on principle.

The second man's name may be more familiar to more people because the war over
the Falklands is perhaps more readily recalled than Mr Carter's dreadful
escapade in the desert. The second man is Lord Carrington and his story is more
simply told.

Argentina suddenly invaded the Falklands. Through some unsuspected cunning of
General Galtieri, or a moment of amnesia in British intelligence, the invasion
was a complete surprise. Lord Carrington was the British foreign secretary and
although everybody else in the government was caught off-guard and Mrs Thatcher
begged him to stay on, he resigned promptly without reservations or rhetorical
sobs and sighs. The issue was quite simple to him. He was secretary of state
for foreign affairs. He was, therefore, the man responsible for the conduct of
them. He didn't know about the impending invasion but, as the responsible
minister, he felt he ought to have known. Therefore, he resigned on principle.

I find it sad that these names should stand out in memory so sharply. It's sad
because there are so few of them – people, that is, who take themselves out of
high office not because they've done anything worse than a hundred others, but
because they have a lively conscience and before anyone else can point the
finger, they point the finger at themselves. As I say, men of principle.

To the names of Vance and Carrington, there must now be added the third man,
Bernard Kalb and, before I put his name on this honour roll, I ought to remind
you that Mr Vance was, is, by birth and upbringing, an upper middle-class
American and that Lord Carrington is an upper-class Englishman. Both decent
Establishment types. Both, you might assume, trained from boyhood to act as
they did.

Bernard Kalb is quite another type. He is the son of Max and Bella Kalb, both
Polish immigrants to this country. The father, like so many Russian, Hungarian,
Austrian, Polish, immigrants, knew one trade: he was a tailor and New York city
was the hive of tailoring in its humblest skills. Max Kalb sent his two sons to
the New York City public schools – in the American sense, the schools where the
public goes.

Bernard worked his way to and through college, graduated in 1942, just in time
to be whipped into the army and, like so many other patriotic youngsters who
expected to give his all in the fight against Hitler and Tojo, he was assigned
or sentenced to a desk job – a very primitive and shivery desk in a hut, a
Quonset hut on a small island in the dank, grey Aleutian Islands. He was set to
work on a sheet, a so-called army newspaper. The editor of the newspaper was
another active exile, you might say, from the Japanese war, one Sergeant
Dashiell Hammett, who later graduated to a more comfortable desk and the
authorship of 'The Maltese Falcon' and 'The Thin Man'.

After the war, Bernard Kalb went to work for the New York Times, then for a
local radio station as a writer and then covered the United Nations. He was
sent off by the Times as a correspondent in south-east Asia where he learned a
great deal about the difference between news handouts (official news) and the
news as a diligent reporter can dig it out. He also acquired a love of – and,
by saving his pennies, a small collection of – oriental porcelain.

He was five years in Indonesia, came back to a television network as a
diplomatic correspondent and just under two years ago, at the age of 62, he
became the State Department's official spokesman – at the best of times, a
delicate job. At the worst of times, a brutal test of judging between the whole
truth and the publishable truth.

He's the man we've seen once or twice a week before a flock of correspondents
gathered at the State Department giving, in carefully measured language, the
State Department's account of what's happening, what's being done, what, by
implication, the secretary of state and the president are prepared to do about
some development in relations with... with Israel, Tokyo, Lebanon, France,
Syria, Iraq, OPEC, Abu Nidal, Colonel Gaddafi, Uncle Tom Cobbley and all.

It's not a job I, myself, would crave. Especially for an old reporter; there
are too many times when you simply have to gloss over the truth because
somebody in the upper echelons has blundered and you can't say so and are
sorely tempted to say the truth must be bottled in the interests of national
security.

Last Wednesday, Mr Kalb went to see his boss, Secretary of State Shultz, and
resigned. This is how it came about. Along with most of us, Mr Kalb had read an
article printed in the Washington Post last week which quoted from a government
document it had got hold of, author unknown, proposing that the administration
should begin a campaign of disinformation to the press, aimed at bothering and
alarming Colonel Gaddafi.

This new, nasty word is a direct translation of the Russian word
'dezinformatsiya'. It means, simply, false information and it's no secret that
the Soviet government has a whole department given over to the manufacture of
false stories, forged documents, concocted plots, meant to discredit the
intentions and the policy of potential enemies.

At some point, Mr Kalb must have learned that this memorandum, or
recommendation, the Washington Post had unearthed was written by none other
than Admiral John Poindexter, the National Security adviser. Whatever this memo
meant to the White House and the State Department, to the press it meant that
the absolutely top man in national security was proposing that this
administration begin a disinformation programme on the Russian model, putting
out false stories about Colonel Gaddafi.

When President Reagan was asked about the Post story, he wriggled around the
truth and simply berated the reporter who'd written up the story. Mr Shultz
said he did not and never would lie to the press. Mr Kalb believed him. He
declared that his boss was a man of integrity, but his boss recalled a fateful
quote. After the war, Winston Churchill said, 'In wartime, the truth must be
protected by a bodyguard of lies' and he was referring, of course, to the whole
system of deception that absorbs the secret intelligence services in wartime.

But, this time, even the president's chief aide suggested that in dealing with
some governments, anything goes. The implication was fatally left that in
peacetime, too, a government cannot be too open about telling the means it uses
to bring down or destabilise an unfriendly government and we know from the
record, in this age of elaborate government intelligence departments, that
destabilisation can require wholesale bribery, electronic spying, secret
mercenaries, rigged elections, even quiet assassination.

It was the president's refusal to say outright that this government has not
deceived and will not deceive the press with any campaign of disinformation; it
was the hint that, in peacetime, too, the truth might require protection with a
bodyguard of lies, that forced Bernard Kalb to what he called 'a choice'.

'As an American,' he said, 'as a spokesman, as a journalist, whether to allow
oneself to be absorbed in the ranks of silence or to enter a modest dissent',
he chose to enter his dissent. He quit and a silent chorus arose from his
Washington colleagues saying, 'Bully for Bernie!'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP