A meeting of minds

Mrs Thatcher will be here in a few days to visit President Reagan and old
Washington hands, whose memories go back a few decades, are anticipating a love
fest more ardent than anything seen here since the great day, just before
Christmas in 1941 when we – we, being the press – poured into the president's
office in the White House and heard President Roosevelt say, 'I wish you'd just
stand up for one minute and let them see you. They can't see you!'.

It's true we couldn't see this guest, whoever he was. Guests at a presidential
press conference are very rare, but his presence had been telegraphed by smoke
signals rising from a cigar. However, a plump cherub stood up, still out of
sight to most of the reporters, until he climbed up on to his chair and
revealed himself as Prime Minister Churchill, at which point – and I'm quoting
from the official transcript of the Roosevelt Press conferences – 'loud and
spontaneous cheers and applause rang through the room'.

I ought to say, though, that if Mrs Thatcher doesn't hear loud and spontaneous
cheers ringing through the White House on her arrival, that will be mainly
because we know she's coming. In the middle of the Second World War, we did not
advertise the movements of Allied statesmen. They crossed the Atlantic in
stealth and secrecy or, as we'd now say, in maximum security and the sight of
Churchill, just off the battle line, pink and cosy there in the White House was
unreal – a shock, a delightful one, which explains why the cheers were so loud
and spontaneous.

One of the minor hobbies of president-watchers is guessing how the new man will
get along with the incumbent leaders of the Western Allies. The press is always
quick to tell us, on the basis of a rash of rumours along the Champs-Elysées,
say, that Mr Giscard d'Estaing could not abide President Carter. We won't
really know till the memoirs come out, but it's dangerous to guess or pretend
to know who is going to take to whom.

Lyndon Johnson, for instance, was willing to tell all comers that he had a
favourite prime minister and I'll bet that not one listener in a hundred would
get it right first time. 'I took to the man,' he once confided, 'because we
talk the same language and in off hours we did the same things. I told him
about the wild turkeys and the gauge required to land a white-tail deer and the
bass fishing in the Pedernales River and he told me about the grouse and the
barley crop and fishing for trout. And I'll tell you another thing, he knew
what was confidential in our talks together and what was not. He knew better
than some when to keep his trap shut. A fine gentleman and a great guy.' Nobody
but Sir Alec Douglas-Home.

However, there is no speculation, no question, about the warmth of Mrs
Thatcher's reception because she and President Reagan are not merely
sympathetic ideologically, they are Tweedledum and Tweedledee. For the first
time since prime ministers and presidents have got together – and let's not
forget it's a very recent habit, mostly since the invention of the jet plane,
most presidents lived and died without ever meeting a British or a French prime
minister – for the first time we have an American president and a British prime
minister of the precisely same political colour, of identical convictions held
with similar passion and with programmes for the economic recovery of their
countries which are carbon copies of each other.

What adds an intense, and almost morbid, interest to this meeting is that it's
almost two years now since Mrs Thatcher did what Mr Reagan says he's going to
do and while Mr Reagan was telling us last Wednesday evening that by trimming
waste and cutting taxes and slashing at social spending, he will balance the
budget by 1984, that employment will go up, that the inflation growth rate will
drop from its present 11.1 per cent to 8.3 per cent next year and 5.5 in 1984
and the anaemic – his word – the anaemic growth of the economy, which is now
1.1 per cent, will become robust and go from 4 to 5 per cent a year from next
year on.

Well, while we were relishing this wonderful new view of the fateful year of
1984, we seemed to recall that Mrs Thatcher had similar hopes for 1981 and 2,
but her hopes and dreams have been, shall we say, moderated. I'm saying this
with no sarcastic reservations. Mrs Thatcher will be able to tell Mr Reagan a
thing or two as she catches him in the glow of his first month in the
presidency.

And I must say that with any other president and at any other time we could
expect by now that the opposition party would be, if not in full hue and cry,
at least beginning to moan and groan about the new man for welching on his
promises, but he's not done that. He's doing the extraordinary thing, the
almost unprecedented thing, of actually abiding by – nay, proclaiming as a new
faith, the platform on which he won the election. It was said long ago, and has
invariably been true, that nothing is more perishable in American politics than
the party platforms adopted at the nominating conventions.

Look back in amazement for a minute at the platform on which Franklin Roosevelt
first ran and was first elected. Throughout the long, grim summer of 1932 he
declared in his soaring tenor voice that the whole cause of the nation's
sickness, the Great Depression, lay in the great and growing power of the
central government, taking over things that no government should intrude on,
stifling initiative. It was time to give the government of the people, he said,
back to the people, to the states and the cities where the people know what
they want and deserve to get it.

That Democratic platform of 1932 is one of the most unreal documents in this
country's history. The day Roosevelt was inaugurated, he seized power at the
centre, suspended the powers of the states beyond the limits set by the
constitution as it came out and launched an era of an all-powerful federal
government which has lasted ever since. Although the separate states had, and
have, autonomous powers which still amaze foreigners, throughout the past 50
years and increasingly, the people, when in trouble, look not to their state
capitals and their governors, but to Washington and their senators.

As one stolid Democrat put it, a man stunned by Reagan's election but beginning
to have second thoughts, 'Today we expect Washington to save bankrupt cities
and automobile companies, to lead the fight against street crime, to put
middle-class children through college, to support the income of farmers, to
help feed and house the poor, to build highways and transit systems – 50 years
ago, none of these things was regarded as the responsibility of the federal
government.'

It's true. And even the most seasoned and uncynical Democrats expected that
once Mr Reagan was in the White House, he would do what a dozen presidents had
done before him – not quite as barefacedly as Roosevelt certainly – he would
forget the platform, adjust to the shock of reality and begin to talk much like
Mr Carter. Well, it hasn't happened. He believed in that platform, he meant
what he said and he means to do it, or try.

Admittedly, the promised ten per cent cut in taxes, which was to be retroactive
to 1 January, will not go into effect till July, but in just about everything
else, he seems determined to follow the gaudy and daring blueprint he laid out
at the convention. The effect on the Democrats, who find themselves in the
minority in the Senate for the first time in 30-odd years and who, in the
House, find many of their own party in rebellious sympathy with the president,
the effect has been one of shock tempered by admiration.

One powerful congressman, a Democrat, said, after hearing the president's
economic speech, 'If this thing works or looks like working, two years from
now, it's we Democrats who are going to have to rescue our party from oblivion.
It's the first big radical turn in American government in 50 years and I tell
you, he's either going to come out of it a stumble-bum or a hero'.

So, surprisingly, the Democrats are lying low. They are shaken. This doesn't
mean that when the president's daring proposals come to them, his request to
cut or reduce 83 government programmes now in being, this doesn't mean that
they won't proceed according to their regular maxim – he may take money from
thee, but never from me.

The one striking reservation that Mr Reagan has made since he spoke as
President Reagan and not as candidate Reagan is that he no longer uses
swashbuckling verbs like 'end' inflation and 'lower' the budget. He was careful
to make clear the other evening, though whether people got it is another
question, that his master plan is, I quote, 'aimed at reducing the growth in
government spending and taxing and reducing the growth of inflation'.

Now, even if the millennium comes in, a hamburger that costs a dollar this year
is still going to cost one dollar and eleven cents next year. When the budget
is cut and drastically, the government will still be spending much more than it
did last year. The population grows, it needs more services than it did, costs
of everything – material, labour – will keep rising in step with inflation.

President Reagan asks us – and he got a round of applause from saying, 'It's
not my plan, it's our plan' – he asks us 'to join me in reducing direct federal
spending by 41 billions in the next fiscal year'. In all, he promises, he wants
to save 49 billions and this means that next year we will spend only $40
billion more on government than we did this year. How's that again?

Well, now you see why he cannot talk any longer about slashing the budget or
cutting inflation. Mr Carter's budget allowed for an increase of 89 billions.
Mr Reagan hopes to save 49 billions out of them. In other words, he has no hope
– no government can have a hope – of reducing spending, reducing inflation.
They can only try to reduce the growth rate of both.

I should like to be a fly on the wall some late evening this coming week and
hear President Reagan tell Prime Minister Thatcher how he's going to do it and
hear her tell him how she did it.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP