Moscow's spy dust

I suppose everybody on earth, including little boys and big men who read comic
strips, have heard of the CIA and everybody else who does not read comic strips
has heard of the KGB, but I should guess that the numbers – in the millions –
would shrink dramatically if you could count the people who know that the
Central Intelligence Agency deals with secret intelligence abroad, while the
KGB deals with intelligence at home, the homeland being, of course, Mother
Russia.

It is the fate of superpowers, whether in Ancient Egypt or nineteenth-century
Britain or twentieth-century America and Russia, that the world knows the worst
about them. To this day, I'm sure the universal image of a British imperialist
is either that of a puffing, bloodshot colonel or a greedy trader enslaving
millions of poor people of some dark colour in the interests of the home
market.

By now, it's left to scholarly moles to dig up the name and labours of the
great Lord Lugard, the pioneer colonial administrator of Nigeria who inspired
at least two generations, including four schoolmates of mine, to renounce in
college the making of money and who went off into the Indian civil service and
gave their lives, literally, to the able and humane administration of native
peoples.

I'm not saying that one type compensates for the other. Simply, that the big
powers, by the sheer fact of being big and strong and rich are looked on as the
big baddies. It's a fate that a whole procession of British governments, from
the defeat of Napoleon to the arrival of Hitler, have had to accept. It's a
fate which troubles very many Americans who are horrified that so many people
at home and abroad look on the United States and the Soviet Union as, in the
current phrase, moral equivalents.

I may be wrong, but I think it was Mr Harold Macmillan who, early in the war,
told a high-ranking American official that when you are in power, you mustn't
expect to be liked, let alone admired. You're lucky to be respected.

And when there are two world powers instead of one, it makes it all the easier
for the hundreds of other nations on the outside to concentrate on the wicked
or threatening institutions of the big two, and, perhaps, never stop to think
that they, too, have some of the same institutions but don't publicise them
very much.

For instance, I wonder how many listeners offhand can at once, or even after
deep thought, name the initials of the French CIA and KGB or the Dutch or the
Italian or the Swedish, the security services of the Chinese or the Albanians,
not to mention Britain's MI5 and MI6? I doubt there's a nation, huge or minute,
that doesn't have its security intelligence service probing away all the time
in secret.

By the way, there's a complication in understanding even the simplest
difference between the American CIA and the FBI. The Central Intelligence
Agency, as I said, deals with intelligence abroad that might imperil the
national security of the United States.

The Federal Bureau of Investigation is the domestic, investigating arm of the
Department of Justice and may look into every sort of crookery, not only
national security, that is suspected of going on, but only across state
borders, not exclusively within one of the 50 states.

In other words, the FBI is not a national police force. There isn't one. The
FBI, for example, had no jurisdiction in investigating the assassination of
President Kennedy. That belonged, for one hectic weekend to the police of the
city of Dallas. Well, that limitation has since been abolished. It is now a
federal crime to make an attempt on the life of a president, wherever in the
United States it happens.

Well, all these thoughts came to pass and I think the comic-strip image came
floating up from my unconscious because, to the jaunty, space-comic phrase
'Star Wars' we have now to add 'Spy Dust'.

On Wednesday an ominous, or at least intriguing, message came in to the leading
newspapers and television networks here that the American ambassador in Moscow
was calling in, or assembling somewhere, all the American citizens living in
that capital city to tell them something.

Before we had any confirming or clarifying word, every sort of Soviet American
expert – what we call Kremlinologist – was phoned to explain not what had
happened, but what was going to happen.

In the feverish state in which, today, all reporters and commentators live, a
rumour has only to be tapped out on the news ticker to produce a knee-jerk
reaction. For a couple of hours or so, I was telephoning here and there and
heard that the United States had been given its marching papers from the Soviet
Union to protest the White House decision to proceed with the first American
test of an anti-satellite weapon against an object in space.

So much, I thought, for the learned commentaries of experts the previous
evening on how the Soviets would take the anti-satellite decision. That Tuesday
evening, I, for one, went to bed fairly happy because the Kremlinologist I most
trust gave it, as his considered opinion that the Russians would a) respond
strongly or b) weakly or c) not at all.

It took an hour or two on Wednesday to learn that the American ambassador would
remain in Moscow, that he wasn't telling all the Americans living there to pack
their bags and head for home and that what he had to say had nothing to do with
the anti-satellite decision.

It had nothing to do with it until Wednesday evening when the TV political
gurus began to ruminate again and figure the political ramifications of
anti-satellites, the timing of the coming summit talk and what the American
ambassador had said.

Well, what did he say? I'm not even sure he said anything, but somebody, some
official at the American embassy informed the 500-odd American residents in
Moscow that the Soviet Union, through the KGB, was using a mysterious,
yellowish powder as a help in tracking the movements of Americans, and maybe
other foreigners. A spokesman for the State Department here said, 'We have
protested the practice in the strongest terms and demanded that it be
terminated immediately.'

Read on a little and we hear from a senator who's the chairman of the Senate's
intelligence committee which overlooks the work of the CIA and he throws off
the passing remark that the United States has known about the use of this
powder since 1976. Why the sudden umbrage of the State Department and demands
in the strongest terms?

Well, it seems that the White House and the State Department have just
discovered that the powder might conceivably cause cancer. Apparently, there's
more than one powder. Again, that State Department man said that one agent – a
chemical, not a man – was a mutagen known as nitrophenyl pentadien. A mutagen
can cause genetic change and can be, therefore, suspect as a cancer-causing
agent.

That was about all we had to go on by Thursday but the reactions came quick and
fast. A Southern senator was on the tube saying it was a horrible thing that
the Russians were giving our people cancer and we should close the embassy and
sever all diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union. I hasten to say that is
something that is not going to happen.

At the other extreme were people who said the whole thing was a clumsy
much-ado-about-nothing plot to embarrass the Soviet Union before the summit
talk and/or to stifle protests against the anti-satellite decision.

There seems to be no doubt about the powder and its use. It was, is, smeared or
pepped on the seat of a car or its handle or a doorknob and so the stuff –
invisible, I gather, to the naked eye – would be transferred to the hand of
anyone touching the diplomat – a journalist, a dissident, say, that he'd been
in contact with.

So how do the Russians spot the powder at long distance? Ultra violet light
devices have been suggested, but when an administration official was asked to
pierce the heart of this mystery, he said that how the tracking was done, the
operational aspect, as he put it, was something he could not talk about and
that the United States had not bothered to protest about a trick going on for
nine years, because only now had laboratory tests done here showed up the
minute possibility that the powder might cause cancer.

A morning after check of authoritative chemists, one from the American Chemical
Association, for example, said that in all the literature, there are only eight
references to this chemical among six million chemical substances and there is
no reference to the possibility of cancer.

By the way, no American in Moscow has been given cancer or anything else,
except a smidgeon of powder that lights up in a Soviet lab when I kiss your
hand, madam.

It all sends me back 40 years to the age of innocence, when the Russian
delegation arrived in San Francisco for the birth of the United Nations. They
wouldn't go up to their hotel suites and rooms until a posse of their
bodyguards cased the entire wing for bugged cupboards, closets, chandeliers and
so on. This was not the sort of thing you reported in those days. I can only
say we were shocked. We were so young, we didn't even know about bugging.

And years and years later, a lung disease specialist told me that deep in the
hills north of San Francisco lie veins, geological veins of magnesium silicate,
commonly known as asbestos and that, of course, it must get into San
Francisco's water supply – not, however, in lethal doses. But for heaven's
sake, he said, don't write anything about this or the entire population of San
Francisco will go into a panicky fear of getting asbestosis.

It occurs to me. Do you suppose that during the nine-week United Nations
conference, the Russians had their men digging deep into the coast range and
planting layers of asbestos?

Just a suggestion, but you can't be too careful with those Russians!

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP