Mid-term elections

Before you reach for the knob, let me remind myself of the wise words of an old
Englishman who once warned me that it's bad enough understanding our own
politics, but American politics sound like a different form of chess in which
the pawns move backwards and there's no king and queen. He could have added in
which, also, the bishops control Boston, Chicago and Philadelphia.

I'm going to talk about Tuesday's national election in the House of
Representatives, mainly as it reflects not just on America's problems, but on
the problems of government that are common to the whole Western world, or
should I say the democratic world, including Europe, Australasia, India, Israel
and Japan.

I'm not thinking of foreign policy, of what to do about the Middle East, the
nuclear freeze, trade with the Soviet Union and so on, about which the senators
who sit for six years have most to say. I'm thinking rather of the clash
between two philosophies of domestic government that are now out in the open
and in the works in Britain and Germany and France and Spain and Sweden, as
much as in America. You can give this clash several labels. Call it the welfare
state versus the trickle-down theory, or Lord Keynes versus Milton Friedman, or
government planning versus free enterprise, or Roosevelt's famous advice to a
loyal henchmen, 'Tax and tax and spend and spend!' versus cut taxes and balance
the budget.

Two years ago, Ronald Reagan said he'd been elected to reverse 50 years of a
government philosophy that had, in the long run, practically bankrupted the
country. The philosophy was that of the New Deal which asserted a new belief in
this country that the government, the national government, has a permanent and
prior duty to take care of the poor, the sick, the disabled, the dispossessed
and the unemployed. As Roosevelt put it 'to soak the rich' to pay for these
irrevocable services and if taxes weren't enough, then print more money.

If Ronald Reagan had been an Englishman, a new prime minister with a similar
message, he would have said he'd been elected to reverse 75 years of that
philosophy, since 25 years before Roosevelt, Lloyd George and Winston Churchill
initiated their 'New Deal' which accustomed us to old-age pensions,
unemployment insurance and much else as permanent obligations of government.

Well, let's look at the American election, what it was about and what happened.
It was, as I say, a national election though not a presidential one. We call it
a mid-term election because, if I may say so, two and two make four. The
president is elected for a four-year term, the 435 members of the House of
Representatives are elected for only two years. So, halfway through the
president's term, the whole House is turned out and a new House elected and,
therefore, the congressional elections are always taken as an opportunity for
the people to say whether they think he's doing well or badly.

The issues in 435 congressional districts, over a continent with vastly
different climates, livelihoods, economies, grudges, are obviously of great
variety and it may be, in fact it's fairly certain to be, that Mr A voting in
Detroit and Mrs B voting in California and C, D and E voting in Florida, Maine,
Alaska have almost nothing in common by way of what concerns them most.

Let me give you a personal example, one that doesn't concern more than 30-odd
thousand voters in the United States but it meant more than anything else in
the election, to me and my neighbours. At the end of Long Island, there are two
forks, like the fish flukes, that enclose a large, 30-mile long bay. In the
middle of this bay is an island. The flaming issue at our end of the island was
whether this hilly, beautiful and uninhabited island was to be opened up to
what we always call 'development', whether development or degradation is the
end in view. Anyway, by the existing limit on saleable plots, 56 families could
build on 15 acres each.

Now there were two men running for the state assembly, that is for New York
State's Congress, if you like. One, Mr S is all for opening up the island to
development. The other, Mr P, was resolutely opposed to it, pointing out that
it would require a ferry service, tap the precarious water table still deeper,
entail sewage, crowds, not to mention destroying the stillness and beauty of
the bay. Well Mr P lost. It's not the end of the matter but I can only say that
his defeat caused little selfish us more gloom than the defeat of a family
favourite in another state for the United States' Senate.

And yet, with this multitude of regional interests and issues, the national
commentators appearing, after all, on national television, have to say that
over and above your interests and mine, there is a grand, national purpose. The
election in the House, they say, represented a referendum on Mr Reagan's
economic policies, known as Reaganomics. Useless for reporters in large parts
of the south and in places with comparatively low unemployment to say that
Reaganomics was not an issue in their part of the country.

Pointless, or rather insensitive to the point of callousness, to mention that
90 per cent of Americans are at work and, therefore, the election could hardly
be a judgement on ten per cent unemployment. Legions of political leaders of
both parties either proclaimed or conceded that, yes, Reaganomics was THE
national issue and unemployment was Mr Reagan's Achilles heel. I ought to say
that what even the Reaganomics fans know and wince at is the fact that for
every tenth of one per cent increase in unemployment, the ordinary taxpayers
are going to have to pay out many millions more for unemployment benefits.

Yet, in New York State, a Republican who made his principal target the high
rate of crime lost the governorship by only 150,000 votes in over five million
to a Democrat who kept saying, over and over again, that Reaganomics was the
issue, was a failure and the president had said so, which he had not.

Now, it's usual enough to amount to a tradition that in the mid-term election,
the party in power, I mean rather the party whose man is in the White House,
always loses seats in the House. Why should this be so? I hazard a simple,
human answer.

Americans are, by now, in general, cynical about politics to the alarming
extent that only 31 per cent of the qualified voters voted in this election,
but this minority is all the more concerned and idealistic. More than most
nations, they vote for a new president in the fervent belief, or hope, that he
is, at last, the Moses they've been looking for. At the end of two years, they
discover that he is not Moses. Eisenhower came as close to the hoped-for
impersonation as anybody in modern times and, in his mid-term election, he lost
only four votes in the House. But there've been other presidents – Truman and
Lyndon Johnson as the most glaring examples – who lost heavily, the highest
count being, I believe, 70.

Now the pollsters and the statisticians dutifully went through the records of
the past 50 years and came up with an average loss in the mid-term of incumbent
seats in the House. The average is something like 11.4. An average between
wildly swaying extremes doesn't really make much more sense than saying, which
was true a few years ago, that the average family in the United States has two
and one-quarter children.

Let's just say that when a party loses 20 seats in the House, it's not going to
have things all its own way in the new Congress.

Well, the Republicans, who were already in a minority there, lost 26 seats.
Does this mean that the president can therefore count on 26 less votes for any
policy he wants to put through? Not at all. Because of a misconception that's
terribly easy to fall into, especially if you're foreign to American politics
and assume that the parties are ideological bodies, Republicans being
conservative, Democrats being liberals. It used to be, in the Roosevelt days,
much more so, but the Democrats especially are a regional alliance of
conservatives in the South, labour leaders in the industrial Midwest,
environmentalists here, small businessmen there.

So the more important change to notice is the ideological balance of the new
Congress. In the Senate, there is none. The Republicans lost only one seat and
will still control the Senate but, in the old House, and I stress 'the House'
because it has the last say on money bills, there were about 56 per cent
conservatives to 44 per cent liberals. The president was able to rally support
for his economic policies from about 25 per cent of the Democrats. This
imbalance has now been reversed. There are more, liberally inclined congressmen
than conservatives in the new House, which does mean that the president is
likely to lose, or perhaps to be wise enough not to bring up, such issues he
has wanted to press as prayer in the public schools, the denial of federal
funds for abortion and the idea of a constitutional amendment requiring a
balanced budget.

As for economics, Reaganomics, the president has to maintain his smile and his
phlegm and swear that he's going to stay the course but he's already left the
course. He is, as he proved in California, a pragmatist. He's not going to be
the only one riding up the hill when the majority is riding down. He has
practically conceded, though he hates to say so, that government, national
government – that is, the working tax payer – must pay for the poor and the
sick and the unemployed.

It seems to me most likely that the new House, which is the body that controls
the purse strings which says who gets how much for what, will rearrange the
priorities as between social services and defence spending and that the
president, like every other head of government in the Western world, is going
to have to go along with it, and that means releasing more money and that means
more inflation which means, in turn, more, not less, taxation.

In all the writhing through economic theories and clashes between the welfare
state and the free enterprisers, there is one hard truth that no party can
ignore. It is Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes's saying that taxes are the price
we pay for a civilised society.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP