Texas A&M University

It used to be one of the pleasures of travelling far from the east coast of
America that the New York Times was as unprocurable as the South China Morning
News. I hasten to say that I'm casting no aspersions on America's leading
newspaper. The sort of pleasure I have in mind is like that of, say, a London
businessman or lawyer who goes on a fishing trip to Scotland and discovers the
pleasure of not having to keep up with the stock quotations or the law reports.

It was a special pleasure, particularly out west, to get up in the morning,
inhale the crystalline air, walk past the false fronts of the little stores and
see the clear line of the mountains on the horizon and duck into a lunch
counter and settle to a breakfast of orange juice, cream of wheat, two eggs
over easy, patties of country sausage – not what Americans call link sausages,
but little pancakes of nothing but sausage meat, no skin, no bread, no lumpy
gristle – with a side order of hash brown potatoes, hot toast 'oozing', as Max
Wall used to say, with butter and as many cups of coffee as you could manage
with no extra charge.

Even then, as an incurable newspaper man from an early age, I found it
impossible to forego all newspapers. I also picked up the local gazette,
something called The Tombstone Courier or the Deadwood Tribune, to discover
what was on the minds of the locals. Of course, there'd be several agency
stories on the front page, like 'Hitler Claims Germans Persecuted in Austria',
'FDR Condemns Big Business Practices', but you turned inside to see what was
really on the minds of the Dakotans or the Arizonans, with headlines that took
several years of living in America to grasp, like 'Score DA's Blind Eye to
Wetbacks'. Score was a verb with the pronoun missing and meant that somebody
was scoring, condemning the district attorney's indifference to the wetbacks,
the Mexicans who were sneaking illegally across the Rio Grande by night. They
now come in like an army on the march.

A favourite noun which has vanished from western newspapers was 'solon' –
meaning that state's legislature's senators or representatives – as in 'Solons
Score New Tax Drive', but in those far-flung days, weeks would go by when you
never knew of anything that was troubling New York City and the east unless, as
I vividly recall, even the smallest newspaper of the smallest western town had
a front-page headline blazing forth the news, 'Prosecutor Grills Manton'.
Manton was a federal judge of high standing, the first, I believe, ever to go
to jail for the mysterious disappearance of $125,000.

Of course, you can still doggedly make a point of buying only the local
newspaper but nowadays it amounts to an act of tough self-discipline to walk
along a western street and not slip a quarter into a sidewalk machine and take
out our new national newspaper, USA Today, as also, in the next machine, the
nearest metropolitan daily.

These nostalgic thoughts came to me after spending most of a week in the heart
of Texas where, every morning around eight o'clock, I walked along a corridor
on the way to the cafeteria and slipped 50 cents into one machine for the New
York Times, another in an adjoining machine for the Wall Street Journal, a
quarter in another for USA Today and yet another for the Houston Chronicle.

Oh, by the way, my memory slipped a cog a week or more when I mentioned my
first sight of Dallas and remarked on the fires blazing on the horizon where
they were burning off the-then thought to be useless natural gas. Dallas has no
oil thereabouts. It was, in fact, Houston.

A modest city, 50 years ago, which has since found oil under the living room
carpet. I remember approaching Houston then at a snail's pace one night because
about 30 miles out of town, the two-lane paved highway gave out and there was a
sign saying 'Detour' and we had to go for 30 miles or so in a big, irregular
arc back to the same highway. The road was something just one step up from a
dirt road, not yet paved and of the sort known as a tin-roof road, with
parallel ridges at three feet intervals. You could choose either to proceed
with great care over one bump at a time or throw caution out the window and try
to skim the ridges at 30 miles an hour. Sometimes this worked. More often you
managed 20 miles before the axle slumped and the transmission began to groan
and shudder.

Well, to coin a phrase, there've been some changes made. I was, as I say, deep
in the heart of Texas at a university, an old university founded as an
agricultural and mechanical college, hence, A & M, at the end of the last
century – one of the colleges created, like most of the state universities,
that is universities created by and for the youth of a particular state, with
public money for free education. The first of them were known as land grant
colleges, the federal government gave the land and the state taxed its citizens
to provide a free college education.

If I had done, or were doing now, a television programme on education in
America, I think I should have started with the university I was visiting. The
picture would have opened with a shot taken apparently from a second-storey
window, looking down on a path and a girl student coming along in a jumpsuit,
cradling her books like a newborn babe. This, I would say, is a student at
Texas A & M.

The camera would pull back and take in a male student behind her and then
another and then, just coming into the picture, a young man resplendent in a
grey uniform and cavalry breeches, a member of the university corps, army
reserve corps. The cameraman, by now, had better be in a helicopter for, as we
rise, the picture expands to take in lawns and an Italian Renaissance building
and more lawns, fringed with trees and more big, flat buildings in a more or
less uniform, modern style. We are in fact, beginning to encompass the campus.
Encompass is a big word and is not as strictly accurate as the word
'beginning', for our own intrepid cameraman, and I can just imagine the
unflappable Kenneth Macmillan, the incomparable cameraman on my America series,
would begin to flap.

The question would disturb him pretty soon whether his helicopter was equipped
to ascend into the stratosphere. For up and up and the campus widens, immense
spaces flanked by more and more handsome buildings and rows of cottonwoods
looking, by this time, like plumes of grey-green fog. Onwards and upwards at,
till I should guess about, what, 20, 30,000 feet and, at last, we would
encompass the whole campus. It is 5,200 acres. I don't know what your personal
measurement of enclosed spaces is, but let me say for people who can recognise
120 acres from a train or an airplane, that the campus of Texas A & M could
comfortably enclose 43 18-hole golf courses.

I did not, I need hardly say, walk all over this vast, scholarly landscape. I
find it bad enough these days getting round 120 acres with the aid of an
electric cart, but I mooched around most of the central part of it and visited
the splendid libraries, plural, the architecture school, the biochemical lab,
the engineering school, the petroleum engineering school in which Texas A & M
is pre-eminent. The pre-medical school, the university newspaper building – no
typewriters, everybody facing word processors – a part of the agricultural
department. I did not wander enough among the breeding grounds or the herds of
cattle that were dots on the horizon and the students' centre which, with its
memorial halls and its own library and its clothing stores and candy store and
exhibition halls for paintings and telephone rooms and study alcoves and
reservation desk – it's also a hotel – and huge cafeteria and many private
dining rooms. In all, about the size of the old Crystal Palace.

I did not get the impression as I was being escorted around, on this
essentially country walk, of pressure or surging crowds. I guessed they must
have, maybe, 2,000 students, housed at comfortable distances, though one
student did tell me that if you were in a biology class and had to get to the
medical school, you couldn't make it in less than half an hour at a fast trot.
Well, there are 32,000 students, 11,000 of them living on campus, the rest in
dormitories scattered over those ample acres.

The most indelible impression after four days among them was of a student body
united by three things: general cheerfulness, conservatism and charming
manners. More than three-quarters of them are Texans. It is, then, a very large
university, a graceful and impressive university equipped beyond the dreams of
any ancient or modern university I know, but at one symposium, a student said,
'We mean to make this one of the great American universities. What, in your
opinion, is the test of a great university?'

This was red meat to a native Englishman and I had to swallow hard and resist
the Englishman's most instinctive temptation which is to condescend to
foreigners, most of all to Americans. I thought of a great western university
and its... practically its team of Nobel Prize winners.

I said, 'Well, I'll tell you one thing. You don't measure a great university by
the number of Nobel Prize winners it has collected on the faculty. My own idea
is that the test of a great university is the intellectual quality of the
average student.' There was a long, deep thoughtful pause.

A little later, the dean of the faculty said to me, 'You're right, of course,
but shouldn't it also take in another average – the high common denominator of
character and social behaviour?'

It was my turn to suffer a deep, thoughtful pause.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP