US interference in UK politics

Whenever I see in an American newspaper, which I have to say is very rarely, an
item datelined from my old stamping ground, Blackpool, I naturally seize on it.

I'm always disappointed. I expect, or hope, it will be about the pleasures of
the Pleasure Beach or whether the Bloomfield Road team has produced another
Stanley Matthews and do little boys still stake their lines in the sand
overnight and arrive next morning to find them wriggling with plaice? And, by
the way, do the cotton workers, if there are any cotton workers, still stroll
out along the promenade, early on summer mornings and toss off a slurp of
winkles and mussels, followed by a slab of tripe in a sea of vinegar?

Well, I admit, such passing thoughts are recollections of a remote society
whose heroes and heroines might as well be engraved on medallions, as in
anybody's memory. Cecil Parkin, the jester of English cricket, tilting the edge
of his shoe and persuading the ball to run up his leg into his hand. Gracie
Fields, bringing the house down at the Palace before London had ever heard of
her. Jack Hylton playing 'Who' and 'Sunny' to a thousand swirling couples in
the Tower Ballroom.

Enough of this morbid memorising! It was triggered by a dateline in the New
York Times – a dispatch written by the chief of its London bureau. It said,
Blackpool, England, October 1. Perhaps this fairly new correspondent was off on
a regional jaunt to acquaint Americans with a part of British life outside the
usual numbing round of Westminster, Mayfair, the London real-estate explosion
and the arrival of a new breed of investment bankers who owe nothing to ties to
the old school tie.

Alas, it was not about life as it's lived in Blackpool 51 weeks in the year.
The headline was, for a brief moment, a puzzle. 'US Interference Shaping Up as
British Issue'. Sure enough, Blackpool had made the foreign headlines for the
only reason it ever does – the Labour Party was holding its annual conference
there and I gathered that the enemy this time – for a day or two, anyway – was
not so much Mrs Thatcher as Mr Caspar Weinberger, the American Secretary of
Defense. What was he doing at Blackpool?

He wasn't. May I say, for listeners in Mexico or the New Zealand Alps, that the
previous weekend, Mr Weinberger, being interviewed by the BBC in Washington,
expressed what is certainly the administration position that the British Labour
Party's commitment to remove American nuclear weapons, including cruise
missiles, would severely weaken the Anglo-American alliance and could, quote,
'strengthen isolationist tendencies in American public opinion'.

Promptly, or rather before the interview was broadcast, my old paper, which had
received a text of the taped interview, wrote that it amounted to a pre-emptive
strike against the election of a Labour government. Then up spoke the old
defence horse, Mr Denis Healey, and accused Mr Weinberger of being in open
collusion with the Conservative party to prevent Labour winning the election.

Now who should show up at Blackpool but the American ambassador! Nothing odd or
sinister in that, it's quite normal for American ambassadors to attend the
annual political party conferences, acting, I ought to say, as interested
observers, by no means intending to run interference. But then the ambassador
was interviewed on television and spoke nothing but the truth, that Secretary
Weinberger does, indeed, speak for the Reagan administration.

This unfortunate television series reminded me of the never-to-be-forgotten –
it ought never to be forgotten – the historic embarrassment of the British
minister in Washington, almost one hundred years ago. The story ought to
printed and framed in the study of every British ambassador to the United
States and every American ambassador to Britain.

1888, then, the year of a presidential election. The British minister – it was
before the days when the United States was thought worthy of having a
full-blown ambassador – the British minister was one Sir Lionel Sackville-West.
The election campaign, which was a hot one, was between President Cleveland,
renominated by the Democrats, and an Indiana lawyer, Benjamin Harrison,
nominated by the Republicans.

In those days and for quite a while afterwards, New York state was often
decisive in the November election. The Republicans redoubled their efforts to
discredit President Cleveland with New York's Irish voters who'd been shaken
four years before by the admission of Cleveland that he had an illegitimate
son. They were not, however, quite as shaken then as they were by the
Republican candidate's howling characterisation of the Democratic party as a
party of rum, Romanism and rebellion.

Cleveland, in spite of his private lapse, was elected president but he presided
over a very negative, lacklustre administration for four years and now, the
Republicans, proclaiming that an Irishman's religion was no impediment at all
to his voting as a patriotic, thoughtful citizen, wooed and flattered him.

It might have been a tight election, but an Englishman in California, a
naturalised American, wrote in good conscience to Sir Lionel Sackville-West in
Washington asking for guidance through the exotic jungle of American politics,
which of the two candidates, the Republican Harrison or the Democrat Cleveland,
did the minister think a first-time voter ought to choose.

Sir Lionel wrote back, 'Mr Cleveland is the man'.The Republicans got hold of
Sir Lionel's letter. Not surprising, since they'd put the innocent Englishman
up to the original request for guidance. Two weeks before the election, they
published the letter far and wide. It was a shocker. The Republicans carried
New York State handsomely. Mr Harrison went into the White House. Sir Lionel
was recalled.

Ever since, and well into my time, British ambassadors in Washington were well
acquainted with this cautionary tale and made a point of being conveniently out
of the country – a much-needed rest or pressing private business or whatever –
on the verge of a presidential election.

Well now, a British party's annual conference is not an election, but it is as
close as British political parties come in mood and political sensitivity to
the eve of a General Election. It's a time when any ally of Britain, whatever
its feelings about the British government in being and the opposition, might
well stay mum. The feelings of President Reagan and of Secretary Weinberger are
surely very well-known about retaining American cruise missiles. Everyone knows
they deplore the Labour promise to get rid of them. But there is time to remind
Britons about them and a time to lie low, to say with the late, immortal
Stanley Baldwin, 'My lips are sealed'.

Mr Weinberger's appointments secretary might have had his memory jogged about
how Sir Lionel Sackville-West walked blithely into the elephants' den. He might
have noted down on Mr Weinberger's calendar, October 1, British Labour Party
Conference at Blackpool – suggest secretary avoid all interviews with BBC or
play golf. Or something.

Well, on Thursday, another foreigner, Mr Pik Botha, was accused of
interference, but this time in the domestic policies of the United States. A
few hours before the Senate was to vote to join the House in overriding the
president's veto of a bill imposing strong sanctions against South Africa, the
foreign secretary, Mr Botha, telephoned several senators with a quite
straightforward threat. If the Congress voted the sanctions, South Africa would
boycott the importation of American wheat. That would be a blow to Mr Reagan
likely to take his mind off the promise, or the results even of the Iceland
little, or pre-, or mini summit.

This country, with only a fifth of the farmers it had 50 years ago, is yet
going to produce the bumper wheat crop of all time. It desperately needs
foreign buyers if the farmers of the prairie, the great wheat bowl on the
Midwest and beyond, are not to plunge even deeper into debt and misery.

Mr Reagan, probably giving thanks that just now he has no cause to threaten the
Soviet Union with an embargo on American wheat – last time it happened there
was such a whirlwind of protests out of the Midwest that Mr Reagan quickly
dropped it – Mr Reagan recently offered (begged would be too cruel a word),
offered to sell to the Soviet Union 3.85 million metric tons of American wheat,
subsidised wheat, of course. Last Tuesday was the deadline for the offer. The
Soviets ignored it. No sale. They had, only three days before, bought one
million metric tons from the European Community for $11 a ton less than Mr
Reagan was offering.

Nobody in Washington seems able to explain why, in what is a critical time for
American grain farmers, the administration offering the wheat eight dollars or
so above the world price.

What most likely happens now is that the administration will have to help the
beleaguered farmers out by increasing their subsidy – a policy which has
outraged some of the president's closest advisers, including, interestingly
enough, Secretary of Defense Weinberger who, having his being outside the
Department of Agriculture, cannot interfere in his own president's domestic
policies.

Needless to say, the wheat farmers are livid. Four or five Midwestern
Republican senators who need to hold their seats in November if the Republicans
are to keep their control of the Senate are, at the moment, excessively
unpopular in their home states.

There! I've done a whole talk without saying a word about Daniloff and
Zakharov. It's really quite simple. The Russians proposed trading Daniloff for
Sakharov. Mr Reagan said, 'Never!' So, 24 hours after Daniloff went home, so
did Mr Zakharov. Mr Reagan says it was not a trade, not a deal. Mr Shultz says
it was not a deal.

The only question unanswered is, when is a deal not a deal?

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP