James Mason remembered

It is not with foolish boast that I recall, with almost frightening clarity,
how a young man, more than half a century ago, came walking across a common in
Cambridge, his neck swathed in a college scarf, his body leaning against one of
those perishing winter winds that sweep across the damp Fen country.

He was on his way to an appointment with the high muckamuck of an acting
society, not long established, called the Cambridge University Mummers and, as
the president of that society, it was one of my jobs to hold auditions for
aspiring members. And, since I lived in rooms on an upper floor of a house in
Chesterton Road, I looked out across the common that dank day and saw this neat
young man leaning into the wind.

He was coming for an audition and during that winter I used the script of one
play for the men's auditions. It was called 'Journey's End' – the first honest
play about the First World War. It was played entirely in a dugout. It was put
on originally for a private society in London but when the critic James Agate
wrote at glowing length about it and said it was a scandal that this noble play
could not get backing to be seen in the West End, a sponsor was found and
'Journey's End' became the theatrical sensation, first of London and then of
New York.

There were two parts in it that were so far apart in character and style that
anybody reading first one and then the other could not help revealing some
glimmer of talent. One part was that of Lieutenant Raleigh, a blue-eyed public
school infant. The other was a whisky-sodden cynic, Captain Stanhope. So, when
the intense young man swathed in the Peterhouse scarf knocked on my door and
came in, we exchanged howdedoos and I told him we would, together, read a
passage of dialogue, each of us taking one part and then the other.

He had a ruddy, a pink, face, a finely modelled head and, I remember, large
piercing brown eyes. He was painfully shy and his eyes had a wary look, as of a
fine fox expecting any minute to hear the huntsman's horn. I'm sorry to say
that he gave no sign of any acting talent whatsoever. We had some coffee and
though my normal cowardly practice with duds was to suggest that we'd call
them, I felt there was no point in delaying the agony. I asked him what he was
studying. 'Architecture,' he said. To my shame, which embarrassed me for years
to come, I said, 'Stick to it!' And he was on his way.

Twenty-two years later I met him again and we became firm friends through the
Fifties and the Sixties. His name was James Mason. The only other auditor I
turned down flat as a young man so devoid of talent that it would have been
cruel to encourage him, even at that early age, was a youngster from St John's
College who subsequently became Sir John Clements. It only goes to show what a
marvellous talent scout I would have made.

James Mason was a man who, as an actor and especially as an actor in Hollywood,
suffered from a lifelong allergy to social fuss and pretension, so he bridled
against the whole studio system of wild-eyed promotion, of recomposing a chosen
actor as some sort of demigod. He was a private man caught in the spinning
wheels of publicity and he hated it. Like Katharine Hepburn, he spurned all the
requirements of the tinsel factory – the glamour interviews, the endorsing of
cigarettes or automobiles – and, like Katharine Hepburn, he earned an early
reputation for being uppity, arrogant and, by the press agents' sleazy
definition, uncooperative. He often said acting was a ridiculous profession.

What he meant was that it was a profession he enjoyed practising but his
character was embarrassed by the publicity requirements and his temperament was
driven to despair by the occupational need to sit around for hours and hours
doing nothing between takes, when he might better have been reading or
painting, for which he had more than an average gift.

We once went down to stay with him at Harpers Ferry, West Virginia, where he
was on location – the actual location where John Brown, the one whose soul at
least goes marching on, set up a farmhouse garrison of whites and Negroes and
from there raided a federal arsenal with the intention of arming black slaves.
He was captured by a marine colonel, one Robert E. Lee, and subsequently hanged
for murder, insurrection and treason to the commonwealth of Virginia.

Mason played this crazed missionary and gave it the intensity of a demon, but
what I remember most of that little safari was a conversation we had about
General William Tecumseh Sherman. Sherman is known to American schoolboys, or
was, as the Union general who, during the Civil War, marched with 90,000 men
from inland Georgia, from Atlanta, 250 miles to the sea at Savannah,
plundering, burning and ravaging the towns and the landscape as he went. The
most ruthless, you might say, of the generals on either side.

Yet Sherman became a soldier who developed a loathing of war more profound than
that which eventually overtook General Douglas MacArthur. Sherman was haunted
for the rest of his life by the systematic atrocity of his march to the sea
and, 15 years after it was over, he addressed the graduating class of a Midwest
military academy and it was to these astonished students that he wound up his
speech: 'I am tired and sick of war. Its glory is all moonshine. It is only
those who have neither fired a shot nor heard the shrieks and groans of the
wounded who cry aloud for blood, more vengeance, more desolation. War is hell.'

I read that speech once to Mason and he didn't forget it. A year or so later
there arrived at my house a package containing a wooden statuette of General
Sherman which stands on the bookshelf behind me. I think Mason saw in him a
kindred spirit – a good man in, for him, a bad trade. Most successful actors,
sooner or later, get caught up in publicly expounding the subtleties and the
magic of their trade. James Mason had no truck with this moonshine. He looked
on acting as a first-rate carpenter looks on carpentry – it is a craft to
learn, to be scrupulous about the performance of it. Not, though, to pretend to
laymen that it's some sort of necromancy or holy witchcraft which God has
called on you to perform.

In other words, he was a pro – a man capable of doing his best work when he
didn't feel like it and, away from the set, the studio, the greasepaint, an
intelligent and sensitive and humorous man, willing to talk about anything but
the theatrical mumbo jumbo. He accepted with due grace the fact that he could
not forever go on getting the girl and remained to the end a fine character
actor. He lived a long life and, for the last 13 years of it, a very happy one
with his Australian wife.

The only consolation of his going is the certainty that we shall now be getting
a flock of reruns of his best pictures, of 'Odd Man Out' and 'Rommel' and 'Five
Fingers'.

W. H. Auden once instructed us, 'Honour the vertical man!' Very well. Let us
now praise another famous man who is vertical and full of sap at 84 on 10
August. Many of you must have glimpsed him – or the actor who played him – in
'Chariots of Fire'. He was, in life and in the movie, the sprinter who came in
third, next but one behind Harold Abrahams in the 100 metres in Paris in the
Olympics in 1924. A man of much fame in his native New Zealand but not much
known outside that country, except among surgeons the world over.

'My hobby,' he was saying the other day in Los Angeles, 'was athletics. My life
was surgery.' Arthur Porritt, now a pink, outsize Micawber in appearance, went
from the firefly fame of bronze medal in the Olympics to a career of great
distinction winding up in the 1950s and Sixties as Sergeant-Surgeon to the
Queen, a title which reminds us that in its original sense the role of sergeant
was a very grand one, being reserved for men of knightly rank who were in
immediate attendance on the king's person. So, of course, Arthur Porritt was
knighted. He was honoured by the surgical academies of France, the United
States, Scotland and, when his days with the knife were over, appointed
Governor-General of his native land, New Zealand.

Lord Porritt now, he was recalling the other day the long-lost days when the
Olympics brought together the best athletes in the world who were, in that
innocent time, also amateur athletes. He remembers with special poignancy an
episode that never came into 'Chariots of Fire'. When the race was over,
Abrahams' Cockney trainer cheerfully remarked that 'Porritt was the worst
runner I've ever seen in my life, but', he added, 'let me train you and I'll
make you the best!' Porritt took the ridiculous gamble and trained as he never
even thought of training. The first result – he took a tenth of a second off
his time. The end result – he beat Abrahams.

Looking now at the Los Angeles' Olympics, Lord Porritt watched the young and
the eager, their muscles trained to bursting point. For what? For the gold
medal, if possible, of course, but it now comes out, also planning long before
the Olympics for the fortunes that can come later from wearing this firm's
shoes, that firm's shirts and shorts. The great Moses made half a million last
year. Asked if he would compete in 1988, he said, 'Unfortunately, I might have
to' – meaning his contract with the sportswear manufacturer runs so long.

'They tell me', said one old star, 'that my gold will be close to a million
bucks in commercial endorsements.' And now, the new star, the adorable little
16-year-old gymnast, Mary Lou Retton, who trained eight hours a day for 12
years, is probably going to find it was worth it because the advertising
agencies are beating a hot path to her door. As one writer put it, 'The Gold
Rush begins after the Games are over'.

The last word on this Roman circus belongs, I think, to Lord Porritt. 'There
are', he said, 'no amateurs left'. There is no way to change the farce of the
Games. They suffer from giantism, commercialism, nationalism, racism and drugs.
It's sad. I still believe in the Games but I doubt they can be resuscitated.
They're trying to do an impossible thing. To keep an Olympic ideal in a modern
world.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP