The waiting game

There was a phrase familiar to everybody who ever went to an old music hall and
I hope it's not too archaic to have been buried in the dictionaries. The phrase
is 'vamping till ready'. It provided for a comedian, especially, a teasing
introduction to a song during which he could get off a series of well-rehearsed
ad libs. He'd come on and the band, or the piano, would play softly 'um tum,
tum tum, um tum, um tum,' till he was ready to launch into his song.

Well, the curtain has fallen on Jimmy Carter and his Georgia gang. The lights
have dimmed again and the orchestra is vamping till ready for the imminent
appearance of Ronald Reagan and his sunny Californians. It is pointless now to
criticise the last act and it ought to be pointless to guess and speculate
about the next act, but newspapers have to live and television has to offer
nightly surveys of the news and it's with a kind of uncomfortable eagerness
that they concentrate on the Italian earthquake, the damaging brush fires in
California, the Las Vegas hotel fire and other natural and accidental disasters
that are independent of governments and policy.

But, after such a jolting shake-up in the government of the United States,
people are naturally anxious to know what it is going to mean to them, to their
homes, their jobs, their wages, their schooling, taxes, every part of their
life in which the government has a hand. The fact is nobody knows and it would
be wonderful, though quite inhuman, if we could suspend all comment until 20
January.

But history marches, or lurches, on and not the least of the frustrations of
this long vamping till ready interval between the outgoing and the incoming
administrations is that President Carter has to go on conducting policies and
even announcing policies which will have no authority six weeks from now.

You might think that this would lead to a poverty of comment. On the contrary,
since we are not privy to the intense discussions and arguments that are going
on in the dozen or more transition teams that are advising Mr Reagan, we have
to fall back on what he said he would do in his campaign speeches, even though
we all know that campaign speeches are pure ideology. They paint a picture
after what the heart desires, not the much duller picture now being painted of
what the head discovers is possible.

So, what we have now are reams of articles and television commentaries, some of
them persuasive, some of them very intelligent, about what we can hope for and
what we have to fear. Conservative columnists are rollicking in the prospect of
a free market, of a tax cut, of a return to capital punishment, of abolishing
abortion on demand, of returning tax revenues to the states, of leaving
education to the states, of the triumph of Dr Milton Friedman and free
enterprise.

The liberal columnists fall back on fears that the United States will
soft-pedal Mr Carter's concern with human rights in relations with foreign
countries, that hospitals will go short-handed, that the military will run
amok, that the central cities will rot and the blacks will lapse back into
servitude. I must say that some of these fears are as unrealistic as some of
these hopes and that Mr Reagan, closeted with his teams in California or with
his congressional leaders in Washington, is learning fast about the unreality
of those splendid speeches he got off during the summer and fall.

It was an old, long-dead secretary of state to a Republican administration
which came in after just as drastic a repudiation of the Democrats who sighed
during the transition, 'The curse of the long presidential campaign is the
over-dramatising of our differences. When you get in power, you have to spend
the first six months liquidating your campaign rhetoric as you find that the
options open to you are really not very different from what they were a year
ago.'

This is a remark it's very necessary to recall now because the newspapers, the
columnists, the editorial writers, not knowing what Mr Reagan as President
Reagan intends to do prolong the evangelism of the campaign by pointing out the
glory of doing this or the horror of doing that which was promised during the
summer speeches. For instance, candidate Reagan said the federal government
should cut off all money aid to cities that maintain rent control. The mayor of
San Diego, California, who faces an almost total slump in investment for new
urban housing is now urging Mr Reagan to stay with this promise. On the other
hand, Mayor Koch of New York, who has to face about half a million New Yorkers
who'd be out of house and home if their rents were decontrolled, says that it's
a wild promise and one impossible to fulfil.

Another time, candidate Reagan said he'd urge Congress to lower the minimum
wage for teenagers and some conservative columnists said, 'And a good thing
too! Since it's fundamentally unfair for beginning workers to earn the same as
old, experienced workers'. Liberal columnists exploded in disgust saying Mr
Reagan would be visiting cruel and unusual punishment on teenagers eager to
work. Neither of these arguments touched Mr Reagan's point, which was to give
teenagers a better chance in the job market. He was acting on the perception of
labour economists who have calculated that every ten per cent increase in the
minimum wage cuts the jobs available to the unskilled, and hence to teenagers,
by seven per cent.

And now I'm looking at a headline in the New York Times which, at first glance,
fulfils the gloomiest fears of the liberals and it's the mischievous power of
headlines to implant an idea, a prejudice which the story underneath has a hard
time uprooting. It says, 'Reagan's State Department Latin Team Asks Curbs on
Social Reformers'. The lead sentence of the story reinforces the headline fear,
'A report prepared,' it says, 'by president-elect Ronald Reagan's State
Department transition team has proposed basic changes designed to reduce the
influence of human rights' advocates in the bureau which deals mainly with
Latin America and the Caribbean.'

Well, this sounds, if you read no further, as if the United States were going
to strengthen its support for cruel dictators who torture and imprison
leftists, but what the report goes on to condemn, and it names names, is any
ambassador who, for example, supports the redistribution of land and the
nationalising of banks by a junta (half-military, half-civilian) that is
fighting an extreme left-wing opposition. The report says that this conflict –
not to be mysterious about it, it's going on in El Salvador – this conflict is
something that an American ambassador should leave to the contending forces. He
should report and not meddle.

What, in detail, the report is advocating, is a return to the oldest American
diplomatic doctrine stated by George Washington in his farewell address in 1796
– it is our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances with any portion
of the foreign field.

Mention of the foreign field brings us to a couple of pounding headaches which
Mr Reagan may well be praying will go away before 20 January. One is the, I
suppose you can almost begin to say the perennial, problem of the American
hostages in Iran. When they were first seized, Mr Reagan said with becoming
dignity that this was nothing to criticise, what the president needed was our
support and our prayers. But in the fever of the campaign, Mr Reagan got used
to saying how ashamed, how humiliated he was to see that, after almost a year,
the Carter administration had not brought the hostages home.

He did respond to the Iranian conditions, finding almost all of them agreeable
except the automatic and unconditional unfreezing of Iranian assets in the
United States and the return of the Shah's wealth. These were matters, he said
correctly, over which the administration, any administration, had no overriding
authority. They would have to go through the courts. Well, the Carter
administration, in its dying days, is saying exactly the same thing and, so
far, neither side seems willing to yield. The nasty problem remains and it
looks as if it would land unsolved in President Reagan's lap.

The other, and graver, issue is the growing conflict between the Polish
Communist party and the new independent trade union Solidarity. I don't know
how it is elsewhere but I think it's true to say that nothing that has happened
in the Communist world since the Hungarian revolution, has stirred Americans so
much, as the emergence and the stamina of a workers' movement in a Communist
country demanding a say in its contract, wages, working conditions, demanding –
in a word – freedoms that are automatically snuffed out in totalitarian
countries.

For the first week or two of Solidarity's resistance, the tributes to its
leaders resounded around this country from the press, from politicians and from
legions of ordinary people who were interviewed and responded with admiration
verging on veneration for Mr Walesa. One famous commentator said that if Time,
the magazine, were still picking and choosing among the bravest and the best
for its annual nomination of Man of the Year, it need go no further. 'Walesa is
the man.'

The Reagan camp, from all reports, exalted in this first sign of a crumbling at
the base of a Communist regime. Then came the puzzling purge of conservatives
in the Polish politburo who had resisted all cooperation with Solidarity and on
Wednesday what was taken here to be the ominous summoning of the military
council. Taken with reports of what President Carter called 'an unprecedented
build-up' of Soviet forces along the Polish border, Mr Reagan gave his foreign
affairs advisers a warning not to announce any policy attitudes, but he did
convey to Moscow a message of concern identical with that of President Carter.

The brutal recognition shared by both the outgoing and the incoming
administrations is that, in the event of a Soviet invasion, the United States
could wring her hands, proclaim a trade embargo perhaps, lament the end of
détente and the SALT treaty, but apart from that could do little else but
deplore.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP