Tennessee jails crisis

In the long ago – so long ago, in fact, it was when I started to do these talks
– I had a producer, a talks producer, I can never forget.

People on the outside, that's to say people not in broadcasting, must wonder
what talks producers do. Well, some of us would be in trouble without them,
apart from timing a talk and seeing it gets on the air and seeing that you
don't run over into the religious half-hour or 'Melodies For You', they act as
watchdogs, as intelligence agents, so that when you've done, they can come into
the studio from the control room and say, 'By the way, you know Hitler was not
a German' and you say, 'That's right!' and amend your script to Austrian and
then do that bit over again.

In the days before recording, when everything went out, as we say, 'live' no
matter how dead the material, it was necessary, of course, for the producer to
read the script over ahead of time and spot mistakes like saying Hitler was a
German or Napoleon a Frenchman, but in the early days at Broadcasting House, in
my early days, anyway, a talks producer was a good deal more than a man –
always a man – with a stopwatch and a knowledge of the birthplaces of
dictators.

He was trained to be a sort of schoolmaster. Of course, there were good
schoolmasters but the one I have in mind was a lulu. I don't believe he,
himself, had ever broadcast. He was a perfect example of the old Shavian line,
'Those who can do, those who can't, teach'. When he was assigned to me, he used
to telephone me several days before the broadcast and say, 'I trust you've been
making notes. What topics do you intend to talk about this week?' I would
recite four or five items I had dutifully taken down. It was not my nature to
do this and it was years before I was allowed to let nature take its course and
go to the microphone and talk about something I very much felt urged or
attracted to talk about.

Anyway, before we adopted this weekly routine of going over proposed topics of
the week, this dedicated teacher had explained to me the two principles of a
successful radio talk. You must first, he'd say, go over in your mind the list
of topics you've put down, assess their relative importance and then strike a
balance. Secondly, he'd say, you must begin each talk by saying what you're
going to talk about, then talk about it and end by summarising what you've
talked about.

He came to regard me as a pupil with a barely passing mark because I was never
able to do this. I couldn't rid myself of the feeling that broadcasting,
whether you're talking about politics or sport or how to raise cucumbers, is an
exercise in suspense, in at least keeping people wondering what's coming next.
After obeying his prescription for several weeks, I had ample evidence from
protesting letters to prove it dead wrong. If you begin by saying, 'I am now
going to talk about the American trade deficit and its effect on the unpaid
interest on Third World loans', you will hear and will deserve to hear, several
million knobs being turned off.

However, the one instruction which made me bristle – and in those days, mere
broadcasters did not go beyond bristling with anyone as important as a talks
producer – was his constant parroting of his favourite line at the end of every
phone conversation, 'Don't forget now, strike a balance!'.

Well, the poor fellow has been gathered to his fathers, but I sometimes wonder
if he'd lived in the United States and looked over, week after week, the news
of a whole continent, how he would strike his balance. It all depends where you
live. For instance, even after watching and listening to such routine nightly
horrors as the general panic over AIDS, the 17 per cent of American high school
pupils who have tried cocaine, America's new status as a debtor nation, I was
brought up short by the sight and sound of a judge in Tennessee, leaning over
the bench and saying, 'Our judicial system is rooted in the notion of crime and
punishment, but we have no place to put them'. At which point, he banged his
gavel and set loose a whole bunch of criminals – well, minor criminals, but men
who, in any other state, would certainly have gone to jail for a month or two.

Now this judge is not, he's not a kook or an innovator or a man with his own
peculiar ideas of prison reform. He's at the end of his tether. He has issued
an order and, as the senior federal judge in the state – he's a federal
district judge – he will be a hard man to override. A few months ago, he
ordered the state of Tennessee to reduce its adult prison population to just
over 7,000 by the end of the year and, if that's not done, Judge Higgins has
the power to start releasing prisoners on New Year's Day.

At present he refuses to sentence anyone to jail until all the present inmates
have a bed. As it is, the cells are crowded, the prison gymnasiums are used as
makeshift dormitories, the homicide rate inside the prisons is the highest in
the nation.

Last summer there were violent riots at four of the state institutions. The
cost of the damage ran to several millions of dollars and Judge Higgins is
putting it up to the governor to use that money not in repairing damage, but in
building new prisons or else, returning, for instance, drug traffickers to the
streets.

Tennessee may have more murders committed behind the prison walls than anywhere
but its troubles can be approximated not only in practically every state of the
union, but also, I suspect, in most countries of the Western world. American
convicts expect more than most by way of comfort, reading matter, television,
recreation, sanitation. When they find themselves bundled together, two or
three to a cell, they grumble, they heckle and then they riot. So, scarcely a
month goes by without some state airing the grievances of its prison population
and, in the past few years, making an almost monotonous din about the actual
shortage of prisons. This is very tough on the governors who are automatically
accused by their political opponents of cruelty, indifference and
do-nothingism.

This week, the governor of Tennessee offered his second prison reform plan in
three years. He took the blame for the riots and other troubles, but said, 'I
tried to spend every available penny we had for classrooms, for healthcare and
jobs for the millions of Tennesseans who obey the law, instead of using it for
the handful who break them.'

Since the state has no funds left in its budget for the care and feeding of
that belligerent handful, the governor proposes calling on a private company to
finance, to build and to run two new maximum-security prisons. Twenty years
ago, this would have been a revolutionary move, but it's happening in many
states with the financing of other necessities that have always been thought of
as the duty and/or prerogative of government, either federal, state or local.

Transportation, for instance. The streets of New York are more choked than
usual by the buses of private companies that supplement the city-owned buses.
The main railroad system along the eastern seaboard is run by a corporation.
The post office was separated from the government some years ago to be run as a
private corporation, nothing like the free market. It is, by the way, losing
millions a year, so sooner or later, such brave enterprises come to the
government for a subsidy.

If I were taping this letter in, say, San Francisco where I expect to be next
week, I would not trust the mailing of it to the San Francisco post office. It
would be no sooner taped and packaged than a smart white van, run by a private
express mail company that exists in every state of the union, the van comes
hurtling up to the studio, takes the package, gives you a form on which you
sign your name and record the BBC's contract number and the package is whisked
off to the airport and put on a plane, picked up in New York by another white
van and delivered to the BBC office in New York before 10am the next morning.
If it gets there at 10:30, you can get your money back.

Well, all this arose from imagining that we live in Tennessee. Suppose,
however, you lived in Virginia or its neighbouring state of West Virginia. What
sort of balance would you strike in reporting the news of America? The idea of
balance would never cross your mind. You'd have been knocked off balance this
week and overwhelmed by devastating floods – a story that you have to search
for in the papers of the rest of the country.

Well, after all, the end of the fall and the approach of the first storm wave
from the west or south is normal, isn't it? It is. There are always floods at
this time of the year. However, on Monday and Tuesday and Wednesday, these two
states and the fringes of North Carolina to the south and Pennsylvania to the
north, a region larger than England, were subjected to seven, eight, ten,
twelve inches of continuous rain – a legacy from the expiring hurricane Juan in
the south.

Thirty people are dead. Another thirty or so missing and hundreds of thousands
of people have seen their homes go under and float down the boiling rivers.
America, as the French were the first to notice and exploit, is a continent of
rivers and in those three or four states the Ohio, the Monongahela, the James,
the Appomattox, the Roanoke poured over the nearby towns across 300 miles in
one direction and 400 from north to south. The governors were begging their
neighbours for millions of gallons of drinking water. The James River alone was
20 feet above flood stage.

So, we don't live in Virginia, West Virginia, Northern North Carolina or
Southern Pennsylvania. Lucky for us.

About the visit of the Prince and Princess of Wales this weekend, I will simply
express, or imply, one puzzled question. I've always assumed that Buckingham
Palace is thoroughly well informed about the life, the social conditions, the
climate of the nations the Royals choose to visit. In California, southern and
central, the only month you can be sure of rain is February. So, Queen
Elizabeth went there two years ago in February and had a week's drenching from
arrival to departure.

In the east here, the magical, warm, trumpeting season of brilliant light and
beautiful skies is October, the fall. It's now over, so the Prince and Princess
will be lucky if they don't find themselves in Washington during the only month
it is much like London, Paris or Moscow.

No sun, no warmth, no fun, November.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP