Labor Day parades end

I don't remember a time when, on the first Monday in September, you could look
down on Fifth Avenue from a high building and not see the sidewalks lined with
crowds from 96th Street down into the 40s and marchers and bands coming up the
avenue and the mayor, whoever he might be, leading the parade.

Last Monday, I thought they must have switched it to the West Side. Next
morning, however, the paper told me that for the first time since the Labor Day
parade was instituted in 1882, it had been abandoned. There was no parade. Many
other cities too skipped it and in one Midwestern town only 400 people showed
up to march and they marched home.

This is a remarkable sign of the times. It was in the spring of 1882 that a New
York carpenter, one Peter McGuire, proposed to his local union that the first
Monday in September should be designated as an annual Labor Day. The suggestion
was adopted and there was a parade joined by other craft unions. Within seven
years, 31 states followed New York's example and in June of 1894, President
Cleveland signed a national bill.

By that time, organised labour was being accepted as a fact of life but only by
employers of mechanics, carpenters, builders, who had begun to amalgamate their
locals in state craft unions. The national craft union, the American Federation
of Labor, was created just a hundred years ago, but not until the depths of the
Great Depression in the mid 1930s was there a national, industrial union,
eventually called the Congress of Industrial Organisations, the CIO.

In those dire days, with over a quarter of the work force unemployed, the
unions fought company unions, boycotted corporations that hired goon squads and
fought the Communists who tried to bore from within – that was the phrase – and
take them over. When the Second War came, it would not have been possible to
make the guns and planes and tanks and all the other weapons without the solid
cooperation of the AF of L-CIO.

The CIO, the industrial union, had become so powerful that in 1955 the craft
union, the AF of L, merged with the CIO but only in the sense that Jonah merged
with the whale.

When the war was over, just on 30 per cent of all American workers in every
sort of job were unionised. I find that most people are surprised that the
figure, even then, was so low – one American in three, but that was the peak.
Today, union labour accounts for only 19 per cent of the American workforce –
four working working Americans in five do not belong to a union. What happened?

Well we're so close to the time and the slow changes in the story of organised
labour that it's tempting to leave it to history, if so often history were not,
as a German cynic put it 'something that never happened, written by a man who
wasn't there'. I have tapped down the years many of the men who were there,
more recently, old labour men and young entrepreneurs. They tend to agree on
only one thing. The unpredicted prosperity of the post war years which had 70
million jobs to offer instead of the hunger and vast unemployment that liberals
and the new Progressive party had prophesied. And many states, recoiling from
the grip that organised labour had on industry during the war, started to pass
so-called 'right-to-work' laws, giving workers even in basic industries the
right not to join a union.

Now in the fighting days, industrial workers especially flocked to the CIO and
the Automobile Workers Union because their strength had helped the New Deal
administrations of Franklin Roosevelt to pass a national labour relations act
that guaranteed for the first time the right to organise, to bargain
collectively, that prohibited specified unfair practices, for bad company
unions and, eventually, set a minimum wage. This was a revolutionary change in
the 1930s.

When the war was over and America was enjoying what we didn't know at the time
was to be its glorious twilight as a creditor nation, when orders were pouring
in from abroad for everything, even for the staples of life whose production
had been devastated in the bombing of Europe, employers who had once fought
union labour at the factory gates now readily accepted the New Deal guarantees
to labour.

In the general euphoria, we didn't recognise then that labour would lose its
last big, crucial fight, its routine practice of demanding compulsory union
membership when many states passed those right-to-work laws which, as I said,
legalised the right not to join a union.

So, in a way, the very victories that union labour had won in the Thirties and
Forties led to its undoing, when even old company towns respected the new laws
and often, if their need was pressing, offered higher wages than the minimum.

Well, that's enough guessing over the long haul. The really conspicuous decline
in organised labour has come in the past six years, certainly since Ronald
Reagan went into the White House. He dared, in his campaigning throughout the
industrial Midwest in 1980, to promise workers all the rights they had secured
and more if they had the nerve to go Republican and desert their unions' old
and dependable alliance with the Democratic party. And they did.

For the first time, there was a disastrous split in the party loyalty of
automobile workers, steel workers, the men in the basic industries whose
fathers and grandfathers votes could be automatically delivered to the
Democratic party. And in 1984, Reagan was re-elected with the support of 49 per
cent of union members, an impossibility for a Republican 20, 10 years ago.

A reason that many people give for organised labour's decline is the success of
President Reagan's rather breathtaking act at the time, 1981, of setting a
deadline for the air traffic controllers to go back to work and telling them
that if they didn't, they would be fired. Everyone knew that the largest
civilian aviation system in the world, 6,000 daily flights, couldn't possibly
function without its traffic controllers. The controllers' union knew and
defied the president's threat.

When the deadline fell, the president announced that all the men not back at
work were sacked for good and all. They couldn't believe it. Two-thirds of the
entire air traffic controllers of the United States, over 11,300, lost their
jobs. New controllers were hired and trained in a hurry and five years later
the system still works with astonishing efficiency in spite of the efforts of
former controllers to attribute every other airplane accident to a controller's
error – a contention not proved.

Other industries, other employers, grew bold after that step. Recently a
national meat-packing company refused to meet the increased wage demands of its
many thousands of workers and the company held out throughout a year of the
strike, and the union lost. Not only lost what it wanted, but lost old gains.
The workers were back and new workers found they were to be paid less than old
workers in the same jobs.

Undoubtedly, one new element that has given the employer the stamina to resist
new contracts, new wage and pension demands, is the conglomerate. When a bus
company is a bus company and nothing else, it's likely very soon to be
concerned about the blow to its revenues when its workers are on strike. But,
several years ago, when the workers of a national bus company went on strike,
the workers' antagonist was not the bus company. It was a conglomerate that
owned the bus company but still counted its profits from its food and soap
companies. It held on and broke the strike.

United Airlines was another famous strike and the pilots might have got much of
what they wanted if United Airlines was an independent company running nothing
but an airline. However, United was part of a conglomerate with two national
chains of hotels which went on making profits while the pilots were out
picketing the airline.

I have a friend who spent over 30 years as a labour arbitrator and he says that
the president's firing of the air traffic controllers was not an historic turn
in the attitude to organised labour. It was, he said, just one incident, if
certainly the most dramatic, in a long train of ailments or surrenders on the
part of organised labour. He believes that the unions' decline is due, more
than anything, to the enormous increase in the numbers of people engaged in
service jobs – clerking, secretarial, state and city, federal government
bureaucracies, hotel help, telephone workers, so on. And where these people are
organised, he says, they are what he calls 'passive' union labour with few
collective resources, no strike funds and little inclination towards militant
action.

Well, maybe he's right but as for the air traffic controllers' strike, I have
to say I think it's an example of history's being not what happened but what
people are convinced happened. In other words, if enough American employers
were heartened by the president's action and enough employees were scared by
it, then there'll be a lot of employers, especially if they are big
conglomerates, who will think twice about giving in to a union's demands and a
lot of employees who will think twice about going on strike.

I find that wherever I talk to people who are not experts in labour relations,
whose job lies outside the basic industries – which is to say the vast majority
of us – they all bring up the air traffic controllers' strike as a brave or
frightening precedent. Brave or frightening according to party affiliation.

And when only one worker in five throughout the whole country belongs to a
union, there is a general indifference to the problems of union labour, a
glaring lack of that vocal public indignation which, in the Depression backed
the miners and the automobile workers and the A F of L and the, then separate,
CIO – the absence of a resounding public opinion that was mobilised by
President Roosevelt to defeat the sweatshops and the strike breakers and the
company unions and the arbitrary wages and the confident tycoons who now seem
to be reborn.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP