China denies move to capitalism

I should say – in fact I will say – that if there were two stories that hit
most Americans this week both in the newspapers and on the box, one had to do
with the political economic health of China and the other with the physical
health of you and me.

I'm thinking of stories that, as the old commentators used to say, give you to
think. Not the stories that are the bread and butter of the tabloids, the ones
that tickle or assault the emotions. Of course, like the rest of the world,
we've been thrown into despair by the famine in Ethiopia and other parts of
Central Africa and the hijacking in Tehran has once more stirred Mr George
Shultz, the secretary of state, to announce that terrorism must be fought with
force, without saying exactly how that's to be done, especially since the
essence of terrorism is that it's unannounced and you don't know who's doing
it.

How, then, are you to take up arms against an unknown enemy who acts without an
ultimatum? The best we've been able to do so far has been to put up concrete
fortifications around likely targets, like the barricades that now deface the
approaches to the lovely façade of the White House. We hear that the Pentagon
is next and, considering the enormous acreage of that five-sided Department of
Defense, the defence of it is going to be quite an undertaking. Chances are, I
should guess, that a thoroughly protected Pentagon would begin to look as
formidable as the famous Maginot Line, the proud bulwark of France's defence
which the Nazis never did try to attack, finding it simpler just to go round it
and put its builders in chains.

Well, as I say, the first big story which was hailed by the most thoughtful
commentators as a piece of unsullied good news was the extraordinary leader
editorial, printed last week in Peking's People's Daily, which is the official
voice of China's Communist party. Let's just look at the gist of it without
cutting it or otherwise taking tasty sentences out of context. We have to
remember that only eight years ago, the solid, down-the-line disciples of Mao
Tse-tung, the true Marxists, the gang of four, accused the leadership of China
of embracing the treacherous enemy, capitalism. These dreadful charges were met
with shocked denials. What was happening, the leaders said, were certain
necessary modifications of the true faith, but make no mistake, Lenin, Marx,
Mao Tse-tung were still the gods and Marxism the only true faith.

Well, last week's editorial in the People's Daily was such a shocker that our
raciest, certainly the intellectually liveliest of our newspaper pundits, Mr
William Safire of the New York Times, started his piece on it with this
remarkable sentence: 'Put yourself at the turn of the millennium and look back
15 years! What event in 1984 most affected the history of the world?' He listed
the usual guesses – Reagan's second landslide, the famine in Africa, the
unpredicted decline and the price of oil, the Russians bogged down in
Afghanistan.

'But when it comes to world history,' he wrote, 'the big event of 1984 was
surely the rejection of Marxism and the embrace of capitalism by the government
of one billion Chinese.' Now, the gist of that remarkable Chinese editorial was
this. Marx died one hundred years ago. There have been tremendous changes since
his ideas were formed, so we cannot use Marxist and Leninist works to solve our
present-day problems. Times are changing. To go on clinging to those original
principles would be naive and stupid and our historic development will surely
be hampered.

This certainly would be an alarming piece if it had appeared in Moscow. Mr
Safire points out that there's a nationwide campaign going on in China to track
down and punish smugglers, embezzlers and other sharp practices among a class
of people who are cheating the new capitalists in ways all too familiar to us.
Mr Safire wonders if this battle against corruption isn't just as much a purge
of the old gang, the loyal Marxists who resent or detest the new capitalism.
Could be. But that's a plunge into the deeps of Chinese internal politics that,
at present anyway, I suspect we are powerless to fathom.

Mr Safire's conclusion is more of a warning than a cheer. 'If', he suggests,
'China succeeds in just feeding itself with a market economy, the neighbouring
Soviet system will be shown to be a failure. The entire Russian leadership will
be threatened internally and if the Soviet Union cannot stop the Chinese
turnaround politically, the threatened men of the politburo may think they're
forced to do it militarily. That way lies World War Three. It may turn out that
our major peacemaking task in the next century will not be between us and them
but between them and them.'

Now, we go to West Berlin and a commentary from a lady who's been on the front
line of international reporting, at least for 40 years – 39 years if you want
to be exact, when I well recall the regular appearance of this beautiful girl
at the busy press conferences in San Francisco, during the founding conference
of the United Nations, was enough to upset the concentration of strong men and
diligent reporters.

Her name is Flora Lewis and she's been, for many years, the chief commentator
on international affairs of the New York Times, also flitting untiringly from
Paris to London, to Warsaw, to Brussels, to Washington, to ports of call in the
Middle East, in Africa, wherever. She is, I suppose, the best-informed roving
reporter in our language. She's never flip. She is often sombre.

Well, for once, she was if not ecstatic, at least exhilarated by that same news
out of Peking. She was not spinning shrewd thoughts in a vacuum, she was in
West Berlin and she talked to Communists from the eastern bloc who had been,
the week before, at the annual symposium of international deep thinkers in
Aspen, Colorado and she reported that several of them, reading the Peking
editorial, were left speechless.

A Polish official made it very plain that the editorial would not be reprinted
in Poland. Miss Lewis' familiarity with Communist officials of several stripes
or nations led her to remind us that while Communism varies in its practices,
not even the Yugoslavs have ever questioned the official dogma and that the
Russians dare not because they need it to justify their power. They're
frightened of losing control without the ideological security blanket that
covers their brute security forces.

She does believe that for Peking to say flatly that old shibboleths must be
brushed aside, in thought as well as in practice, creates a terrible problem
for Moscow. She notes that the Chinese leader, Mr Jiang, could make this daring
leap into avowed capitalism because he has already suffered physically, as well
as politically, for being a heretic. The Russians have no heretics among their
leaders and if any of them had come forward and said that Marx and Lenin were
old hat – these are my words – they would, in effect, admit that they'd done
wrong or behaved 'incorrectly', the chilling word for backsliders who are
promptly sent off into the wastes or the psychiatric hospital or Outer
Mongolia.

Miss Lewis concludes, 'If Peking's efforts succeed, the next Soviet leadership
will have to take note. It's much too early to throw away arms but, for once,
there is some really good news.'

I don't remember in, say, a quarter century of reading Miss Lewis that she's
ever come forward and announced anything so cheerful or blunt as 'really good
news'. But now, just while we were raising our glasses to the audacity of Mr
Jiang and no doubt the chairmen of international conglomerates were smacking
their lips over the prospect of welcoming Peking into the global fold, now
there appeared an inconspicuous dispatch from Peking, a dispatch from Reuters,
which was filed on 10 December, a couple of days after Mr Safire and Miss Lewis
had finished and dispatched their copy.

When I read it, I couldn't help wondering what changes, what amendments, to the
general joy they would both have considered if they'd written their pieces now
instead of then. What happened seems plain enough. The Chinese, having heard of
the happy outburst throughout the capitalist world, called in the foreign press
and announced that the People's Daily had gone too far.

The tone of this reproof is limp with typical Communist understatements like
'The editorial was flawed' and 'incorrectly reported a speech by the Communist
party's chief without checking the official text' – such language must be
producing shudders or what Americans used to call conniption fits among the
Chinese editors who did the reporting. What has happened or will happen to the
man who wrote the People's Daily editorial does not bear thinking about.

The Chinese officials maintained that what the party chief had said in
addressing a gathering of provincial propaganda officers was, 'One cannot
expect the works of Marx and Lenin to solve all of today's problems'.The Peking
editorial had said, 'to solve today's problems'. It reminds me of the fatal
omission of the definite article in that United Nations' resolution calling on
Israel to withdraw from occupied territories, instead of 'the' occupied
territories.

Well, if these officials would take the trouble to rebuke their own editorial
writer, it's pretty clear that they never meant us to put on his piece the
jubilant interpretation we've given it. The correction was followed in the
Reuters piece by a comment from several Western diplomats in Peking which, at
the moment anyway, appears to have put the snuffer on the two little candles of
comfort and joy lit by Mr Safire and Miss Lewis.

They – our men in China – said that even in its original, uncorrected form, the
Peking editorial was not breaking new ground, but only expressing more firmly
ideas that Chinese leadership has been voicing since 1978. So there! We're left
to wonder whether the Chinese weren't nudged into the correction by the Russian
ideologists on their borders.

Well, it was nice while it lasted. I see I never did get round to the big story
about your health and mine. It belongs, anyway, much more fittingly to
Christmas and, for once, I know what I'll be talking about next week before I
sit down to ponder.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP