Charles Wick's secret tapes

Before the war – I suppose I'd better identify the war as the Second World War
– among the most popular American radio commentators (this was before
television) who gave us the news on a national network every night was an
Englishman, very little known I think in England, but here he was both a
household name and very much a household voice – rapid, clipped, invincibly
British, indestructibly cheerful, though most of the time the news was then, as
now, horrendous.

His name was Boake Carter and his extraordinary aplomb, while acquainting us
with grief in a dozen countries, moved one of the great journalists of our
time, the inimitable E. B. White of the New Yorker, to write a little poem
about him. I can give you the gist of it in the first 15 lines:

'It pleasures me, At end of day, To hear Boake Carter's baleful lay, The
lullaby of world decay, When Boake has spoke. I like to hear him summon us,
With all things ominous, Munition makers plotting gain, Asylums bulging with
insane, Cancers that give no hint of pain, Insurgency in northern Spain, And
rivers swollen with the rain. For Boake, Has spoke, And it's no joke.'

This hits off a curious, if not a reassuring truth which is that normally
healthy people, though they don't care to admit it, get a small, guilty glow
from disasters. Many a newspaper tycoon, what they used to call a press baron,
not only knows this but shamelessly exploits it by printing little else but
violence, scandal, sex and disaster and thereby making a pretty packet in many
cities of the globe.

We who listened to Boake Carter saw nothing bizarre or offensive in the fact
that, every evening, however appalling the news, he always wound up the same
way. He would make a studied pause and say, 'But I see my time is up and so I
say to you, cheerio!' Those were the days when 'cheerio' was an exclusively
English greeting or farewell. Come to think of it, it still is and it restored
the listeners to the hearth and home and the feeling that however much the
world seemed to be falling apart, old Boake had it under control.

I was reminded of E. B. White and Boake Carter when I came to look over the
week's news and saw that, with or without a gift for rhyming, you could make a
similarly depressing list. The Kissinger commission on Central America has
finished its work, found a Soviet-Cuban challenge there and suggested more
military aid than the Congress is ever going to grant. The first American
casualty, a helicopter pilot, is reported in Honduras. The American marines are
stuck in Lebanon unable to be a peacekeeping force without also becoming a
combatant. The Chinese prime minister has come and gone and while he was
cheerful about a new trade deal, he made it plain that China will never be a
true friend until the United States does something which no president dares to
do, namely, to abandon the old ally, Taiwan, to mainland China.

It now come out that it's possible for innocent people to get the dread disease
AIDS from a blood transfusion and New York's majestic Metropolitan Museum of
Art has admitted that 45 of its priceless items of Renaissance jewellery,
including Benvenuto Cellini's famous Rospiglioso Cup, are fakes done in the
late nineteenth century by a German goldsmith.

Well, there's really not much point in talking now about the very serious
questions of whether the American military should get out of Lebanon and
whether it should get deeper into Central America until the Congress starts its
new term, which it will do in another two weeks, because it's so easy to forget
– headline writers on both sides of the Atlantic forget all the time – that
these matters are not at the president's disposal. He's not a prime minister
announcing a policy which his party is bound to carry into legislation and
which the opposition will have to wait till they're in power to cancel. He's
more like the treasurer of a big corporation who puts up to the board a
suggested budget which the board will then reduce or expand or ignore.

This is particularly true of the government budget for the next fiscal year. Mr
Reagan, we are told, polished it up or polished it off during his holiday in
California and will be ready to present it to Congress at the end of the first
week of the new session and you may be sure the headlines will say, 'Reagan to
Spend 200 More Million on Defense' or 'Reagan Cuts School Lunches Further'. If
that's what he wants to do, it's no more than a wish. Congress is responsible –
the House of Representatives, ultimately – for saying who gets how much to
spend on what.

Same with the depressing load of the federal deficit which now approaches 200
billions. This is constantly referred to as Reagan's huge deficit. Well, even
if the federal deficit were accountable to the president, most of this mounting
pile was created by the last three presidencies. In fact, it was created during
the last three presidencies by succeeding Congresses. It's gone higher because
costs have doubled and tripled, so that even if, as the Democrats correctly
bemoan, the president goes on proposing further cuts in welfare and social
programmes, it is still a fact that, under him, the government is today
spending more on welfare and social programmes than it has ever done.

So, for the moment, I'm just warning you against the drift of the big headlines
coming up in a week or two when the president presents his budget to Congress.
He will not be announcing American policy. He will be making a plea. He won't
be Mrs Thatcher's Chancellor of the Exchequer saying in the next year we're
going to do this and that, he will be Oliver Twist going to Congress with his
cup in hand.

But there are some things we can talk about and one is a topic I've been
ducking in the hope that with the departure from high office of the party of
the first part, I could say, like the football commentators after a fumbled
pass, 'Well, that's history!'. It concerns the man who, in any administration,
represents the voice and the image, the reputation, if you like, of America
abroad, the director of the United States Information Agency. Some
distinguished men have been in the job – the late Ed Morrow, the living John
Chancellor who, after his stint under President Johnson with the agency,
returned to his job as a highly alert and respected television reporter and
commentator.

The present incumbent is one Charles Wick. I need say no more about the
function he's meant to discharge than to describe his job as presiding over the
fount of information the government of the United States puts out for foreign
consumption about the government of the United States, about its policies in
all domestic and foreign and cultural matters. At its best, the agency is not a
propagandist. It's a disinterested reporter about America.

A few weeks ago, it came to the notice of two reporters on the New York Times
that Mr Wick had been secretly taping conversations with people, both obscure
and famous, without their knowledge. The two reporters called on Mr Wick and
asked him if he'd ever done such a thing. 'Good gracious, no!' They spent a
couple of hours with him and he assured them, time and again, that whatever
else he was guilty of, secret taping was not it.

A day or two later, the reporters confronted him with actual transcripts of his
taped conversations. He spluttered a little and he broke down and said,
contradicting the session of prolonged lying, that, well, yes he had recorded
some calls since 1 January 1983. One of the reporters, the ever-watchful
William Safire then produced records of tapings done in 1982 whereupon Mr Wick
changed his admission again. He had, he recalled, done some previous taping, 'a
few tapes' as he put it, for a limited time. So, Mr Safire goes back to the
machine or the transcripts and finds conversations taped without the other
party's knowledge as early as July 1981.

Now you'd think if you were anybody who'd been alive and sentient ten years ago
and had heard of Watergate that Mr Wick, who oversees 'mould and glass of form'
of the United States of America would have thrown in the sponge, especially
when his agency, the USIA was compelled to deliver to congressional committees
– one in the Senate, another in the House – 81 transcripts and four audio
cassettes, along with a note saying that the records of other conversations had
been 'discarded', was the official word.

The congressional committees are now looking into this fat file. Meanwhile,
another embarrassing paper raises its ugly head. A memorandum from four top
officials of the USIA dated December 17,1981 laying down the rule that all
people telephoning the agency whose conversations might be taped should be so
informed and their consents be recorded and transcribed. There is no evidence
so far that, in spite of this proper warning, the head of the agency ever
respected it. Mr Wick went on taping away for two years.

Well, did Mr Wick resign at once? No. Mr Wick says there was early confusion
and faulty recollection. So did the president fire him? Mr Wick is a close
friend of the president. They saw the New Year in together. The president says
Charles Wick is not a dishonourable man in any way. The president says he has
done a splendid job. It's an eerie statement, suggesting to some people that we
are, indeed, in George Orwell's '1984'.

Mr Wick's ultimate or interim confession was, 'I did a dumb thing. What else am
I to say?' Well, of course, he didn't do a dumb thing. A dumb thing is a single
act done in a moment of stupidity or amnesia. He, for nearly two years,
performed a tricky and deceitful course of action and when confronted with the
evidence, he lied in his teeth.

But, once again, the administration protects its own. The president says he has
complete confidence in Mr Wick. Perhaps Mr Reagan is privy to some secret,
forgiving, knowledge that we don't have. Otherwise you might say that Mr Wick's
retention of his job was a sign of the moral numbness that has been
distressingly evident before in this administration.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP