Andrei Berezhkov's non-defection

I've just finished riffling through, or scrutinising, a whole flock of papers
and magazines, domestic and foreign, and I gather that the second great
question now plaguing the Western world – the first being when and how the
Americans and the Russians can really begin to dismantle their nuclear weapons
– the next great question is, can yoghurt and honey help you live to be 159?

Well, before we get down to the main business of our correspondence, I'd like
to notice a fascinating couple of items, a hand-written letter out of
Washington and a mouth-spoken announcement out of Switzerland which bring into
focus a political game that surfaces about once a year, though it must be being
played underground like a floating crap game all the time.

The Washington letter was written or – as we cagey reporters like to say
(dreaming of a lawyer with a light-brown attaché case) – the letter was
'allegedly' written by a 16-year-old Russian boy, the son of a Soviet diplomat
assigned to Washington. It said with refreshing directness, 'I hate my country
and its rules and I love your country. I want to stay here.' The boy, one
Andrei Berezhkov, also reportedly wrote – 'reportedly' is another good word –
'I know you are a free press not like ours and I hope you'll help me.' He
addressed it to, 'Dear News,' though it was sent to the Washington bureau of
the New York Times and he signed it, 'Andy'.

The second item was a statement from a Czech exile, a dissident writer living
in Switzerland announcing that Ivan Lendl who, until he regularly massacres
John McEnroe, the dissident American, will have to be known as the Communist
world's leading tennis player, well, the man says that Lendl has been given
permission by the Czech government to live in America but he is not defecting.
This report, in its quieter way, is just as intriguing as the one about the
rebellious – allegedly rebellious – Russian boy.

First for Andy's heart-rending letter. The Washington Post which did, after
all, force Richard Nixon to lift the covers from the Watergate tapes is
America's number one newspaper sleuth and it doesn't appear to have done much
preliminary digging before it released the letter in photostat. Young Berezhkov
was not quite on the verge of becoming a national, an American national, hero
when three American reporters, one from the New York Times, one from the Hearst
newspaper chain and one television anchorman, were invited to the Soviet
embassy to talk with the boy and his father.

In his letter, the boy had said he proposed, without his parents' knowledge, to
drive up to New York and present himself to what he called 'the US mission' –
this has to mean the United States mission to the United Nations. Well, at his
troika press conference, it came out from him and his father that he had,
indeed, gone off with the family car, without telling his parents and had been
missing for about ten hours. Then he came home again. All he wanted to do, he
said, was to drive around the city. Not a weird ambition for an inquisitive
boy, though ten hours seems a little over thorough.

Anyway, he dismissed the three American reporters by saying he never thought
this little trip would be interpreted as a way of showing he wanted to stay in
America. He hadn't written any letter. Both he and his father said it never
would have been signed 'Andy', his name was Andrei. In simple words, the father
and son said what the Soviet embassy had said from the beginning – that the
letter was a forgery.

Now, if the letter had not yet appeared in the Washington Post, why did the
State Department and the FBI and the Washington police all get busy looking for
Andrei? Why did they assume they had a case of a willing defector? Because the
writer of the note mentioned in it that he'd also written for help to the
President and the State Department announced, on the evening of the letter's
publication, that that was so. Mr Reagan had had it.

The following day, the State Department went way out on a slender limb by
saying they would insist on interviewing the boy before he could be taken back
to the Soviet Union. The Russians said, 'Nonsense', or 'No dice', or whatever
is the brisk Russian equivalent. A few days later came the invitation to the
three reporters.

Lovers of John Le Carré will be eager to know about the demeanour of the boy at
the press conference. Well, one reporter – the only one we heard from – said
that while the boy's mother sat weeping in the background, the boy looked
totally exhausted and had red eyes. Whatever the truth, certainly the presence
in the room of 18 Soviet officials would not have contributed to making him
look chirpy. At any rate, from the latest reports, it would seem that the
letter was a pretty crude forgery, something that anyone with an itch for
mischief could do to embarrass either the State Department or the Soviet
embassy or both of them.

By the way, I can't find that the boy or anyone else has denied that it was his
handwriting. We just have to assume it couldn't have been.

This incident led a couple of reporters to tap some other parents of the
diplomatic establishment in Washington and elaborate on the life, the American
life, of children of diplomats and the temptations, if any, that they're
exposed to. There are 2,000 foreign diplomatic families in Washington and it
comes out that many of them have a steadily anxious time watching their
children being, or keeping them from becoming, Americanised in ways that are
horrendous to their patriotic parents.

In a nutshell, it appears that what the parents have to put up with or contend
with is not so much the risk of their offspring's being converted to such
exotic things as a free press or a passion for the Supreme Court, as the danger
of succumbing to five specific American lures – fat hamburgers, American beer
bashes, the availability of dad's car, punk rock and designer jeans. These,
according to one harassed diplomat, are 'the apples of Eden dangling before the
children'.

The reporters interviewed Latin American diplomats, a Kenyan, an Algerian and a
Frenchman. They all agreed that the initial temptation which could lead to the
children's emotional defection was the fact that Americans are very warm and
friendly at first, no matter where you come from, but that after a while they
cool off.

Incidentally, there is one authenticated case of a teenager's defection three
years ago – a Russian boy aged 12. Asked for asylum in the United States, he
jumped ship, so to speak, by leaving his parents' home and moved in with an
immigrant relative in Chicago. This case is still before the courts.

The only diplomat who seemed undisturbed by the brouhaha that has surrounded
the case of Andrei, or Andy, was the Frenchman. 'They live', he said, talking
of his own children, 'they live in this milieu. I neither approve nor
disapprove. My children watch television, they approve of some shows, they
disapprove of others. They are discriminating.' So... not to worry!

The Russians, I guess, could wish that their children, too, need no protection
from the ever-present capitalist seductions of hamburgers, beer bashes, dad's
car, punk rock and designer jeans. Young Andrei got as far as swiping dad's
car. Could be the thin end of the wedge.

The case of Ivan Lendl is not so much shrouded in mystery as in, so far, a very
wispy veil. Who is a dissident writer living in exile to say what the Prague
government has done? Why should Lendl be permitted to live from now on in
America, but not be considered a defector? Maybe by the time you hear this,
three other reporters will have been called in to the Czech embassy to assure
us that the great tennis player is immune to hamburgers and punk rock and has a
car all his own.

If it's true, I suppose the point is that Lendl, or somebody on his behalf, has
made a deal with Prague whereby in exchange for being allowed to live in
America and positively assert, some time or other, that he has no intention of
defecting, his parents and other relatives will not be harshly dealt with.

We didn't seem to get around, did we, to the great topic A? How to live to be
159! Like the holy man from Pakistan, Sayed Abdul Mabood, who came through or
into London airport last week, showed a valid passport carrying his birth date
as December 13, 1823. He swears it's so. His travelling companion swears it's
so and that, furthermore, unlike the very aged people we know, the holy man has
grown in wisdom through the years.

Well, there's been a lot of to-ing and fro-ing between immigration and medical
experts since and they have issued or agreed on a crisp report – rubbish. Only
the Russians seem unamazed by old Mabood. They say they have just under 600
mountain men over 120 years old who live on yoghurt and honey.

There's always a magic diet involved in these preposterous claims. They're
preposterous because even 80 years ago and not only in the mountains of Eastern
Europe, there was no official registration of births. Village people,
especially, behaved with old codgers the way we behave with the movie stars of
our youth. When 20 years go by and we've forgotten them, we hear they're alive
and only 20 years older and we say, 'Ridiculous! Irene Dunne and Fred MacMurray
must be 102 by now!'

I, myself, was a close friend of an old Russian immigrant into the United
States who not only had to guess at his own age – he died at 76 or 7 or 8 – but
said he hadn't the faintest idea of the age of his parents. His father, he
said, in their village, was greatly respected as a kind and, as he got older,
an increasingly wise man. By the time the boy left for the United States the
father, who stayed on to earn enough money to join his wife and children, a
common routine, the father was taken to be 60. If he'd stayed in Russia, my
friend said, there's no doubt in my mind but that by the time he died, at about
70, he would have been practically revered for his 100 years.

As for the diet, all very old men, I mean, gaffers around 85, 90, get baited
into attributing their longevity to diet. Ten, fifteen years ago, I forget, a
former vice president of the United States, John Nance Garner, died in Texas. A
wily, deadpan cove, when he was asked, he put it all down to 'ten snorts of
Bourbon a day'.

And when the famous black baseball pitcher, Satchel Paige, pitched his last
game at the incredible age of 59, he was asked the same question. Without a
hint of a smile, he said, 'I puts it all down to my diet. I eat nothing but
strictly fried foods.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP