Isao Aoki, golfing hero

Bumper stickers on motorcars are an old American tradition. When they don't
simply announce a citizen's political preference like 'Reagan for President'
they offer a safety valve of facetiousness and ribald humour to the ordinary
citizen who has no other public platform. Last time I was in California, I
remember one addressed, in a general way, to tourists, 'Keep California Green.
Bring your own dollars'.

Lately, the very general frustration with the apparent choice of presidential
candidates has led to a rash of stickers suggesting such bizarre alternatives
as 'Miss Piggy for President', 'Vote for Dracula, a red-blooded President' and
'Muhammad Ali for President of the World'.

In the past year or so, protest groups have taken to painting an extra word or
so on public signs. Now, as you no doubt know, at any intersection of two
American roads, there's always a big sign saying, simply, 'Stop' and even if
there's no other vehicle anywhere on the landscape and you drive round a corner
without stopping, some police car hidden in the foliage will come siren-ing out
and pursue you and give you a ticket. By now, the 'Stop' signs carry underneath
such simple, stark graffiti as, 'War' and, more commonly, 'Nukes'. 'Stop Nukes'
means 'ban nuclear power plants', something that neither the Carter
administration nor Governor Reagan nor Mr John Anderson has any intention of
doing.

Pretty soon, I imagine, there'll be an epidemic of words under stop signs
reading 'Stop Test Tube Babies', for this past week the United States Supreme
Court handed down a ruling which was, when you looked at the fine print, a
rather pedestrian technical ruling but on the face of it was a godsend to
afternoon papers thirsty for a juicy headline and a boon to protest groups that
have run out of causes. An educational foundation which had resisted the ruling
greeted it with an ominous press release headlined, 'The Brave New World that
Aldous Huxley Warned of is Now Here'. On the contrary, a genetic engineering
firm in San Francisco triumphantly announced, 'The court has assured this
country's technological future'.

Now what's this all about? Well, the nine judges of the court ruled, by the
narrowest possible margin of five to four, that the present patent, or
'patent', law of the United States can apply to new forms of life created in
the laboratory. Alarmists and doomsayers jumped at once to the inference that
the court was approving any human egg fertilised outside the womb. One paper
printed the wild headline, 'Court Okays Test Tube Baby'. Well, before that
could happen, Congress would have to pass an approving law and then the court
would be required by some third party to judge whether that law was
constitutional.

No doubt, the day will come but for the present the court was considering
whether to award or not to award a patent to a new bacterium that digests oil
spills. Not to put too fine a point on it, this invention could help us all to
get more mileage out of our petrol. The ruling, which is being called a
landmark decision, is simply a legal first step in recognising the revolution
in biological research that is known as bio-engineering, which is mainly the
business of creating new strains of bacteria for use – and their use is already
widespread – in farming, food processing, as well as the oil, chemical and
pharmaceutical industries.

The issue before this court was whether you can patent a live agent, a new
bacterium, and what the court had in mind as forms of life created
synthetically, was such things as hormones, insulin, virus-fighting drugs, even
protein and certain forms of sugar. The chief justice, in the majority
decision, pointed out that the court was not being asked to approve a patent
for the discovery of a natural law, like gravity or Einstein's theory of
relativity, but for the result of human ingenuity and research and, in going
with the majority, Justice Burger wrote, 'This bacterium is not nature's handy
work but the inventor's own. Accordingly, it is patent-able subject matter.'

By which he meant patent-able under the present laws which did not foresee the
engineering, so to speak, of human beings. The court, in fact, made it pretty
clear that its ruling did not extend the patent laws. If that's to be done, to
sanction the patenting of such advances as manipulating the genes of human
beings, it would not be the business of the Supreme Court in the first place.
As Justice Brennan wrote, 'It is the role of Congress, not this court, to
broaden or narrow the reach of the patent laws.'

So, for now anyway, we can relax any fear that the court is whooping it up for
Aldous Huxley's, or anybody else's, brave new world.

Last Sunday evening, the responsible television network that had carried the
final day of the United States golf tournament, the Open Championship, put out
the astounding news that 40 million people had watched the battle royal, not to
say the battle interminable, between Jack Nicklaus, the modern master who is
generally thought to have gone over the hill at the venerable age of 40 and
Isao Aoki, the Japanese player who is almost unknown in this country but who,
in his native land, is practically a candidate for emperor worship. He,
incidentally, last year, earned more money playing golf than even little Tom
Watson, the American successor, indeed, the world successor to Nicklaus as the
best player alive.

Forty million viewers for a golf tournament is almost incredible. Last year,
the American audience for golf on television declined by about 30 per cent and
that was 30 per cent down from an already modest figure. Golf is not, by a long
shot, the favourite sport of television watchers. It comes in audience rating
well behind football – American football, that is – basketball, racing,
baseball and even tennis and, even if it were way up there with football and
basketball, intending sponsors would think twice about putting their money into
televising golf because the costs of the mechanical operation itself are
appalling.

Several sponsors who were once devoted to golf decided in a hurry, a few years
ago, to become devoted to tennis simply because it requires two fixed cameras
and a couple of commentators and the same, maybe three cameras for football.
Their capacity to dart all over the field and see the players sweating or
exulting in close-up is due entirely to the invention of the Zoomar lens but
golf, being played on 140 acres or so, requires the erection of television
towers above most greens, mobile cameras out on the course, miles, literally,
and miles of cables linking everything up.

For many years, the networks stopped short of covering the whole course. They'd
start their televising at, say, the 14th tee and show you, therefore, the play
on the last five holes. You simply took the commentators word that some
challenger or other had just birdied or bogeyed the tenth or the eighth. This
year ABC went whole hog. In the footsteps of the BBC, they started at the first
hole so that, at 2.35 on the last day, the two leaders and therefore the last
pair in the field, were seen swinging and breathing and stretching on the first
tee. They were announced like boxers: Jack Nicklaus of Dublin, Ohio! And, Isao
Aoki of Tokyo!

For three rounds, they had rarely been more than two strokes apart and towards
the end of Saturday afternoon Nicklaus took three putts on two greens while
Aoki was knocking them in from every angle and all distances and they wound up
on Saturday night all tied at six under par. I saw Jack Nicklaus shuffle into
the press tent, a very melancholy and bitter man. With two or three decent
putts on the last five holes, he could have been well ahead of Aoki and he
knows better than anybody that if you lead a tournament for three days in a
row, the pressure of anxiety, the presence of the crowd, the haunting spectacle
of Aoki's automatic putts, would be certain to crush him on the last day.

However, as all the world now knows, it didn't. He played as majestic a round
as we've ever seen in absolute control of his nerves and his great skill and,
when he walked up the 18th fairway, the huge crowd bayed and shouted like a Cup
Final crowd, like no golf crowd I've ever seen. And as he rammed in the final
putt and broke the long tension, in an eruption of grins and outstretched arms,
half a dozen golf records tumbled out of the books.

Next morning, a lawyer friend of mine who's been much troubled by our
presidential choices, called me up and said, 'I've made my mind up. I'm voting
for Nicklaus for President'. And so said several impromptu placards that
exulting fans carried around the fringes of the famous course in New Jersey.
One of them fell by the wayside but the name 'Nicklaus' had been crossed out
and above it had been written, 'Aoki for President' and the man may be right.

Like no golfer I can remember, Aoki has given aid and comfort to the millions
of golfing duffers around the world. He has a swing that would be radically
corrected in the first lesson and, in the first putting lesson, the tyro is
firmly instructed to place the putter along the ground, the entire base, and
then take it back very low to the ground and very short and then stroke it
through the ball along the line of the putt.

Aoki has evidently never had this first lesson. He grounds the putter on its
heel. Most of it's in the air. He then swings the putter up with his wrists,
another elementary crime, and gives it a fast zap or zong with that dreadful
heel. You see this done by a hundred duffers on a hundred courses every Sunday
afternoon but, unlike the duffers, Aoki zongs it into the hole. He also, with
his wristy swing, loops and floats and curves the ball from impossible
positions just where he wants it. My lawyer is right. If we can't have a pro
for president, let's have an eccentric and highly successful duffer, like you
and me.

By the way, you'll all be relieved to hear that Ronald Reagan has put out a
promise that when he's in the White House, he will have the doctors give him
regular examinations and then report not only about his physical condition, but
his mental state.

A friend of mine says the mental report is redundant. As my friend says,
'You've got to be crazy to run for president and so, on principle,' he says, 'I
shall refuse to vote for anyone running for president.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP