Some stories don't date

Flying down to Florida this week – huh! I realise that nobody will listen to
the rest of the sentence or even the talk unless I disabuse you of the picture
that will have come instantly to mind in, I should guess, 90 listeners in a
hundred.

Ahhh, Florida! The very name. Land of flowers. Calls up blazing memories of
sun-drenched beaches, streaming beside an ocean that is sometimes green and
sometimes blue and is, at all time, bright and sparkling. Florida, land of
carefree tourists and miles of white sand littered with sleek, tanned bodies
and, also, with fat or shrinking older bodies, all lying limp, sprawling,
immobile – all determined to pick up a dose of skin cancer before senility
overtakes them.

Land of James Bond outfoxing crooked millionaires with a handmade German car
that ejects missiles or poison gas and still leaving Bond time to order the
very driest Martini in the most glittering bar, alongside some nubile, gorgeous
item who might be, or might not be – you'll never know which till the final
fade-out –on his side.

Well, before I go on to say what I want to say, I'd better make clear the
Florida I saw and what I was doing there. I was going for an overnight trip to
talk to the trustees of a young and exciting university with the appropriate
name of Nova University. It's in a town about equidistant from Palm Beach to
the north and Miami to the south. When I first knew it, was in 1942 – well,
let's look it up in the federal guide to Florida and see what it says. The
guide was published, after all, quite recently in 1939.

Here it is: 'Fort Lauderdale, population 8,666, seat of Broward county, popular
winter headquarters of yachtsmen and anglers. Built on the site, hence the
name, of a fort constructed to fight the Seminole Indians in the war of 1838.
It was named after its commander, Major William Lauderdale. More than a hundred
miles of natural and artificial waterways wind through Fort Lauderdale and when
the roads are dry in winter, Seminole Indians come into the town to sell hides
and game and shop for food and bright clothes. Along the street, the men, aloof
and stolid, stride ahead of the women. Every woman coils her shining black hair
and wears strands of red, yellow and blue beads around her neck. Jingling
silver coins decorate her blouse.'

This sounds very stimulating, just the sort of small settlement that, before
you go racing on to the pleasure domes of Miami, would give you a sharp taste
of the true Florida flavour, its history, what makes Florida so different from
other places, other states. Well, to be truthful, when I first went through
there in 1942, I should have guessed that 8, 9,000 was about right for the
population count. I remember boats, quite small yachts bobbing about on this
heaving, twinkling sea. The town itself, a row of bungalows here, then a
bridge, a canal, another row, straggling, interlaced, quiet and attractive,
with men and boys leaning over bridges with poles. Lots of simple fishermen.
Very different indeed from the great, expensive, cleaving fishing yachts off
Palm Beach to the north where, as one cynical, old American newspaperman wrote,
'Fishermen use little fish the size of billy goats as bait for fish the size of
cows'.

No, Fort Lauderdale was attractive in a bright, clean, tropical seaside sort of
way, rows of little vegetable palms running by the seashore and waving over the
canals, the feathery, nodding Australian pines, what they call in the Far East
the casuarina tree. So I stopped and had lunch at a little restaurant on a pier
overlooking the ocean and lapped up the local specialty, the butter fish or, as
they call it down there, as the Spanish called it, the pompano. A very pleasant
interlude.

So this week I found myself landing at the Fort Lauderdale airport. Needless to
say, there was no such convenience there in 1942. Even 10, 12 years ago, it was
a low-slung, rambling airport, your luggage dumped under a long shed outside,
you came out and the soft blanket of the hot air slapped gently at you. You
were, no doubt about it, in Florida.

Today, the airport is a vast, cement gymnasium of several levels, highways and
bypasses weaving over each other like frozen spaghetti. The din of the wheeling
planes is terrific. There must be at least 8,000 people in the airport itself.
You come out on to a sidewalk running under one or other highway, almost as in
a tunnel. There's no foliage in sight. You could be, except for the heat, in
Michigan, in Atlanta, in Chicago.

I took a cab out to my motel and I never saw the ocean. Needless to say, the
sight of a Seminole striding ahead of his woman with coiled hair and beads
would have caused the seething traffic to come to a screeching halt. I doubt
that one resident in a thousand knows who the Seminoles were, let alone ever
having seen one, though they are, the small remnants of them, still there.
There, being the swampy jungle of the Everglades in the interior where they
live in shacks built on stilts and to get in there and spot a Seminole involves
an expedition on a flat-bottomed boat through winding, tangled swamps and
strange, bright birds, almost as much of an ordeal as a trip to find the
headhunters in the jungles of Brazil.

So, I took the cab along one highway north – there are many highways running
parallel back west into the interior – for the fishing town is now one of those
flat Florida southern California-type metropolises that go on and on. I don't
suppose 8, 9 million is the present population, it just feels that way. You
drive on and on for ten, fifteen miles through a continuous alternation of
petrol stations, second-hand car lots with pennants flying, burger joints,
lunch counters, pancake parlours, insurance offices, funeral parlours, motels
with wonderful names like the Bideawee, the Anacapri, the Sandy Toes.

And then, as all these one-storey service stations give out, places built to
serve your stomach and your automobile engine, and, eventually, your corpse,
finally, some trees come in. A palm or two. And, suddenly, huge towering,
high-rise so-called 'luxury' blocks of flats with electronic gates that open
only when the gatekeeper has cleared your identity by spotting your likeness in
the closed-circuit TV monitors installed in his office. The account of the
place published in 1939 in the federal guide might have been written in the
sixteenth century.

So, now, I can say again casually and without, I think, inducing envious
daydreams, flying down to Florida this week, I found that I had nothing to read
on the plane and, surprisingly, the airplane had only its airline magazine
which I'd read before. And then I remembered I was taking an overnight bag
small enough to stick under the seat in front, as the regulations require, and
it has a useful floppy compartment on the outside into which you could slip
papers. I unzipped it and found the airmail edition of my old paper which, so
as not to puzzle overseas' subscribers who knew it by its old, great name,
still calls itself the Manchester Guardian Weekly. I opened it and was
immediately back in our turbulent world.

'Iraqis Battle for Control of Marshes', as usual. Underneath that, 'Syria's
Shadowy Power Struggle', and beneath that, 'Jermial [UNCLEAR WORD] Pins Hope on
Assad'. Still hoping for yet another ceasefire, yet another final, decent
solution to the upheaval of Beirut. I'm afraid the Middle East is too much with
us, with me, anyway, and I turned a page. A cartoon. Good and funny and, what's
worse, true. A bunch of bobbing heads as of a shipwrecked crew. Deep in the
water ahead of them, their leader clutching Moses' staff and, even though the
water is up to his jowls, he is recognisably Ronald Reagan. The bobbing heads
are angry. One is saying, 'I'll part the Red Sea, you said. I'll lead you to
the Promised Land, you said.' Our leader, ten feet ahead of them, is marching
or sloshing on into an ocean labelled 'Deficits'. Ah! How true!

I settle to read an accompanying piece. It was a shocker, almost
incomprehensible, like reading Old Moore's Almanac for the wrong year. But, it
was a long piece, a thoughtful piece, a persuasive piece. It said there was a
rising tide of hope behind one man in America, a man who, fresh from his
triumph in New England, was marching into the South, rousing the young,
touching the minds and hearts of an increasing multitude of Americans, a man
who stressed not the mistakes of the past, but the promises, the challenge of
the future.

It says here, 'If he is nominated, Reagan will face a new task. He will have to
demonstrate that he can run against the future. No doubt about it, said one
Reagan adviser, he is the most dangerous candidate for us.'

What are they writing about? For the first time, I looked at the top of the
page. This issue was dated March 18 1984. The great new saviour, the great
threat to Reagan, was Gary Hart. I deduce from this perusal of my old paper the
profound cliché, some things remain the same and some don't.

I'm urged by a friend to say something about the resolution the United Nations'
general assembly got out this week about terrorism. What did it say? Well, I
ought to say that it has been 11 years in the making and through all that time,
the UN has argued, debated, quarrelled, adjourned, come back. Even to define
terrorism was a knotty two-year stint. After all, one country's terrorist is
another country's liberator.

Well, after these mountainous labours, they have delivered their approved
resolution. After 11 years, the United Nations says, 'Terrorism is a bad
thing'.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP