Drug addiction spreading

In the summer of 1886, one hundred years exactly before six American army
helicopters and 160 troops would appear on a grim mission flying over the
jungles of Bolivia – in 1886 then, a pharmacist in Atlanta, Georgia, put
together a new and refreshing drink compounded of vegetable derivatives and a
alkaloid derived from the leaves of a tall plant that grows wild in Bolivia.
The plant is called coca, not to be confused with the cocoa plant.

So the drink was sold and called Coca-Cola. It was registered as a trademark in
1893. It quickly became a popular drink, especially among the teenagers who
used the local drugstore or soda fountain as an informal social club. It was so
popular that inevitably imitators appeared and cashed in on the original brand
name by using either Coca or Cola in naming their products. The Coca-Cola
Company started law suits to get a legal monopoly on the use of either word but
it took 37 years – not until 1930 – before the Supreme Court of the United
States ruled that the, by then, common diminutive 'Coke' could be used only by
the Coca-Cola Company. Alas, by then, also, Coke was being used generally for
the variations. You might prohibit a company from using the word on a label or
an advertisement, but no court on earth can limit the use of a spoken idiom.

Zipper, by the way, was coined by an American rubber company in 1913 for a
slide fastener it invented for its overshoes. Other companies found other uses
and, after innumerable law suits, the coiners of the name were allowed the
exclusive use of the name on footwear, but by that time there was no other
popular word to describe the thing itself, wherever it was used. The company
gave up, one sorrowful agent saying or sighing, 'Zipper belongs to us all'.

One of the troubles that plagued the courts for so long in deciding to allow
the exclusive use of the word Coke was that in the 1890s, the plant it
described, coca, was the source of a white, crystalline alkaloid that had
become among doctors a favourite local anaesthetic. That alkaloid is called
cocaine. It was so used first in Vienna, two years before the Atlanta
pharmacist used the leaves of the coca plant to make his stimulating, harmless
drink. Am I saying that the original Coca-Cola contained cocaine? I am, but in
microscopic amounts.

But once doctors started using cocaine freely as an anaesthetic, it came to the
attention of large numbers of alert citizens that cocaine was also being used,
here and there, by less civic types as an addictive drug. The popularity of the
Sherlock Holmes stories didn't help. An aroused Congress passed a bill
proclaiming cocaine to be an extremely dangerous drug. It was removed as an
ingredient from the Cola drinks. It fell into disuse, so everybody believed,
until, in the early 1920s, it came out from the evidence of several Hollywood
scandals that cocaine addiction was, if not rampant, at least fairly common
among movie stars. Two of them died of it.

Well, the alarm and the popular uproar died down. Forty years went by, by which
time, in the early Sixties, the Beat generation appeared on the landscape – the
western landscape first – and, by then, the target of high-minded citizens was
marijuana among the young, and then acid, LSD, finally, throughout the Western
world, among a smaller but more certainly doomed population of the young,
heroin.

Not quite finally. For the past, I suppose, quarter-century, we've been hearing
of daring or reckless addicts going along with speed, a heinous mixture of
cocaine with heroin or morphine.

But in the past five or six years, this country has grown aware, with great
reluctance, of the positive social plague of cocaine. Five or six years ago, we
used to read, some of us to write, knowing if vague stories about the ring of
multi-millionaire crooks in Colombia or Bolivia who were shipping cocaine into
Miami and, by trans-shipment, into the big cities of the north. Out west they
heard more about the transportation of cocaine by road or plane across the
Mexican border into Los Angeles, for we assumed and for a time it seemed to be
a fact that the use of cocaine had moved onward and upward from rock starts to
the smartest parties in Hollywood and Beverly Hills. A scandal, indeed!

About two, three years ago, a very good friend of mine, a young man in his
early thirties that I'd worked with on television, told me casually but with a
strange seriousness that he would not be available for work or dinner or any
other social engagement for the next three months. He was going off into a sort
of retreat, he said, because he had started using the white powder at weekends
on parties. He then mentioned to my astonishment that for the past 16 years,
since he was 17, he'd been on drugs, on everything except heroin and cocaine.

Now I knew that after he graduated from his American university, he'd gone to
Oxford for a couple of years and I said, 'Didn't you find that your habit was
seriously frustrated when you went to Oxford?' I ought to say he was an
excellent student, verging on the brilliant. 'Absolutely not!' he said. In
Oxford and in several provincial cities he'd visited on holidays and in Geneva,
in Paris, in Rome, it took no more than 48 hours to make a connection to buy
the stuff, to meet regular users among students and other young people, to
attend parties at which its use was routine.

Apparently nothing serious happened to him physically during his regular use of
marijuana, acid, even sometimes speed, but he'd drawn the line at heroin or
cocaine, both of which were also readily available. It was back in the States
that, not at a wild party, but at the end of an editorial conference of a very
reputable magazine he was employed by, he was first offered cocaine. It was a
regular offering at the get-together which follows the always tense business of
putting a magazine to bed.

Only he and a girl employee eventually turned the stuff down but before he grew
scared, he told me there were even cosy dinners with two, three friends, no
more, in which the menu consisted of wine and a plate with two or three packets
of cocaine. He soon found that the weekend indulgence was not enough. He woke
up thinking not of the magazine or a jog or the news of the day, but how to get
to the white stuff. The high, the euphoria, of cocaine is very short-lived.
Came the time when he found himself, as the addicts say, chasing the high,
wanting to banish the following mild depression with more cocaine at
increasingly shorter intervals.

Then he heard about this rehabilitation centre. He went there, took the cure
and for the past two years has been, as they say, 'clean', which means not only
that he doesn't use cocaine or any other drug, but that he's pledged to stay
permanently off any other kind of drug, including hard liquor, wine, beer. The
therapists at these retreats or clinics have found that once you're hooked on
cocaine, any other drug, alcohol especially, can weaken your resistance. The
danger you have to watch out for is called 'cross' addiction.

So it's a quite different new life that my friend is living – a life in which
he has discovered, to his delight, that the best high you can enjoy is life
itself, uncluttered and unnumbed by cocaine.

He's spent much of his time lately talking to schools, to high-school students
in particular, in prosperous or comfortable neighbourhoods. For a time, like
the rest of us, he thought that cocaine was a habit exclusive to rock stars,
Harlem delinquents, swinging movie and television people. He found out that
among the young, the most chronic addicts were children of the comfortable, the
most outwardly respectable middle-class.

And here comes in the American passion for statistics which is sometimes
comical but, in all serious matters, more and more jolts us with the brutal
reminder that life is very rarely what we like to imagine it to be. The Drug
Enforcement Administration, an independent agency of government has recently
reported that drug addiction, most especially cocaine addiction, has penetrated
and spread throughout the whole of American society. We used to say to
ourselves in self-congratulation – I'm relieved to think that I don't travel in
such circles.

Well, the circle embraces practically every known social and economic group.
One-third of all American high-school graduates have tried cocaine. Wall
Street, young prosperous yuppies, the staffs of magazines, the fortunate, we
suppose, children of the country-club set, of course the rock scene, moviedom
and, most dramatically publicised lately, professional baseball and football
players who are now in a conflict with the commissioners over the
constitutionality of being made to take drug tests, especially since the sudden
death of a golden boy, a 22-year-old basketball wizard who had his first take
of cocaine of great purity, went into convulsions and died.

At another time, I hope to go into the work of the Drug Enforcement Agency and
its recent aerial raid – with the Pentagon's assistance – on the jungles of
Bolivia to burn the cocaine labs in a province which is the heart of the drug
country. Unfortunately, somebody in government, in the Pentagon or the State
Department or wherever, leaked the word of the coming raid a week before it
happened and the raid was a bust.

Meanwhile, 21 federal agencies and units of the army, navy, air force, marines
and coastguard are mobilised to try and stop the northward flow by road, by
boat, by air, of processed cocaine worth something on the street like $28
billion a year, five times the amount coming in only four years ago.

Of course, the more that comes in, the cheaper it costs and the demand is
there. The great social problem is how to check or weaken the demand. So far,
the best that has been done is a national campaign started by Mrs Reagan to
instruct schoolchildren about drug abuse and to teach them to chant and believe
in a slogan that says, 'Say no to drugs!'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP