The Squeal Rule

The only time I can remember my wife ever taking a hairbrush and whacking her
daughter with the hard back of it was when the said daughter had tattled or
squealed on her brother. She was one astounded little girl, I can tell you! But
the lesson went home and, in our family, the rule stayed firm. One unforgivable
crime was tattling, squealing, telling tales.

This famous and unique incident occurred to me when our papers started to write
about what is called 'the Squeal Rule'. It's a proposal of a government
department that has to do with health and human services, that whenever minors
– not coal miners, but under-age humans – go to a government clinic and are
supplied with a contraceptive device, the clinic must then notify the parents.
Not before the Pill or the device has been given, but afterwards.

Well, this proposal, and that's all it is until Congress acts on it, it's
caused what the serious papers call 'a national debate' and what the rest of us
call a hullabaloo. The uproar comes from opponents of the idea who say that
it's an unwarranted intrusion on human privacy. They add that the knowledge of,
say, a 15-year-old girl that her parents knew what she was up to would scare
her off the clinic and lead to either pregnancy or abortion. The people who
support the idea say that the sex life of a minor is certainly the parents'
concern and that if they're ignored, the new rule would amount to the state
taking over from the parent and doing it with dollars contributed by the
taxpayers. They add that the new rule would lead to more pregnancies and
abortions from children who would fumble the devices. Neither side has enough
figures to prove their point about these hazards.

I think the best way of solving this problem and it's what most women, I
believe, would do instinctively, is to ask how you would feel if it applied to
your own daughter or son. The noisier argument of the opponents is that the sex
life of their 10, 12, 16-year-old is its own business, just like its choice of
friends or what game to play. The supporters of the proposal say that parents
are assumed to be the curators not so much of the private life of a minor, as
the curator of its values, that the parents are the first to be told if a child
steals, takes drugs, even skips school.

And I have to say at the end of this objective report that I, myself, am very
much on the side of the proposal. It may be uncomfortable for parents to know
about hanky-panky leading to an unexpected or unwanted child, but when the
child or the abortion becomes the first order of business, it's surely family
business and not being allowed to know about it is as bad as ignoring it. In
other words, the parents are forgoing not a right, but their duty in any
society to help, to suggest, to guide.

I brought this up though because of the vivid little catchphrase that has
christened it and which obviously is going to be effective in fighting the
proposal. The Squeal Rule says, in three words, that the government – of all
bullying outsiders – is going to squeal on your child. William Safire, the New
York Times commentator who doubles once a week in a fascinating column about
language, its uses and abuses, has neatly expressed the power and danger of
this catchword by saying that whenever a vivid bit of slang sums up a
controversy, one side seems to grab the moral high-ground by the coining of a
phrase.

This controversy reminds me, by the way, of second thoughts that the Russians
are having – I must say it's rather late in the day – about the institution of
children's day-care centres. If the Russians didn't invent it, they were
certainly the first wholesale practitioners of it and I remember way back in
the days when people like Lady Astor and Bernard Shaw were visiting the new
Utopia and reporting ecstatically about it, it did seem to a lot of us young
onlookers as one of the more sensible and responsible developments of
socialism. It's been adopted far and wide and something of the sort is clearly
a pressing need in the society of today where nearly one wife in two is a
working wife, whereas it used to be, 40 years ago, one in five.

Well, in other countries than Russia, disturbing figures are showing up not so
much of juvenile delinquency, which can most often come from no care at all,
but of emotional troubles in the adults who were the beneficiaries, as we
always thought, of daycare by someone other than their parents. It's a tricky
business this and one not to be dogmatic about, especially in a time when the
Freudian or post-Freudian theory – that the parents were almost solely
responsible for the way their children turned out – has been challenged by our
knowledge and our ignorance of genes, chromosomes and the like.

All I'll say now is that in talking over some of these problems with a youngish
man, just 40 but a survivor of the generation that was in the thick of the
protest movements and the drug culture of the 1960s. He said something that I
see to be true when I look around at good friends of mine whose children, now
in their thirties, are weak sisters or zombies or mind-blown hangers-on or sad
and sensitive layabouts. He said in all the kids I knew in college, I've never
known one with a drug problem who had a good, close relation with their
parents.

Well, I'm back to thinking about the power of a catchword to grab Mr Safire's
high moral ground. We've had, for several years now, another national debate
going on about something called 'the right to work'. Several states have
drafted or passed or tried to enforce right to work laws. Well, surely,
everybody has a right to work but this law is attractively and woefully
misnamed. What it means is the right not to join a union and you don't have to
mooch for long around industrial cities in any company town or any other town
whose basic industry – coal, steel, automobiles – has made it thoroughly
organised, to discover pretty quickly that any brave soul asserting his right
not to join a union is asserting, rather, the privilege of joining the
unemployed.

And now we have the famous 'nuclear freeze'. It's catchier than 'zero option'.
It asks us whether we'd like to have the superpowers freeze their nuclear
arsenals. Well, who would want to say no? What the phrase, the slogan does not
say, is to freeze what, when and at what levels.

There's another attractive word with a bad meaning – a word revived from the
heyday of Roosevelt's New Deal – a word with which the Republicans used to
lambaste Roosevelt for spending public money on what they took to be
unnecessary invented jobs. It's an old word whose origins are hidden somewhere
in the Southern mountains of the pioneer experience. It's the word
'boondoggle'. When Roosevelt took a couple of million unemployed boys off the
streets and set them planting trees or mending bridges in an outfit he called
'the civilian conservation corps' that was called a boondoggle and now the
word's come back.

President Reagan, looking at the stubborn unemployment figures which will not
go away or improve is thinking of reviving something like Roosevelt's
conservation corps. Reagan's problem is to find some other word than
boondoggle, a word with a nice sound, a word that sings of bravery and free
enterprise.

I was... I was going to start this talk with a phrase that certainly does not
sing and I was afraid if I used it right away the night air or the breakfast
tables would jiggle with the sound of sets being clicked off. What could be
more dreary, except to the people engaged in it, than the phrase 'market
research' ?

Well, what I've come across is market research of a canny and even comical
kind. It's certainly something new in the motion-picture business. In the old
days, the big, awesome producers were the ones who could sense in their bones
and were right about the sort of movie the people would flock to. Now, however,
there's a research group that's been employed to tap the pulses of the people –
old, young, white, black, every sort – to find out ahead of time what sort of
movies they'd like to flock to. The group has had a great deal of success. It
stopped, just in time, one studio making an epic about D-Day, the allied
invasion of Normandy, when it discovered that most Americans under and crowding
20, the biggest movie audience, thought the invasion of Normandy had something
to do with the Norman Conquest.

So far I hear the group has had one crashing failure, a failure of prophecy. It
warned a big studio off making a picture because of its title and subject
matter. The word 'wars', it said, is fatal and a film about robots will empty
the theatres in droves, as Sam Goldwyn said. The company thought again and
stayed with the risk. Result, the $500-million grosser, 'Star Wars'.

Another bit of market research that fills me with amazement and, I must say, a
twinge of sadness, was done for the television networks and their sponsors to
help them decide which sports they ought to televise. The main shock is the
staggering news that only four per cent of the American population does not
play or read about or watch some form of sport. The two socko attractions are
American football, 39 per cent and baseball, 28 per cent. After them, in
descending order of attraction come basketball on the heels or the fingertips
of baseball, then boxing, gymnastics, swimming, ice skating, horse racing,
tennis, athletics, skiing, motor racing, marathons, wrestling and bowling. Way
at the bottom, soccer, jai alai and – wait for it – lacrosse.

There is one other game, very close to the bottom, a bare five per cent of the
population ever watches it. It is called golf. Only six per cent play it. It
can only mean to me that America is full of self-conscious or pompous or
over-proud people who can't bear the thought of going out on Saturdays and
Sundays and making fools of themselves in the silent presence of their friends.

It's the silence that hurts.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP