Sally Ride, new role model

If, only a couple of weeks ago, you dropped the name Sally Ride into the
conversation anywhere in America, I doubt you'd have heard even a stammer of
recognition. To avoid any nauseating suggestion that I was holier or wiser than
thou, I ought to say that a month ago, the name Sally Ride meant absolutely
nothing to me either but last weekend, with a couple we've known for 30 or 40
years, we found ourselves, at the inspiration of Sally Ride, talking about
American heroines. This was not difficult to do since Moira Shearer had just
died.

We were talking about her and as old fogeys will – and young fogeys too, for
that matter – we went on naturally to reminiscing about our contemporaries and
other American heroines. We were talking, musing rather, about popular heroines
and of all the movie stars and famous models and singers and such, one name
came back to us with a special dazzle.

It was called for by an item in the news we were watching, an announcement that
Los Angeles has just put on sale tickets for the 1984 Olympics. It was recalled
that the last time Los Angeles housed the games in 1932, the first-day tickets
could be purchased for what, in the depth of the Depression, was considered a
very stiff price indeed – three dollars. Last week, the Olympic Committee
announced, without a blush, that an opening day ticket next year would cost you
$200.

This led, as it inevitably would, anywhere in this country among old-timers
with an interest in sport, to the recollection of the indomitable and cocky
figure of Babe Didrikson who hypnotised the thousands in Los Angeles by
setting, on the opening day, the new women's record in the javelin throw. A
couple of days later, she broke the record in the high hurdles and was second
in the high jump. The Babe was only 19, had already made an all-America women's
basketball team, was a remarkable swimmer and tennis player. Nobody had ever
seen an athlete, male or female, like her. She went on a vaudeville tour. She
was, could have been exclusively, a first-class tap dancer. She pitched an
innings for the Brooklyn Dodgers. Two years after this show of versatility, she
responded to a sports writer's suggestion that she ought to take up golf.
'Think I just might,' she said.

I ought to throw in here that this June 1983 weekend is the weekend of the
United States Open Golf Championship and in an off-the-course interview, Jack
Nicklaus, probably the best golfer there has ever been, reminded us that from
the age of ten to twelve, his teacher held his head while he hit a couple of
hundred balls a day. Two years, Nicklaus figured, is about the least time in
which you can learn to hit the ball with any accuracy or predictability.

Well, Babe Didrikson, within one year of buying her clubs and grabbing a
teacher and keeping him at it on the practice range till nightfall, within one
year she was touring the country with Gene Sarazen, then in his prime, showing
the customers that a woman could crack a drive past the 250-yard marker. I will
bring instant cheer to long-suffering hackers by saying that her game was not
all that hot as yet. She just banged the ball but she settled down to learn and
practice nothing but golf. It took 12 years for her to win the Women's
Championship and then, in the season of 1946/7, she reeled off 15 tournament
victories in a row, something no golfer, man or woman, has ever done since or
is likely to.

It was not just her astounding ability, it was the marvellous sassyness of her
personality. Once she was invited to play an exhibition game at a club in Iowa.
The club picked its champ to play along with her. Before a sell-out crowd, the
local champ teed up to show her the way. He fired a beauty, about 260 yards
down the fairway. Hearty and relieved applause from the locals. The Babe,
driving also, of course, from the men's tees, cracked one about 20 yards beyond
the macho champ and as they took off down the fairway, she turned to him and
hissed, 'Don't it burn your tail though!'. She naturally won the British
Women's Championship too and delighted the crowds as much with her comic
asides, as with her sizzling and, by then, precise talent.

So, how about Sally Ride? If you haven't heard it already, you certainly will
hear it ad, shall we say, libitum, in the next few days. Sally Ride is 32, a
cheerful, attractive, no-nonsense woman who thought of becoming, and probably
could have been, a crack tennis player. She decided instead to major in college
in Los Angeles in astrophysics and English literature. She is the first
American woman astronaut and is off with four men on the sixth mission of the
space shuttle Challenger. They intend to deploy two enormous communications
satellites for the benefit of paying customers in Canada and Indonesia. They
will also drop over the side an experimental instrument platform and let it
float alongside for nine hours, after which they hope to retrieve it with a
robot arm. This has not been done before and we have to take it from the boys
and girls at the Kennedy Space Centre that the success of this retrieval is
crucial to future shuttles.

The public relations staff at Kennedy would never know it. They report that
most of the enquiries that have come in, what the PR men say has been a
paralysing volume of enquiries, have been all about Sally Ride. Whether she
likes it or not, she has become an overnight heroine, film star and, as the
popular jargon has it, role model. It happily turns out that she doesn't like
it much.

She was interviewed a night or two before the flight and, I must say, was
admirably crisp – not curt, just courteously unforthcoming about the usual
nonsense that is put to any woman these days who does something that was once
thought to be the exclusive job of a male. No, she had no interest in politics.
How would this affect her marriage? Sweetly, she said, 'I think that is between
Stephen and me'. She refused to make her mission any sort of landmark event for
women's liberation – a giant step forward for womankind was suggested. If you
say so. She put a stop to such misty mush by saying, apropos of the publicity
and the big hype, 'I think it's too bad that our society isn't further along in
accepting these things. This is not such a big deal. It's time people realised
that women can do just about any job they want to do.'

End of interview. End of the media's (restless) attempt to make her into a
combination of Marilyn Monroe, Gloria Steinem, Babe Didrikson and Eleanor
Roosevelt. Her one ambition, she said, was to be a good physicist and a team
player in the astronaut corps.

For myself, I must say that I'm pleased, almost excited to hear that there's a
doctor along on the flight with the particular mission of finding out why so
many shuttle crews suffer from motion sickness. I recall that after an early
orbit by an American astronaut and when the space programme began to dawdle for
a while, one embittered astronaut said all that the public was getting from the
expenditure of those billions of dollars was the discovery of a non-sticky
frying pan.

Well, I'd like to believe that that robot arm does its stuff and that its
success will lead to progress undreamed of in space shuttling but it would be a
great thing, also, if the studies up there of Dr Norman Thagard mean that
people can soon sit in the back seat of a bouncing taxi and not feel like
throwing up.

Talking of heroes and heroines reminds me that they will emerge in the next two
weeks in their most conspicuous form, if not in their purest form – I'm
thinking about the start on Monday of Wimbledon, what, for some reason, the
linguists have never explained, Americans, even American sports commentators,
call Wimble-t-on. However, I believe this is the right time to talk about what
can only be called a crisis in the conduct of tennis tournaments.

Not only the fans, but the casual onlooker will know what I mean if I say that
the crisis crept in on cocky feet about a dozen or more years ago with the
arrival on centre court of Ilie Nastase. It approached more boldly in the
following years with the jumpy Jimmy Connors. It roared in as a full-blown
problem in human behaviour with John McEnroe. It's nothing more or less than
what is now a routine defiance of the etiquette of decent behaviour that once
made tennis, and still makes golf, an exercise in maintaining grace under
pressure.

The official response to these sulks which turned into tantrums and then into
storms of obscene abuse, was to look uncomfortable at first. 'Am I hearing what
I think I'm hearing?' Then to turn grave, then to administer a slap on the
wrist in the form of a warning, a second warning and then fines. Fines of
hundreds of dollars against players who earn a million or two a year.

I took this up with a famous sports writer who's been covering tennis for 40
years or more. 'It's too late,' he said, 'the crowds expect it. Some of them
come for nothing else. If umpires disqualified them, there'd be a riot.' So?
One riot would be a cheap price to pay for restoring the game as a decent
sport. Already in a terrifying documentary film I saw the other week we see
that little tots, ten-year-olds at tennis schools are hurling rackets, shouting
at linesmen, exploding in obscenities just like their heroes from New York.

'It would take great courage,' my veteran reporter said, 'for an umpire to
disqualify any big star.' I dissent. It would not take courage of the order of
Shackleton, Martin Luther King, Lech Walesa, It would take ordinary, simple
guts. Just announce in a circular before the games start that protesting a call
would produce a warning. Abuse of an official would forfeit the match.
Obscenity against an umpire would have you thrown out.

As the late, great Red Smith put it, 'To have an umpire fire one of these
riff-raff from not the match, but the tournament, would dispose, at a stroke,
of the whole, slum-clearance project.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP