Candidates consider TV debate

I cannot help it if people choose to live in New Orleans, where I see it was
101 yesterday, or farther north, but still in the south, in Atlanta where it's
94 or even farther north still in Washington DC, a provincial government city
which is boasting, as I speak, of delicious seasonable weather, sunny, clear
and 84 degrees which does, for Washington, suggests that winter is not far
behind.

But for us above the 40th parallel, there has appeared the blessed boon of the
finest of Canada's exports to the United States, the north-west wind which,
having come across 3,000 miles of dry land, disperses all the seaborne haze and
smog, like a fumigator in a garbage bin and, as I talk, leaves New York bone
dry, crystal clear, razor sharp and baby blue.

It's a time, obviously, for a sunny, cheerful talk. It's a time when even the
most sullen bus drivers startle their passengers by wishing them a good
morning. It's a time when constitutional strollers quicken their steps and feel
ready for anything, which was a lucky thing yesterday for a 32-year-old woman,
a Mrs Arledge, who was stepping smartly along Park Avenue at high noon when
somebody bumped into her.

'All of a sudden', she said, dropping vividly into the historic present, 'I
feel a lightness.' The lightness was due to her having been relieved of her
handbag containing $160 in cash and a pack of credit cards. 'Then', she said,
'I see a person running very fast and like something surreal I see my bag
floating away from me. He was a gazelle, a sprinter. I've never seen anybody
run so fast. I let out a primal scream like I've just been shot and start
yelling, "Stop that man!" '

The man, for this gazelle turned out, after all, to be a man, was already
halfway across the nearest side street with Mrs Arledge, the roused tigress,
after him. Unaccountably, he wheeled back and headed for her. What would you
have done? What she did was a feat of amazing grace. 'I dived at his chest with
my right shoulder like a football player (an American football player). I hit
him solidly, it was like running into a car. It threw me to the ground but I
slowed him down.'

She did more than that. She outraged him with her football cross-body block so
that he reeled in time to be punched by a halted cab driver and then pounded
with an attaché case by a passing businessman. By the time he was recovering
from this outrage against his civil rights, two cops had arrived and cuffed him
and hauled him off to the jug. Mrs Arledge went along to identifying him and,
offered a tranquiliser, scorned it. Was she scared? 'No,' she said, 'I wasn't
scared, I was just mad.'

I quote this remarkable incident because it's what happens, or happened, in all
the best Chaplin and Laurel and Hardy movies but practically never happens in
life. How many women in the Western world, seeing a handbag float away,
surrealistically or not, would immediately execute a footballer's cross-body
block against an oncoming gazelle? Of course, I must say it helps if you are,
like Mrs Arledge, the wife of the president of a television network's sports
department.

For the wives of non-football fans, a device is now being marketed which looks
like a solid tie clip. You snap it on to your lapel or blouse or T-shirt or
whatever. When the thief grabs you close, the device releases a gas carrying an
odour as pungent as the exhaust of a skunk. The manufacturer of this marvel
swears that no mugger or attacker can stand it.

I should like to keep up these cheerful, spunky notes but all is not sunny, as
you would not expect it to be, in the relations between the three cross-country
runners who are hoping to wind up in the White House. Their names, for anyone
who came in late on this race which happens like the Olympics once every four
years and breeds just about as much ill-will, are Carter, Reagan and Anderson.
Mr Carter, the Democrat, is already in the White House and wants to stay there.
Mr Reagan, the Republican, is, in the public's view of the race, running neck
and neck with Mr Carter. Jogging gamely well behind is Mr Anderson, a
congressman and a Republican who can't bear the choice of either Carter or
Reagan and is taking his own independent route to the White House.

The race, or campaign, begins officially in the first week in September, though
some sharp-eared listeners may have noticed that it really began about two
years ago. However, the moment the official starting gun is sounded, it used to
be that people looked in their newspapers to see when the rival candidates were
going to appear on the rear platform of a train as it came through their town.
Today, the moment the gun goes off, people ask each other, 'When is the first
television debate?' And, I suppose, if you're under 40, you assume that it's an
old American tradition. In fact, it's a good deal younger than American
television but it started in 1960 and it was not conceived by either of the two
candidates, John F. Kennedy and Richard M. Nixon. It was conceived by guilt on
the part of the networks and by a dramatic jump in the viewing figures which
offered a way of assuaging that guilt. Let me explain.

The guilt grew out of a general complaint in 1959 at the trashiness and
increasing violence of many television programmes and it grew out, also, of a
particular scandal. In 1959, it came out that the winner of the biggest money
prize in the most popular TV quiz show had been fed the answers to the final
round. In no time the press made other probes and found other so-called
'payola' scandals. There was a well-publicised congressional investigation
which thoroughly scared the networks to the point of fearing that they might
lose their franchise unless they made amends by fulfilling more conscientiously
their legal obligation to give substantial time to what the government's
responsible body, the federal communications commission, called 'public
service'.

The networks, up to that point, had generally looked on public service
programmes as certain money losers. Now they yearned to do their public duty
and give time free for the discussion of national issues. The free time was
long overdue. In 1950, ten years before the first presidential television
debate, only 11 per cent of America's families owned a television set. Ten
years late in the presidential year of 1960, 88 per cent of American families
had one.

The networks new-found good intentions were then seen to be blocked by an
actual law – a section of the Communications Act said that every radio and
television station in the country that offered free time to a political
candidate must also offer equal time to everyone else who was a candidate for
that office. The networks, two of them anyway, in consultation, had already
decided that the best show they could put on in the public interest, would be
to offer free time for the two main presidential candidates, Vice-President
Nixon and Senator John Kennedy, to debate the issues.

But, as the law stood, it would require them, also, to give equal debating time
to 14 other candidates, however large or minute their body of supporters, who
were running on such party tickets as farmer labour, socialist, vegetarian or
whatever. Obviously, 16 candidates debating all at once, or working in shifts
like coal miners, would ruin the networks and drive the populace into coma.

So, the networks begged for a change in the law and, in June 1960, Congress
suspended the section that required free time for everybody. Delegations from
the networks met staff aides of Mr Nixon and Mr Kennedy and, eventually, four
television debates were set up between the two of them. The first, it was later
concluded, was the decisive one. Kennedy, who'd been chided for his youth, even
by ex-President Truman of his own party, looked as pink as a choirboy, was as
poised and knowledgeable as an elder statesman addressing his loyal republic.
Mr Nixon, who made the mistake of wearing no make-up, was jumpy, addressed
Senator Kennedy and had a five o'clock shadow that gave him a menacing Hammer
Production look.

Well, the audience for that first debate amazed even the network presidents. It
was 70 million people, smaller only than the record television audience for the
clinching game of the 1959 baseball championship. The networks were now
actually proud to announce that they had sacrificed $2 million worth of
advertising revenue in the public interest and in their own interest of being
seen once again as Mr Clean.

However, by the fourth debate, the people had had it. There was nothing new to
say and there was already a sizeable and voluble part of the populace which
hoped there would be no more of them. In fact, there were none. In 1964 or '68
or '72, the candidates decided they would look more presidential standing and
speechifying alone rather than side by side but, in 1976, no one was more eager
to develop his public exposure than the Democrats 'up from nowhere' candidate,
Jimmy Carter of Georgia. President Ford was, perhaps fatally, willing. Mr
Carter was humble and surprisingly informed and articulate. President Ford was
honest enough to look uncomfortable and he committed a couple of howlers.

But now that John Anderson is hot for public exposure, he wants to be seen
debating alongside Mr Carter and Mr Reagan. Mr Reagan is willing to debate with
one or both or either. 'Sure,' he said, 'if the League of Women Voters, the
sponsor of the first debate, says that John Anderson is a viable candidate,
I'll be there.'

President Carter, on the other hand, has decided that if he debates with both
Reagan and Anderson together, he will look less like a president and more like
an equal – a golfer in a three-way tie in a sudden-death play-off. It could be
his first and fatal tactical blunder leading, indeed, to sudden death.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP