El Salvador crisis

With all the troubles that are gathering for the United States in the
Caribbean, I'm surprised there's been no mention of the 160th anniversary of an
American doctrine that, ever since it was enunciated, has been the controlling
doctrine of American foreign policy in this hemisphere.

It doesn't have the force of law. It doesn't need to. It would be as absurd as
a British law that laid it down that neither Napoleon, nor Hitler, nor any
other foreign leader had the right to invade Britain. This American doctrine is
known as the Monroe Doctrine and was the brainchild of the fifth President of
the United States, James Monroe, a Virginian who has several other exploits and
enlightened convictions to his credit. He fought and was wounded in the War for
Independence, he studied law under Thomas Jefferson and no doubt from him
acquired his opposition to a constitution which did not include a written Bill
of Rights.

Monroe entered the first American Senate and a year after he'd sat there, he
saw such a bill come into force, namely, the ten original amendments to the
constitution which are known as the Bill of Rights and which proclaim such
things as freedom of the press and religion, limits on search and seizure, the
right to a speedy trial, the forbidding of cruel and unusual punishment and so
on.

Monroe was, at various times, a governor of Virginia and the United States'
Minister to France. At the age of 58, he was elected president and again, four
years later, with an electoral majority which has never been equalled. He
lacked only one vote to make his re-election unanimous. And I suppose it's due
to him, as much as to anybody, that for nearly the next hundred years, the
United States did not have to bother too much about a foreign policy and could
concentrate on developing and expanding the new nation.

Monroe had come in the first time shortly after Britain had been defeated a
second time in a war with the United States, the so-called 'War of 1812' – even
young people then had the most vivid memories of the capture of Detroit, the
invasion of Maryland, the British burning of the Capitol and the White House
and they were still reeling with surprise, if not pride, at having defeated the
British fleet.

There remained only two obstacles to the unity of this country under a
non-European flag. There were border clashes with the Canadians and Spain still
owned Florida. In his second term, Monroe settled the borders with Canada and,
as proof of his goodwill, he stripped the 3,000-mile border of all its forts.
He made it painfully clear to the Spanish that if they stayed in Florida, they
would have to fight for it against hopeless odds. The Spanish, who were then
being battered by rebellions throughout their entire South American empire, saw
the point and ceded Florida once for all. Not without, however, the bitter
afterthought which rankles to this day that they'd been given Florida at the
end of the War of Independence as a reward for not pressing their claims to
Gibraltar.

Spain, in fact, at this time – and we're talking about the 1810s and Twenties –
was the favourite whipping boy from the Caribbean to Cape Horn. Talk about an
idea whose time had come! Revolution was the means and independence was the
idea. It's astonishing to look at the map today, at the vast extent of the
Spanish dominion in Central and the whole of South America and realise, in
merely the eight years that James Monroe was in the White House, the number of
countries that fought for and won their independence from Spain. First Chile,
then Argentina and Colombia. Then Nicaragua and Mexico and Honduras and
Guatemala and Venezuela. Then Peru, then Uruguay and Bolivia. All in eight
years.

Paraguay had gone a few years before and in 1822 Brazil proclaimed itself free
from Portugal. There were other conquered places, colonies, mostly of Britain
but after the triumphs of 1814, these island colonies were not regarded as
threats to anybody.

Well, with all these liberating upheavals in South and Central America and with
Florida recovered and Canada pacified, Monroe, seeing the last European power
ousted from North America, Monroe was moved to look over the whole Western
hemisphere and he felt enough confidence in the growing power of the United
States to proclaim his doctrine which declared, simply and grandly, that
henceforth the United States would oppose all European intervention in the
Americas. Cuba was still a hold-out and would be until in 1898, the United
States jumped in to help her eject the Spaniards from their last American
stronghold.

Since then, it's been assumed by the United States, and for that matter by the
whole of Southern and Central America, that no European power would intervene
in an American dispute and certainly would not attempt to get a military
foothold. Obviously and increasingly throughout this century and the rise of
the United States as a world power, no country of the 21 American republics
ever presented a threat to the United States.

In the first third of this century, Uncle Sam basked in the benevolence of his
role as the big protector of embattled little states to the south. American
businessmen invested far and wide in sugar and fruits and oil and mining and if
American interests were threatened by some upstart rebel, the marines were sent
in. They were sent in to Nicaragua twice when that country defaulted on its
American loans. And if some Mexican bandit temporarily terrified his
countrymen, he had only to dare to cross over the American border, as one of
them did in 1916, and the bugle sounded and the American cavalry beat him back
again.

For most, indeed for all, of my time, South America was looked on by Americans
as a dark continent peppered with picturesque Indian relics. Central America
was a hotbed of tinpot dictators and almost monotonous and enumerable military
coups. Will Rogers, the old cowboy philosopher, once said, 'In our country,
every boy has a chance to be president. In Central America, every boy has to be
president'.

Not until 1933, however, did an American president, Franklin Roosevelt, put out
a public proclamation forswearing ever again American intervention in Western
hemisphere nations, giving them a hundred years after the Monroe Doctrine, a
Monroe Doctrine of their own.

Well, today, not even the most obtuse politician or the most bland commentator
would deny that a new era has dawned, exploded rather, in United States Central
America relations. The eruption came 21 years ago when the Russians installed
missile bases in Cuba. President Kennedy, during that awful October weekend,
himself mentioned the Monroe Doctrine to remind any American who'd forgotten it
that a European power was threatening to intervene in the Americas and I think
there's little doubt now that if the Russians had not backed away from the
naval and air quarantine that Kennedy set up, the United States would have gone
into Cuba, at least to obliterate the missile sites.

Today, I'm sure that if Nicaragua's Sandinista government were a rebel
government, even a leftist government of the old sort supplied with arms and
men from neighbouring states, it would be fretted about but it would not be
thought of as a possible threat to the security of the United States and,
similarly, if the government of El Salvador were being opposed only by local
guerrillas, it would not seem so important a bastion of stability.

What riddles this whole mounting debate about giving substantial aid in arms
and money to the guerrillas fighting the Sandinistas and giving more aid to
prop up the elected government of El Salvador is the fear in Washington –
bolstered by the knowledge claimed by the intelligence services – that not only
the Soviet Union is bringing in massive military aid, but also Cuba and the
PLO. The administration has described Cuba as an 800-mile aircraft carrier and
tells intelligence committees of the Senate and the House that the flow of arms
and armaments from the Soviet Union does not stop short at conventional weapons
and represents, 21 years after the missile crisis, a sustained intervention in
the affairs of republics that in the nuclear age are in the United States'
front yard.

If, as the administration claims, the threat to this country's security is real
and massive, then it's amazing that the president has not appealed for massive
help, including arms and men. The ratio of economic aid to military aid is
still three to one but when the president made his fervent appeal to Congress
to vote an amount of military aid the Congress does not seem disposed to grant
him, the one standing ovation they gave him was for his promise not ever to
send in to El Salvador American men.

It reminded me of Franklin Roosevelt's promise given to American mothers in his
last rally before the 1940 election. 'I say to you, mothers, again and again
and again, that no American boys will be sent into any foreign war'. This is
what everybody aches to hear and they ache to hear it again because they very
much fear it may happen – may have to happen – if the United States chooses to
arrest the spread of Soviet-supported regimes in the Caribbean.

This is a consummation devoutly to be driven from the mind, even though in the
latest opinion polls 72 per cent of Americans think it likely that if the
rebels topple the government of El Salvador, leftist rebels will do the same to
other governments in other Central American countries. In other words, the
domino theory is back again in America's front yard and this time three
Americans in four think it apt to happen and don't propose to do much about it.

The Democrats' official reply to the president is the rather limp one of
saying, 'Let's get the rebels and the El Salvador government sitting down
together to negotiate' – something the rebels have no intention of doing. It is
an unresolved problem and nobody seems to have the answer.

Winston Churchill once said, 'The day the airplane was invented was a bad day
for Britain'. We can say, without giving aid or comfort to anybody, 'The day
the Americans invented a nuclear bomb was a bad day for America'.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP