Voters believe Reagan lied

I flew into Los Angeles the other day and, as the plane descended, I leaned
close to the window to get a bird's eye view of this enormous city. I should
modify the word 'enormous', if you're thinking of population. Los Angeles is a
Johnny-come-lately, not to be compared, as a congregation of humans, with
Shanghai's 11 millions or with the nine millions, just about, of Mexico City,
Peking, Tokyo, Calcutta, Bombay, Seoul, Moscow.

Los Angeles has less than half the population of the most famous runners-up,
London and New York, but the three million Los Angelinos are spread thin and
wide and even across 440 square miles, so that a bird, wanting to get its
famous eye view, would have to rise to a cruising altitude of about five miles.
As it is, by the time the stewardess, or hostess, or flight attendant, tells
you to stop smoking – or, on most American planes, to please extinguish all
smoking materials – what you see down there, usually through a thick filter of
yellow smog, is a vast tangled web of intertwining motorways crawling with
traffic, like a colossal bowl of spaghetti overrun by armies of ants.

I thought back to the first time I came to Los Angeles in 1933, when you didn't
fly in – it was possible to fly in, in small, two-engine prop planes on to a
fairly rudimentary airstrip. Three years later, there was a real airport from
which four-engine, two-decker seaplanes, the famous Clippers, flew you in great
comfort, beds and all, to Hawaii. But in 1933, you came in by train, five days
and four nights from New York. Of course, most cities and towns everywhere have
grown to accommodate the unchecked populating of the globe and I'm not
pretending that in 1933 Los Angeles was a very small town, though it was only
about 20 years away from having been one. In fact in 1912, it was a sheep town
in the hills with no post office.

But on my first visit, there was a small, fairly dense downtown and pretty soon
old two-lane roads meandering through random suburbs and much greenery, and
continuous stands of exotic trees and burgeoning beds of every sort of flower.
And they're still there. Hollywood was a just connected suburb, and very lush
too, till at a bend on the road going west on Sunset Boulevard a sign said
Beverly Hills and beyond that there was no advertising, no visible telegraph
poles, no shops. Just foliage and roads winding into the hills overlooking
large lawns and trimly disciplined woods around mansions, small and large, of
many styles – French château and some mock Tudor and elegant New England and
Southern colonial with white columns and porticos.

That was where the stars lived and just on the eastern side of the entrance to
Beverly Hills, there'd be one or two cars and/or little buses with painted
signs saying, 'Guide to Stars' Homes'. You signed up for the tours as to
Hampton Court and when the bus was full, the man took off and you went weaving
up and through the handsome tree-lined roads and the man would stop at
intervals and shout through a megaphone, 'The colonial house on the left is the
home of Clark Gable', or Loretta Young, or Adolphe Menjou, or Gary Cooper, or
some other long-gone idol.

By the way, Loretta Young is still with us. That creamy, adorable young angel
is now in her seventies and for many years has been totally absorbed with
Catholic charities.

Well, as the song says, 'There've been some changes made'. Words fail me to
replace those scattered, leafy, flowery suburbs with the teaming, unending,
intertwining, six- and eight-lane motorways, beneath and beside which, live –
drive, most of the time, it would seem – the inhabitants of a city that has
just under three automobiles for every human.

We were met by an old friend, our Los Angeles host, at the airport and about 40
minutes later, having threaded our way through the seething freeways, we went
through a wrought-iron gateway fronting on Sunset Boulevard and were
immediately in very bosky mountain countryside – a compound, fenced off from
development and vulgarity, I think, about 40 years ago, of about 140,000 acres.
Mountain country, right inside the Los Angeles city limits, but the estates and
houses are so separated by generous rolling gardens and forests and even by
small canyons, that the effect of going to stay with such an old Angelino is
that of being some scoundrelly Pacific dictator, forced into exile. But, as
often happens with such, finding himself in a small palace overlooking gardens
and pools and marvellous semi-tropical trees and canna lily bushes and shasta
daisies and a cloudless sky and total silence.

Very strange and very congenial to deep meditation, but essentially you have
the feeling of being under house arrest, for if you should want a loaf of bread
or a newspaper or a shoe lace, it would be necessary to drive out down the
winding hills, out of the woods and the compound and, again, past the homes of
stars or lawyers or agents or whoever, and driving, say, four miles away to the
necessity of a shop.

On the way into exile, down on a leafy corner of Sunset, we passed a parked car
and, sure enough, the old sign, 'Stars' Homes Tour'. Still at it. 'But', said
my host, 'I don't think you'd be terribly excited, a different group.' I asked
who they might be. I recognised only one name and that was not because I don't
go to the movies as often as I used to, but because only about ten per cent of
all Hollywood movies are shot in Hollywood and, what with the jet plane and the
collapse long ago of the studio contract system, the big stars live all over
the place and if they're needed for filming at the remaining two studios, they
wing in for work from their homes in Switzerland or London or the Riviera,
northern California or wherever.

The general idea behind this talk when I began was to remark on the blessed
escape high up there in the Hollywood Hills from the burning issues and the
chronic smouldering issues and Washington's investigation of what is now being
simply called, in the serious papers as well as in Life, 'the mess in Iran'.
Now you could, of course, refuse to read a paper or listen to the radio or
watch television and shun your friends, but you could do that if you were
determined just as easily in a cottage in Norfolk. The fact is that unless
you're a moron or a deliberate hermit, there is no place to hide.

In the early days, in my early days in Los Angeles, the Los Angeles Times, the
only big city daily, could provide a rest of a sort from international affairs.
It was a predictable, rock-ribbed conservative, local sheet and so city-proud,
so intensely chauvinist that an old, droll, Hollywood screenwriter said, 'The
Los Angeles Times would never report Man Bites Dog. The headline would say, "LA
Man Bites LA Dog".'

Well, today, the Los Angeles Times is, at the least, the second-best newspaper
in America and has no superior that I know of in the English-speaking world for
its foreign news coverage. So, breaking from my meditation around the trees and
flowers, I did a quick read about the world, which took a couple of hours, and
then turned, inevitably, to the coverage of the mess in Iran.

There've been two striking changes. One, not so striking, is that there was for
a day or two last week a lull in the breadth and intensity of the newspaper and
television coverage. Nothing else took pride of place, but other things –
Soviet-American relations, the fighting in Nicaragua, the surgeon-general's
tough report on AIDS, the policy prospects of the new Congress – fought for
second place.

The lull did not last once the House Foreign Affairs Committee started its
hearings – open hearings and televised – alongside the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee's closed hearings. The new note was one struck by the White House. A
vicious outburst came from Mr Patrick Buchanan, the White House (that means the
president's) communications director – communications as in press, radio and
TV. Mr Buchanan blamed the press for overplaying the mess and making outrageous
comparisons with Watergate. And the president was not far behind. He talked
about the press as a school of sharks circling for the kill in bloodied waters.

I think it was a pity he said that. Of course, there will always be reporters
and papers that jump the gun on any story that has sensational possibilities,
but the press is not a regiment or a masonic lodge. It's a scattered company of
innumerable individuals, of all degrees of competence and incompetence, of good
faith and bad faith, and I think in fairness and seriousness, the best have
easily outweighed the worst.

Now that the Senate and the House have full-fledged committees calling every
relevant witness, from the secretary of state on down, it is from them that the
truth, however ugly, will come out. It's not the press that refused to testify.
The press has done no more than report a chain of events that, in the latest
two national polls, finds 76 per cent of the American people believing that the
mess has seriously damaged American relations with the rest of the world. And,
for the moment, more seriously, that finds 47 per cent, almost one American in
two, believing the president lied in professing not to know that the money from
the sale of arms to Iran had gone to the counter-revolutionaries in Nicaragua.

Sooner than later, the president must accept that Congress is charged to find
out those truths, if any, that violate or go beyond the president's
constitutional powers and beyond the general law.

So, back to the flowerbeds and the marvellous quiet trees and, as the night
comes on, the coyotes squealing in the hills like wounded cats.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP