No school prayers

The spring came into New York very balmily at the usual time, if not the usual
date. This tends to happen once every four years, a fact that was noticed and
deplored by the godly men who founded New England.

There is a record somewhere – and please don't ask me to synchronise the
dredging operations of my memory and of the Library of Congress – there's a
record somewhere of a fiery old New England divine who took the arrival of
spring on 20 March in leap years as sure proof that the devil was very busily
at work in the person of those humans who, as I remember his putting it, had
the irreverent audacity to be born on 29 February. They, apparently, were
responsible for upsetting the equinoxes and he warned us that these agents of
the devil were to be watched for the rest of their days, since they were
destined from birth to pretend to an age that was not truly theirs and to brew
mischief of one sort or another through their mortal lives how long soever.

Well, we all know people who for a time, at least, have pretended to an age
that was not theirs – the new Democratic Galahad, Gary Hart, being only the
latest to be found out – but that pretence has everything to do with vanity and
nothing to do with the calendar.

I have to say that I know two men, both then in their late fifties, who three
weeks ago celebrated their 14th and 15th birthdays, respectively. One is an
Englishman and the other is a New Zealander and I have to admit that they are
both wily birds, if not suspicious characters. The thought of the godly men,
the divine's pious lawyers who founded New England, must have come to mind
because in the past week, the people of the United States have been bemused and
their representatives in Congress obsessed by God – an interesting change in a
country which is so often thought of by foreign commentators as being either
too puritanical or too heathenish. What I'm talking about is the tremendous
to-do about the president's proposal for a constitutional amendment which would
permit – it would not compel – permit spoken prayer in the public schools,
that's to say the elementary and high schools maintained at public expense.

What private schools do, the schools whimsically known in Britain as public
schools, what they do is their own business and, plainly, in this country, the
so-called parochial schools, the privately maintained Catholic schools, always,
at some time of the days, either hear or recite a spoken prayer.

Since the children who go to the public schools here are drawn from the widest
possible ethnic range – that being the children of parents or grandparents from
all the countries of Europe and increasingly in our time from South and Central
America and now again from Asia, especially from Vietnam and Cambodia and Korea
– the children in the public schools of America subscribe to literally scores
of different religions. This recognition has always been the main practical
obstacle to any standard religious practice in the schools, but there's a
bigger obstacle put there not by accident, but by design. Put there by the 55
men who set up the American system of government, who sat in Philadelphia for
two months debating and writing and voting on, clause by clause, the
Constitution of the United States.

When it was finished, it took two years for the original 13 states to ratify
the constitution and appoint or elect their delegates to the first Congress. It
met in September 1789 and the first order of business was to submit 12
amendments to the constitution to clarify certain individual and state rights,
not put into the original document. They had very little trouble with the First
Amendment and many of the new congressmen were amazed they'd not anticipated
it.

It had to do mainly with freedom of the press and the part that religion was to
play in the new government. It is the article that has been the bone of
contention between the president's supporters and his opponents in the argument
over school prayer.

The First Amendment, then, says, in its first phrase, 'Congress shall make no
law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise
thereof'.

To many people outside this country that seemed, and still may seem, a very
early preoccupation when you come to define the rights of individuals, but the
old colonials were offering a cure for their own grievous experience. They'd
had over 150 years of religious intolerance among themselves and the New
Englanders reluctantly came to admit that their forefathers who had landed on
these shores to practise their own religion, after being persecuted for it in
England, had not come here to establish freedom of religion, they had too often
come to allow your freedom to practise my religion.

In other words, the new non-conformists were just as rigid in setting up a new
conformity as the Church of England had been in enforcing the old conformity.
Of course, there were states that did allow people to worship as they chose,
but the New England example, down a century or more, was frightening. The
Quakers, to take only one sect, suffered exile and persecution.

So, by 1789 with the colonies already populated with English Christians of
several sects, with German Lutherans, with French and other Catholics, with
Jews and with various unaffiliated sects, by 1789 it became clear that the way
to what they called domestic harmony, in the matter of religion, lay through a
plain statement that people could worship or not worship as they chose and that
the state, the United States of America, should have no official religion.
That's what the founding fathers had in mind by 'an establishment of religion'.

As a matter of daily practice, once the new system got under way, schools had
prayer or didn't have prayer according to the religious preference of most of
the inhabitants of a particular town or village. Only in the late nineteenth
century when millions of new immigrants, German and Irish and then a tidal wave
of Jews from Central and Eastern Europe, only when they all poured in did it
seem prudent not to have spoken prayers anywhere in the public schools.

By that time, in the flood tide of the turn-of-the-century immigrant, a
generation of old Americans began to wonder if prayer was gone from the
schools, what simple, secular ceremony could unite these various nationals and
in 1892 a weekly magazine in Boston called the Youth's Companion printed a
pledge of allegiance to the flag of the United States and proposed that it be
recited at morning assembly in the schools. This idea, by the way, had its
strongest appeal at the beginning of this century when the United States was
having its first and only fling at acquiring an empire in the Caribbean and in
the Pacific.

Well, it came to be and I don't know any American who went to public school who
did not regularly recite in the first hour of the school day this pledge: 'I
pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of America and to the
republic for which it stands, one nation, indivisible, with liberty and justice
for all'. It's a pledge that's long been required, also, to be spoken by
everyone on the day of acquiring American citizenship.

Now, an interesting point which I haven't heard mentioned in the congressional
debate or in the editorials of the newspapers, but I have heard and seen on the
telly, young people arguing in favour of the school prayer amendment by making
the point, why shouldn't we pray to God in public when every morning in school
we take the pledge of allegiance with the words 'under God' – that's the moment
when my wife, for instance, rises in indignation and says, 'Who says 'under
God'. When did that get added to the pledge?'

Well, to be precise, in 1954, an act of Congress added the words 'under God' so
that the pledge now goes: 'the republic for which it stands, one nation under
God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all'.

So President Reagan's proposal for a constitutional amendment was rooted in no
such historical survey, but in the simple belief that America needs to reaffirm
old godly value. It was rooted, also, in the unproved historical conviction
that school prayer is something the founding fathers would have been all for.
To the president and his supporters the prohibition of an establishment of
religion was a prohibition against – and only against – an 'official' American
religion.

Well, the question then came up, what sort of prayer would be suitable for this
rich, ethnic mixture of American school children? Who was to write it? Simple,
they said. It should not appeal to the god of any religious sect and children
who believed in no god could simply bow their heads and stay silent. Or,
indeed, they could leave the room.

The more this simple prescription was offered, the more complicated became the
possible family and individual problems – problems of ostracism, of being
mocked, of feeling different, of being seen as oddities. Plenty of parents were
willing, nay eager, to declare that if the thing went through, they would keep
their children at home and launch appeals to the courts, ultimately to the
Supreme Court. The whole proposal blew up a terrific dust storm of religious,
political, social and psychiatric argument.

Now, I ought to say that to make a constitutional amendment binding is a long
and arduous business. The founding fathers were careful to lay out a whole
landscape of hurdles for any man who wanted to have a political whim or
prejudice pass into the law of the land. First, the Senate must pass the
measure by a two-thirds majority, then the House by a two-thirds majority, then
it goes to the legislatures of the 50 states and three-quarters of them – 38 –
must pass and ratify it. It can take years.

Well, last week, after a rehearsal of much passion and a tangle of knotty
debate, the Senate came to vote on the school prayer amendment. In the result,
it fell 11 votes short of the necessary two-thirds majority. Even if it had
passed, the experts in the House gave it no chance there – a House controlled
by a Democratic majority with Democrats, on the whole, strongly opposed.

Incidentally, the polls showed that 80 per cent of the American people are in
favour of the amendment, but the founding fathers, in writing the constitution,
ignored the popular wisdom of the Gallup poll. The school prayer amendment is
put off for a year or two or more, perhaps for ever.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP