Ethics in government

Just before switching off the light the other night, I came on this sentence
written by the anonymous author of a scientific treatise published in 1776:
'All for ourselves and nothing for other people seems, in every age of the
world, to have been the vile maxim of the masters of Mankind.'

It's a glum, but a very common, thought and I suppose I should have passed it
over if I had not, in the previous day or two, been pouring over reports on the
widespread corruption in New York city government, on the prosecution of a
whole gang of Wall Street brokers for insider trading and on the impending
trial of Michael Deaver, once the president's closest adviser on charges of
violating the Ethics in Government Act.

This depressing bout of reportage came after I'd read the history of the
decline of a once greatly respected investment banking firm in a book whose
title is 'Greed and Glory on Wall Street'. Way back, it seems, in January 1986,
a New York city official, in charge of the parking tickets section of the
Department of Transportation, tried to commit suicide. He was charged with
somehow misappropriating parking fines. Two months later, he tried again to
take his life and succeeded. It was, I think, regarded by New Yorkers at the
time as an aberration, a random stain on the enlightened, vigorous and famously
honest administration of New York's mayor, Edward Koch.

Mr Koch, elected and re-elected as mayor in an unprecedented landslide, is one
of the most engaging figures in recent American politics and maybe I ought to
remind you that the mayoralty of New York city, of all the five boroughs, is
not a ceremonial office. It has been called, rightly, the second most powerful
executive job in the United States. Second only to that of the president.

At the end of his gutsy, funny and fascinating autobiography, Mayor Koch has
written, 'I have had responsibility for more than seven million people. The
city of New York includes nearly 200 different religions, races, nation groups,
ethnic backgrounds. I am the mayor of a city that has more Jews than Jerusalem,
more Italians than Rome, more Irish than Dublin, more blacks than Nairobi and
more Puerto Ricans than San Juan, and somehow or other, we have learned to live
with each other. It is a tremendous responsibility but there's no other job in
the world that compares with it. Every day is new. Every day is dangerous. I
love it.'

Until the past year, the overwhelming majority of New Yorkers who put him in
for a second term would have said, 'Amen' and there's still no doubt – very
little doubt anyway – about the mayor's personal honesty, but he's more
powerful than the president in appointing the people who administer affairs in
the five boroughs. Though their chief officers are elected, there are few
checks and balances on the mayor's power to pick whomever he wants for hundreds
of the most influential political jobs.

Well, instead of listing the growing catalogue of city officials who have left
their jobs in a hurry or been indicted for crimes or actually gone to jail,
let's go back to a scene in the autumn of 1981. It was a rousing ceremony and
one of which Mayor Koch was, at the time, rightly proud. President Reagan was
there on the lawn of the mayor's colonial house on the East River. The
president was happy to present to the mayor a cheque for $85 million; it was
the federal government's contribution to building a grand new highway on the
west side of Manhattan alongside the Hudson River. Never mind that the whole
project was later cancelled.

The president had, at his side, his secretary of labour. The mayor was
surrounded, naturally, by a circle of the city's political bigwigs. Well,
that's five and a half years ago. Today, 21 of those attending politicians have
either resigned under fire, been indicted or convicted on criminal charges of
corruption. The president's then secretary of labour, by the way, is awaiting a
criminal trial.

The same question is being aired about the mayor in connection with his corrupt
officials as about the president in connection with the Iran-Contra affair –
what did he know and when did he know it? At present, there's little doubt that
the mayor, as I say, is personally as honest as he has always claimed to be,
but the same fact dogs him as dogs President Reagan. He is responsible for
them.

You'll notice that I've used the word 'indicted' – a word as seldom used in
Britain as the word 'remanded' is here. I remember the time before the Second
War when a distinguished British journalist, the diplomatic correspondent of
The Times – THE Times – was on a first visit to this country.

I was assigned to take care of him and the second morning I visited him in his
hotel room, he tossed away the New York Times with a helpless gesture and said,
'I don't understand. Somebody is always being in-dic-ted in this country.' It's
perfectly true. Some official, politician, businessman, gangster, lawyer even,
is always appearing before a grand jury and when it has finished its secret
deliberations, if it finds that there's a case against the man, the accused,
which ought to come to trial, the grand jury brings in a true bill of
indictment.

The word, its practical use, its frequency in our headlines, all derive from
the continuing institution in this country of the grand jury – an English
invention at a time not much later than the Middle Ages. A judge, especially
one riding around on circuit, would come into a town, hear that Ned Tomkins was
accused of a crime. What more fair and sensible than to call together a number
– 16 was usual – of his neighbours, people who knew him? They could best decide
whether Ned was or was not likely to do such a thing. If they thought there was
a case, then the judge would send the man to trial.

The practice waned in England throughout the nineteenth century and in, I
believe, 1913, Lord Birkenhead, the Lord Chancellor, made a brilliant and
typically derisive attack on it. 'How splendid,' he wrote, 'how just, to take
at random 12 or 16 citizens out of a population of six or seven millions and
maintain the pretence that they were the knowing neighbours of the accused.
Time,' Birkenhead said, 'to abolish the grand jury once for all.' And 20 years
later, it was done. It was left to magistrates to decide if there was a case.

But the grand jury system was brought over to this country, took root and not
only flourishes, it is the essential preliminary to a criminal trial. A grand
jury comprises, in different states, between 16 and 23 jurymen. All right,
persons. They are called by the district attorney, the public prosecutor, and
he presents the evidence against. Their sessions are secret and to publish the
way things are going is, itself, a criminal offence but in this itching,
investigative age, some newspapers often relay damaging, if unattributed,
rumours. That's the first mischief.

The second is far worse. It's nothing less than the entirely proper publication
of a grand jury's findings. Once a true bill has been handed down and a person
has been indicted, inevitably – especially if the subject is a public figure –
the fact of the indictment and the list of the charges are front-page headline
news, so that a man indicted is at once presumed to be a man carrying a smoking
gun. He is, in the general view, half guilty and from then on, as many an
indicted person has bemoaned, he has to prove his innocence.

And yet, all that an indictment means is that there is a case to be made, no
more. The man is innocent, if suspect. Time and again, when a person comes
through the following trial and is acquitted, his public reputation has
suffered so badly from the airing of the charges, that he's lucky to recover
his old life and restore his career.

I imagine that nobody in public life today has more bitter cause to resent the
publicity and the stigma that go with an indictment than Mr Michael Deaver –
only a couple of years ago, the closest of presidential aides and friends and
now a man who, however his trial comes out, has seen his career in ruins. When
Mr Deaver voluntarily left the White House to earn a little more money for
himself and his family, he went into the public relations business, a very
common practice of former executive assistants. Common, because it's natural
that their potential clients should assume that they have important connections
and can carry weight with people in government.

Mr Deaver soon built up a very influential and profitable business representing
foreign governments as well as independent clients. Among them was the
government of Canada. Since he left the White House, Mr Deaver has been
Canada's best, most forceful, spokesman on behalf of having the United States
do something radical to reduce the plague of acid rain that falls on Canada
from America's industrial Midwest.

Unfortunately Mr Deaver started his advocacy too soon. There is an act of
Congress called the Ethics in Government Act, passed after Watergate which
forbids former members of the executive branch to lobby for anybody until one
year after they have left their government post. Mr Deaver was indicted for
perjury by a grand jury which says he lied in saying he had not started to
lobby within the grace period of one year.

There's surely a very fine line between lobbying and promising to lobby and
winking at the hint of lobbying later on. Mr Deaver will tread that fine line
in his trial.

For the moment, I can only say that if other democratic countries had a similar
act, I suspect that half the former Cabinet ministers and a lot of ambassadors
would be behind bars.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP