Americans stay at home

Blazing but balmy days in the 70s, the existence of clouds long forgotten, the
for-s-ith-i-ya – and the fors-eye-thia – suddenly bursting in showers
everywhere, the wary conviction that the winter is dead and gone. I say 'our'
wary conviction because the only really bad blizzard, we, in and around New
York, have had in recent years came on 7 April three years ago, about a week
after the farmers had taken down their snow fences.

All this splendid weather – the atmosphere is dry and clear as the fall – makes
one (one being me) say, 'Forget Gaddafi and the terrorists and get down to the
serious business of the ageing back swing'. I went down the island this past
week to greet our pro who's back from his winter job in Florida and is busy
reseeding the greens and seeing that they've carted away all the trees uprooted
by last September's hurricane. He was doing this when he was not busy telling
me to get off the right leg sooner and lead with the body.

Enough! Other people with other obsessions are busy riffling through their
flower catalogues. Others are wishing they'd been present to see Boris Becker
beat Ivan Lendl for the first time. The fishermen are out in their little
boats, casting for an early run of weakfish. The newspaper today has six new
recipes for cold soup. Central Park is humming with the drone of electric saws
pruning the dead branches. Out on the meadows of the park, the small fry are
winding up and practising the motions, the peculiar unique motions, of the
all-American ballet which is known as baseball.

People who don't normally take much interest in tennis are saying, 'Whatever
happened to John McEnroe?' He hasn't played since January and even his father
says he doesn't know when he'll start up again. 'John', he says, 'has personal
problems.'

It all reminds me of the time, the balmy spring days, long ago – a little later
in the year, as I recall, in England – when my father and I stopped worrying
about the war debt due the United States and began to fasten every morning on
Neville Cardus's cricket reports in the Manchester Guardian and wonder whether
Hobbs' days was done and would the incorrigible clown, Cecil Parkin, make the
English team.

On the way back along Long Island, we went past a thoroughbred farm as
beautiful and trim as anything north of Kentucky and, shortly after dawn, they
had the mares out there and the little foals trotting along as close as
kittens. All this renewal of life which the heedless young take for granted,
but which gives a wonderful lift to the winter-bound oldsters, is all very well
but I'm aware that there must be listeners who, poor retarded souls, take no
interest and have never taken any interest in any sort of sport.

I'm thinking of what my old newspaper, edited for I think 57 years by a man so
unsporting, so grave and splendidly serious that he looked like God, I'm
thinking of what he called 'the well-informed man'. In those days, a
well-informed woman was, if she existed, a freak.

What does the well-informed man or woman want or need to know about America
today? This week, that is. Well, I regret to say that when the enormous red
ball of the sun sinks over the reservoir and leaves us with a sky like the
burning of Toledo and when the lights come on and the ice begins to tinkle and
it's time for the telly, there is plenty to agitate the calmest of all
well-informed persons.

And, just now, there's one thing fretting an awful lot of people and that is
airplane terrorism and security. It springs from – at least it renews – the
continuing row about Gaddafi and the American Sixth Fleet. I said last time
that the first declared aim of the administration was to prove that the Gulf of
Sidra was within international waters and was not the private lake of Colonel
Gaddafi. Then, since the despatch of 30 warships, including two aircraft
carriers, seemed like a rather elaborate way of making a point in international
law, the administration said the manoeuvres were done to teach the colonel a
lesson, to persuade or force him to desist from sponsoring terrorism.

I had a talk the other evening with an old friend of mine, an airline pilot
who, sitting around for the weather briefing at his base airport, had expressed
the opinion that the Sixth Fleet's manoeuvres, and even sending a couple of
ships over the line of death, was a mad exercise more likely to provoke
terrorism than to squelch it. His colleagues turned on him. 'What are you?'
they complained, 'Some kind of pinko?'

Well, among the 67 per cent of Americans who backed the president on the
exercise, there must be many macho males who feel the same way, who agree in
however vague a manner that the president is right in meaning to meet force
with force.

And this led an international lawyer to chime in and say that international law
does, indeed, require nations to defend their rights against wrongdoers, but it
does not require anyone to provoke a wrong, and that the immemorial practice is
for a nation to lodge a formal protest against any assertion of a private sea
and if the point needs to be stressed, quote, 'the symbolic passage of a single
naval vessel would suffice'.

'If,' said this learned man, who's a professor of international law, 'if
international law demanded forceful exercise of legal rights as the price for
preserving them, blood and destruction will be a daily occurrence on disputed
borders.'

I went on to say last time that the administration, getting very little
sympathy from its allies on the international law exercise, then admitted that
the main aim was to deter Gaddafi from further terrorism. This assertion was,
to say the least, confused by a series of orders to every American embassy and
to American officials all over the world to brace themselves with tighter
security against a wave of terrorism the exercises had meant to deter.

So, now, after the event, there's a new rationale. The administration has not
announced it but some sources in the White House and members of congressional
committees who are well-informed on these matters now say that the naval
manoeuvres were undertaken to encourage the ranking officers of the Libyan
military to overthrow Gaddafi, to say among themselves that their leader's
terrorism was coming at too high a price and only heightened the threat of an
attack from Egypt.

Apparently, the administration has tried several times to persuade the
Egyptians to attempt a joint military effort to oust the colonel. The Egyptians
have so far refused, but the idea is that if the United States mounted an
outright attack on Libyan bases – never mind the law of the sea – the Libyan
military command would say, 'We've had enough!'

Well, we can only accept the purity of these newly announced motives and wait
and see. And this brings us, obviously, to the bomb that exploded in the TWA
jet that was flying on Wednesday from Rome to Athens. And the claim by yet
another splinter terrorist group, the Arab Revolutionary Cells, that they'd
done it in retaliation for 'American arrogance', is the way they put it, in
invading the Gulf of Sidra.

No official here is accepting this claim at face value. Practically any
terrorist, having an American for a target, would now be likely to use the
Libyan clash as a pretext, but the effect on the American people is naturally
to see, or fear, cause and inevitable effect – anyway, to take a renewed and
increasingly frustrated concern for terrorism anywhere and, especially, in the
Middle East and in Europe.

The travel agents here who normally find this to be their busiest season for
summer bookings admit – and they obviously hate to do it – that American travel
to Europe could be down this year by as much as 40 per cent. And people who are
on the fence about going to Europe are tending to drop off on the American
side. That's to say to travel in America. They're all the more persuaded to do
this by the colossal drop in the price of petrol.

When I left Long Island at the end of last fall, regular petrol was $1.35,
$1.40 a gallon. I filled up the other day at 79 cents a gallon. This has
brought great cheer to the agents who deal in domestic travel and compensating
groans from the overseas' agents. The airlines that fly the Atlantic routes
report a similar slump and enough of them are in financial trouble to feel that
this is a new and devastating blow.

This led the other evening to a long and frustrated discussion on television
between a whole range of experts – travel people, top men in the pilots' union,
federal security experts, airport security managers and so on. The pilots of 60
nations are meeting in London next week to go into the whole knotty mess.

The upshot of the TV discussion was that every nation will have to do much
stricter screening of airport maintenance and catering employees, the ground
personnel, on the guess that the planting of most bombs is an inside job, that
pre-boarding security must extend to the checking of everything that goes into
the hold, that it may be necessary, if there's more and more airplane
terrorism, for several nations to band together to isolate by way of banning –
aviation, trade, banking, marine traffic – the nations most responsible, for
instance, Libya, Syria, Iran.

As an afterthought, they conceded that the screening of ground personnel would
be a Herculean task, since in the Middle East, certainly, they include
fundamentalist Muslims, Palestinians, religious sects and splinter groups of
every sort.

Finally, their sad conclusion was that if somebody is determined enough to get
a bomb aboard, he'll do it. There is no longer any way to guarantee risk-free
travel.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP