Labor Day parade

Ten... ten, twenty years ago, there would have been no question at this time of
year what we were going to talk about – an American festival almost as
sacrosanct as Washington's Birthday or Thanksgiving – Labor Day, the first
Monday in September.

It's still a legal holiday in all the states but the reason for it, how it came
to be, has dimmed down the past two decades so that I'd guess there are
millions of children who know it only as the last holiday of summer, the day
before the schools reopen.

It used to be celebrated with huge rallies and parades in all the big cities
and they all had the purpose of commemorating the once-revered but now
forgotten name of Peter McGuire who founded, in this city, the carpenters'
union. He was, by the way, a socialist – something we do not mention in our
fond recollections.

Just 100 years ago, McGuire proposed to the New York City Central Labor Union,
which was an affiliation of the growing unions in several trades, that the
first Monday in September should be designated as an annual labour day. The
city responded and the first Labor Day parade was held here on 5 September
1882. Five years later, a Pacific Coast state, Oregon, where the timber grows
high and the lumber-men first organised, Oregon was the first to declare the
day a public holiday. Within the next seven years, 31 states, mostly states
with developed or burgeoning industries and therefore with embryo craft or
industrial unions, followed this example, and in 1894 President Cleveland
signed a bill proclaiming Labor Day a national holiday.

In the early years, the parades were long and carried an air and posters of
defiance. Unions were suspect in many parts of the country. In the 1880s
especially, there was much violence growing out of strikes for, usually, better
working conditions. It's almost impossible, today, to credit the genesis of the
notorious Haymarket riot in Chicago – a simple, to us, demand for an eight-hour
day. Several rebellious workmen were shot and an editor, unfortunately the
editor of an anarchist paper, called for a mass protest meeting. The mayor of
the city, anticipating the worst, concentrated the unheard of number of 200
police, but the speeches, though eloquent, were mild and the mayor went home.

This provided the police with what they took to be the signal to disperse the
rally. They ordered the crowd to break up, when somebody – nobody ever found
out for sure who – threw a bomb. Seven police were killed and in the subsequent
riot, many people were injured. The 1880s in this country had the wrong climate
for staging impartial investigations. Eight men, all dubbed on wobbly evidence
to be anarchists, were convicted of conspiracy. Four were hanged and the unions
retreated like frightened rabbits from the idea of an eight-hour day.

So, for years, Labor Day from the union point of view seemed to be the day for
throwing down a gauntlet to the employers and the general public. The public
responded either by staying away or looking on warily, as you might at a duel.
And then, down the years, organised labour became a force, a respectable force
and the parades shed their defiance and their numbers, shrinking to small
meetings of workers and modest parades; sometimes no parade at all.

In the 1930s, in the pit of the Great Depression, Labor Day warmed up again as
a recruiting ceremony. Both the National Craft Union and the National
Industrial Union, which didn't merge until 1955, claiming strength or survival
only in union. There were some bloody scenes then, too, especially in the steel
and automobile cities. But since the Second War, when unemployment nosedived
out of sight, Labor Day, its protests, its rallying cries, its flamboyance,
have dwindled to almost nominal ceremonies which pay the passing tribute of a
bow in the direction of that doughty symbol, the American working man.

You'd guess from this little history that the country was a nation of workers
with their dues paid up and a calendar marked every other year with a reminder
of the day the old contract lapses. Well, the fact is that while the American
labour force is officially calculated at 106 millions, only 24 millions belong
to a union. In other words, only one employed American in four has a union
card. At one time, it was more like two in four. I've not seen any thorough
investigation of why this is so.

But things were different this Labor Day. The New York Times had a front-page
picture on Tuesday morning which, at a glance, looked like a reprint of a
photograph you'd have seen in any big-city newspaper during the 1930s. It
showed women striding along Fifth Avenue, carrying placards saying, 'Jobs Not
Handouts' and 'Protect the Needy Not the Greedy'. These women were members of
the most powerful textile union, the garment workers, which can tell a stormy
history in its early days.

For 90 years or so, New York City has been the capital of the garment industry.
It became so through the enormous influx over the turn of the century of poor,
city-bred Jews from Central and Eastern Europe, of young women especially,
whose only saleable skill was what they could sew with their needles. At that
time, half the piecework was peddled out to the immigrant's home. The rest was
done in sweatshops and, once again, it took a catastrophe to rouse the public
conscience, or even the public's awareness that its clothes were being made
either by single girls in garrets or by teams of girls working 12-hour days,
six days a week, in airless sweatshops.

Certainly only an occasional reporter, on this subject a photographer, could
remind people that the raw material for much of New York's manufactured goods
was produced by ten-year-old spinners in the cotton mills of the Carolinas. In
1911, a solid, grimy, blouse factory, right here in the city, caught fire. It
was so constructed, with two exits only leading to one staircase that 140
people, nearly all of them women, lost their lives. The survivors went on
strike and the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union was born.

Well, there was a new note struck by the garment workers this year. They were
not protesting working conditions. Their posters stressed, 'American-made
fashions for American maids' and 'Made in USA'. They were talking in this
shorthand about the shirts and slacks and blouses from Hong Kong and Singapore
and Thailand that are flooding and depressing the American market as Italian
shoes, long ago, depressed the shoe manufacturing towns, and as, most grimly
today, Japanese mainly, and German, motorcars have produced the highest
unemployment since the Depression in Detroit, the automobile maker of the
nation.

In New York last Monday, the parade started in mid morning and didn't end till
the late afternoon. By then, 400,000 workers had marched by. It was the
biggest, the longest Labor Day parade that even veteran union leaders could
remember. The garment workers were only the most conspicuous of the army of
marchers because, I suppose, we know that this is their capital and we look to
see them, but they were preceded or followed by electricians, glaziers, bakers,
leather workers, steel workers, schoolteachers, nurses, furniture makers,
printers and by squads of people you would not expect to see in a labour parade
– actors, bartenders, ballet dancers and government workers.

It was a peaceable parade, boisterous but merry, with 150 marching bands and
Mayor Koch was there in a hard hat, waving like a victorious general in a
ticker-tape parade, waving and grinning even as placards floated by announcing,
'Shame on Koch' and 'Dump Koch' – the inimitable Ed Koch interpreted these
signs as a form of affection. 'It's like a Yankee ball game,' he said, 'they
boo you but they love you.'

Drowned out by the bands and the razzle-dazzle was the most obvious reason why
this parade was bigger than ever and presented, as I imagine other parades in
other cities did, presented a warning, at least, to the Reagan administration.

In spite of the administration's insistence that the present ten per cent
unemployment is a growing pain on the way to an era of new productivity and
more jobs provided by a revitalised private sector, working people in the lower
and middle classes have got it into their heads, whether rightly or wrongly,
that in fact this administration has lifted the tax burden off the rich and the
comfortable to the middle class and the poor. And the people who are
capitalising on this feeling are the leaders of organised labour.

We have only two months to go to the congressional elections and one startling
figure that concerns them is the new imbalance between contributions made by
corporations and business to candidates for House and Senate seats and a sudden
upsurge in contributions by the unions through their so-called political action
committees.

If you'd asked most good political reporters six months ago, they'd have told
you, I think, that what with the recession and the heavy unemployment in the
basic industries, labour, organised labour, simply wouldn't be able to afford
to make sizeable contributions to politicians running for office. It's not so.
Business has increased its contributions to electioneering campaigns by between
five and ten per cent. The unions have somehow managed to increase their
contributions by close to 30 per cent to men and women of their choice, and
their choice is almost overwhelmingly to Democrats. Which must mean that union
labour, which broke into two camps in the election of 1980, is unifying again
under its traditional banner, the Democratic party.

Most political analysts by now are agreed that a decisive turn in the 1980
presidential election was the rebellion of union members against the advice of
their leaders to vote for Mr Carter – 43 per cent of the voters from union
householders went for Reagan. If all these new signs and portents mean what
they say, then something is about to happen which, during the comparative calm
of government-labour relations in the past two years, we've overlooked.

The sleeping giant of organised labour is organising once again for political
action. This time, agin the government.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP