TWA hostages released

Well, they finally held a birthday celebration in San Francisco and when I read
about it, a little paragraph tucked away in some paper, a name came darting
into my mind from nowhere – the name was Walter B. Pitkin. I can't track him
down and I hope I'm right in saying he was the author, years and years ago, of
a book called 'Life Begins at Forty'. It was a thumping bestseller because,
well, who doesn't want to be told that when you touch the crest of the hill and
see the dark valley below, that you're actually still on your way up?

I hope it's not patronising to say that it's a kind of title that appeals to
Americans more, I should guess, than to any other people. It taps the
underground springs of optimism of a people who, in spite of all their woes,
can't help believing that today is better than yesterday and intend tomorrow to
be better still. Now this, any wise old European will tell you, is naive but
some of the great American achievements have come from believing it.

Men were never meant to fly. Is that so? said the Wright brothers. You could
search the earth from now till doomsday, Thomas Edison was told, and you'll
never find a filament that will burn continuously in a vacuum. I forget how
many he tried from how many countries – he certainly tested 6,000 vegetable
fibres and, in desperation, tried everything from cork and hemp and lemon peel
and even a hair from a friend's beard. He succeeded at last with a strand of a
Japanese bamboo.

To a certain type of American, all you have to say is, 'Surgery has reached its
peak, you'll never transplant a human heart'. Whereupon, teams in Texas, in
Missouri and Massachusetts go at it. Of course, the people who eventually do
perform what we'd thought of as miracles know that they take iron
determination, unwavering skill and enormous patience. I suppose I'm thinking
of the millions of the rest of us who yearn to believe that miracles can come
cheap, that the popular wisdom is wrong.

For instance, another book published some dozen more years ago was a runaway
seller on the basis of its title alone. It was called 'The Drinking Man's
Diet', which challenges you at once to believe that you can go on drinking in
the regular way, eat most of what you like and not put on weight.

Similarly, 'Life Begins at Forty', though it might sound to some old codgers
like a whistle in a graveyard, to many more people was a clarion call defying
the wisdom of our fathers. What's all this rubbish about going downhill after
forty?

Well, as I say, they held a birthday party of sorts in San Francisco the other
day – they, being various assembled delegates and veteran survivors of the
United Nations' first organising conference in San Francisco which opened on 25
April 1945 and ended on 26 June with the formal signing of the charter by the
50 founding member nations.

Incidentally, the conference was very nearly scuttled when the Russians broke
their promise to allow the Poles to elect their own government and insisted on
seeking their own hand-picked Polish government. This hassle was not allowed to
delay the signing of the charter, but Poland – the Poland the Russians wanted –
came along later and signed in October.

Well, it's surely not cynical to believe that, for the United Nations, life
positively does not begin at forty. Many of us who were there and are still
ticking over, certainly are, were, not more naive or starry-eyed than statesmen
or journalists of today, but I don't think any of us, in our most depressed or
realistic moments, ever foresaw that the United Nations, far from becoming the
actual superior world force it was meant to be, would be for so long defied,
ignored and finally pushed aside in all matters of real politique, of the
actual contests of power.

It's usual now in memoirs of people who went through the Second War and beyond
to recall San Francisco '45 as a period of honeymoon euphoria. In fact, the men
in power from all around the world, the best political brains available and the
best journalists from many countries were there. The press corps, I recall,
numbered around 600 in the beginning, though at the end, after nine weeks,
there was a little party of what we called the survivors – the press that had
stayed on and worked on. There were about 20 of us.

And I remember now, with startling clarity, one young man with press
credentials who didn't write anything, but he hoped to and he'd gratefully
accepted a job as a copy boy. He ran other men's copy to the cable companies,
pending his emergence as a real writing journalist. He was a string bean of a
Bostonian, so thin he was almost invisible in profile and he was keen. He was
an eager beaver. He thought being a journalist was just about as glamorous a
life as you could wish.

He was pointed out, dashing here and there, with copy in his hand, because he
was the son of a very rich and shrewd American who had been in one of
Roosevelt's Cabinets. The boy's name was John F. Kennedy. About, I should say,
well, actually 15 years later, he was President of the United States and, down
in Palm Beach, when his father's house became the winter White House, this
memory was put to him – the time he burned to be a journalist, to be at least
on the fringes of power. He smiles his wry smile, 'Ah,' he said, 'I decided
long ago writing about events was not for me. I wanted to be where the action
is.'

That phrase is by now a hackneyed idiom but it was new then and it set apart
two types of people. The ones who want to observe events and write about them
and the people who want to make them.

I wondered, when the fate of the hostages was being traded back and forth
between Israel and Syria and Mr Berri in Washington, I wondered then how
Kennedy or any aspiring president would feel about the action today. It's far
more harrowing, more riddled with frustration than they could have imagined.
It's hand-wringing inaction.

There was, incidentally, a moment there, a little glimmer of hope, that the
United Nations would vault into the saddle that was made for it in San
Francisco, to be the prime, the only, arbiter of all such conflicts and crises.
A friend of mine called up and said, 'I see Brian Urquhart is out there, he
might, after all, be the man'. This was a heartening moment. Brian Urquhart is
probably the most dogged, the most unyielding, the most dedicated and sweating
officer of the United Nations there's ever been, as a sort of permanent under-
or deputy secretary-general. He's been there for, I guess, the whole 40 years
or nearly 40.

It was proud news, but it was wrong. The man out there was his assistant and he
quickly denied that he was in Lebanon to help in any way the resolution of the
hostage problem. He was there on some undefined United Nations business of
helping to secure borders. So the little glimmer shone and went out.

And, in the meantime, we sat and watched those grim press conferences arranged
by the captors. You know, the ones in which the men said they were well, they
were well housed, well taken care of – all the time, an official captor or
keeper was sitting at their side, nodding his head sagely as if these thoughts
were springing spontaneously from the hostages. Of course, they weren't and
when they finally got back home, some of them said, 'What did you expect? There
we were and they set this thing up as a wonderful proof for all the world to
see that they were kind and compassionate'. On the contrary, we later heard.

And you had to feel sympathy for President Reagan going out to Andrews Air
Force Base to welcome them with the knowledge of the murdered navy diver and
the seven who are still held somewhere. And away from the relatives and the
cheering crowds, the president has to go on saying things like, 'We demand' and
'We insist' and 'We're making perfectly clear' and 'We must not yield' and
'There was no deal'.

Well, of course, there was. The United States heroically kept its mouth shut
and, meanwhile, sent – had to send – begging signals to Israel to exchange
those 700-odd Lebanese for the 39 Americans. As a veteran of the San Francisco
UN conference put it – the plump but indestructible James Reston of the New
York Times – 'All the president can do is talk tough, act soft and go on
television and tell them that next time, boy, they'd better beware.' That is
cruel but it's true. What else can he do?

I read in a British paper that Americans, plural, are threatening all sorts of
invasions and bombardments. I've never read anything to do with this crisis
that was so mischievous and silly. There is one small cock-eyed, right-wing
group that goes about, while nobody listens, demanding – it's always demanding
– instant retaliation, but across the whole range of American opinion, which of
course mixes bitterness with joy at the hostages' return, the general approval
of the way it was handled is very obvious.

President Reagan's popularity, after the resolution, is close to 60 per cent.
That's an amazing figure when you consider that the difficult and, of course,
much longer handling of the Tehran hostages cost Jimmy Carter his re-election,
but you can't help thinking how maddening and frustrating the action is these
days for any head of government.

I have a friend deeply interested in politics all his life and always
thoughtful about who he votes for for president. He's an old man of an
invincibly optimistic temperament. He told me the other day that 'Life Begins
at Forty' was nonsense. He'd just had a birthday. 'Life,' he said, 'begins at
eighty, but don't tell anybody who isn't feeling well.' He did add, thinking
about the appalling strains of the presidency, 'that you have to be unbalanced
to want it. In 1988,' he said, 'I'm going to vote for any man who doesn't want
to be president.'

By the way, there's an interesting bit of Americana in this whole nightmare
that is seen on television. Everybody takes it for granted and nobody says
where it started. It's the custom, which was followed in every town that had a
hostage being held, of tying yellow ribbons around trees and telegraph poles
and the like. It started during the American Civil War in Texas, which had
acquired a song, 'The Yellow Rose of Texas'.

A new song sprang up, 'Around her neck she wore a yellow ribbon, she wore it
for her lover who was far, far away.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP