Invasion of Grenada

During the past many months it seems to me there's hardly a newspaper or a
magazine, certainly there's not a television network, and not only in America,
that has been laggard in its preparations to commemorate the anniversary of the
assassination of John F. Kennedy 20 years ago next 22 November.

I've given up trying to analyse this morbid preoccupation. Superficially, you
could say that Kennedy's presidency has taken on an heroic glow, the Camelot
legend, even an air of confidence and serenity which is absolutely at variance
with the facts. The appalling debacle of the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba – a
secret plan, unauthorised by Congress and, in the result, a public disaster.
And then the almost unbearable tension of the Soviet threat to Berlin.

Most memorable and most frightening of all, the appalling few days – 21 years
ago this weekend if you want to wallow in an anniversary – when we appeared to
be on the verge of a nuclear showdown until the news came through on a shining
Sunday morning that the Russians had decided not to run the naval blockade that
Kennedy had set up in the Caribbean along all the sea approaches to Cuba.

As always happens these days, some magazines could not wait for the anniversary
itself. They chose to get the jump on their rivals by putting our their Kennedy
memorial issue this week, just too early to draw the striking moral that would
have made Kennedy's gamble in the Caribbean very relevant indeed to what has
happened there this week.

Well, it's hard to know where to begin with this now burning issue. I'll begin
with the vivid memory that came to me last Tuesday – a memory which by a
bizarre coincidence had to do with Kennedy's death and the turbulent weeks that
followed it. A friend of mine, an old American navy man, guessing quite rightly
that I was pretty fagged out from a couple of months of covering the Dallas
horror and the turmoil of the early days of the Johnson administration, he
called me and proposed a holiday on an island not much known to Americans, the
perfect place to get away from it all. We flew down there. He was right. It was
a volcanic island of great beauty, a mountainous, small island, geologically I
suppose quite unlike its nearest neighbour which, by contrast, looks like
Sussex with sugar cane.

There was a five-mile round horseshoe bay, fringed by white sand and a nearly
transparent ocean of green water. There was no industry. The people were
easygoing and placid, the British Raj was in relaxed control. I remember at a
party, the jolly, not subservient, but courteous behaviour of a black man in
Bermuda shorts – a great pal of his overlords, the chief I believe at the time
of the local labour party, a man named Eric Gairy. What my old salt liked best
about the island was the behaviour, the attitude of the natives. 'What I like
about these people,' he said, 'is they are content and reasonable and
courteous.' 'You mean,' I suggested, 'they know their place?' 'Well, yes! If
you like!' he said.

The only other snatch of that conversation I remember was my possibly
sententious remark that if these people hadn't yet heard of the Reverend Martin
Luther King, they were going to. Need I say that we're talking about the
Grenadians and that they did hear the King message, though they got it not from
his lips or the text of his speeches, but from the way in which those speeches
and those convictions could be reported and exploited by the Russian and the
Cuban radio.

Well, as all the world knows, just before dawn on Tuesday morning, 1900
American marines and airborne soldiers invaded the tiny island of Grenada in an
action which, again, had not been authorised by Congress, which had been just
barely announced ahead of time to the allies and which confronted the British
prime minister with the acute embarrassment of begging an American president
not to invade a member, however self-governing or ungoverned, of the British
Commonwealth.

The first announcement from the White House was that it had been done to
protect American citizens, most of them medical students, and to help restore
democratic institutions on the island. We heard an hour or so later that the
first wave of Americans had been followed by about 300 soldiers, natives of
Jamaica, Barbados, Dominica, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent, Antigua and Saint
Kitts and Nevis and when we wondered what they were doing there, it was
explained that the Americans had not gone in on their own initiative but at the
urgent plea of something called the OCS – the Organisation of Caribbean States
– which, even though most of us had never heard of it, is a going protective
association of most of the chain of tiny islands that run down through the
Antilles from Jamaica to Trinidad and the coast of Venezuela.

This assurance that the United States was coming to the help of several small
and comparatively helpless states, understandably alarmed by the Marxist
overthrow and murder of a prime minister and Cabinet members on a neighbouring
island, this assurance put the invasion in a new light. However, within 24
hours it was a pretty murky light. When Mr Caspar Weinberger, the Secretary of
Defense, came next day to brief the press on what had happened and why, he was
reminded that the United States is a signatory to the United Nations Charter
and also to the charter of the Organisation of American States which grants the
right of self-defence to any member against external aggression but absolutely
forbids external interference in an internal rebellion. At an emergency meeting
of the OAS, the United States was reminded of this ban in very lively language.

Mr Weinberger, to give some legal authority to the American invasion, had to
fall back on the treaty of alliance of that little-known Organisation of
Caribbean States. By the time the press faced him, some people had had time to
bone up on that obscure treaty which was signed in 1981 by the member states
including Grenada, at that time already under a Marxist leader, Mr Bishop. The
treaty says that all the members of the OCS are bound by the United Nations
Charter and by the charter of the Organisation of American States which
prohibit military force, except in self-defence against an aggressor. The
Caribbean treaty explicitly allows its members to join together against
external aggression and then, only by unanimous vote of its members. In this
case, there was no unanimity. Obviously, Grenada did not vote to be invaded by
a non-signatory nation.

So, the legal pretext is very shaky. There have to be real reasons for such a
peremptory move and one which is dangerously easy to interpret as an exercise
of might in the Soviet manner, the sort of thing we deplore in Afghanistan as
only one example. The legal expert of the State Department gamely maintained
that some members of the Caribbean alliance felt that the brutal overthrow of
Mr Bishop's Marxist régime by an even more Marxist leader, General Austin,
presented a threat of external aggression, presumably by the new Grenadian
régime, to them.

The Reagan administration has not acted on this presumption though and says it
has no direct information that Cuba or the Soviet Union was behind the bloody
overthrow of the Bishop régime. But now, I believe we're coming down to the
cause, which is one of fear about the possible or probable strategy of the
Soviet Union and Cuba throughout the Caribbean.

For at least two years, the Reagan administration has watched the strengthening
of ties between Grenada and both the Russians and the Cubans and has seen, in
this alliance, something quite different from, and maybe more menacing, than
the revolutions in Cuba and in Nicaragua. The official word from the White
House is that the decision to invade was made last Friday evening.

On that morning, there appeared in the Wall Street Journal the most powerful
expression we've had of the kind of misgivings that drove the President to act
as he did. Briefly, the Journal says that under Mr Bishop Grenada was well on
its way to becoming a Soviet proxy base. The Russians were building a port as
well as the famous two-mile long airstrip. Libyans were recruiting students for
training.

Why the fuss about this speck in the ocean? For starters, it's right on the
deep-water channel through which more than 50 per cent of the Caribbean oil
shipping goes. Its new airport is dandy for the Cuban supply route to Angola.
It is within easy range of the Venezuelan oil fields. Above all, the coup shows
an amazing surge of Soviet Cuban boldness. Cuba and Nicaragua are one thing.
There, at least, the revolutions had local roots. A miniature Afghanistan in
the Caribbean is quite another. The Monroe Doctrine may not mean much these
days but we're in sad shape indeed if the Soviets think they can prop up an
island version of the Babrak Karmal Afghanistan régime in our own backyard.

In other and sharper words, it appears that the administration, thinking back
to Kennedy's missile crisis, was convinced it was nipping in the bud the more
gradual growth of a similarly threatening Soviet base in the Western hemisphere
and one that, on that speck of an island, would not be noticed.

If you hold that conviction which President Reagan holds more passionately than
anyone, then, questions of legality, of the right to impose democracy on
somebody else at the point of a sword, of not attempting preliminary
negotiations or putting out a warning, of, you might say, the very un-American
nature of this military move, they are questions likely to be brushed aside.

But it's plain already that the press, furious at the unheard-of precedent of
being denied their traditional right in a military manoeuvre to inform the
people, neither the press nor the Congress, rousing itself from the torpor that
follows from being in shock, mean to let those very serious questions go
a'begging.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP