Reaganomics 'a gimmick'

With the newspapers stuffed and the telly jammed with last-minute surveys,
polls, meditations and guesses about next Tuesday's congressional elections, I
think this is a good time to remember a splendid postcard sent to me by an old
English lady years ago in the autumn of a presidential election year. 'Instead
of telling us who might win in November,' she wrote, 'would it not be better to
wait and tell us who did win?' It would be better.

However, I must tell you about an incident which would have been red meat to
Charles Dickens or Evelyn Waugh which would terrify everybody who has ever
helped in boosting a political candidate and which will bring wicked joy to the
rest of us who are finally exhausted by the trickery and the blatant
simplifications of the 30-second political commercials with which every
candidate, who can afford their shocking price, is peppering our television
screens.

On the eve of an election, there comes a moment to every candidate and his
advisers, a moment of fatigue tinged with anxiety, when they all pray for some
last-minute revelation, scandal which will swing things their way. You don't
have to be very old to remember or have read about the Zinoviev letter, a
letter supposedly written by a Russian Bolshevik giving secret instructions to
British Communists which was published in the British press before the election
of 1924. The letter was a fake but nobody was sure of it till it was too late.
It succeeded in throwing out the first Labour government.

This weekend, there will undoubtedly be a spate of planted rumours around the
country accusing candidates of every sort of unrevealed shenanigan. The White
House, we must believe, is above such knavery but it must have been a great
moment in the White House last week when suddenly it was announced that the
Nobel Prize for economics had been awarded to a professor at the University of
Chicago, one George J. Stigler.

Now, consider what the president and his economic advisers must have been
pondering when this word came in. Another 680,000 in one week signed up for
unemployment benefits, a parade of economists before Congress's joint economic
committee was testifying either that the economy is in stagnation or that it
would get worse or that there'd be only the most excruciatingly slow recovery
throughout 1983, maybe 1984 and 5. The president kept pointing with dizzy
smiles to graphs showing inflation plummeting, interest rates dropping – now,
even mortgages for private housing beginning to go down!

This last item, which affects so many millions of young people who would dearly
like to own a home of their own, this was taken to be really positive proof
that Mr Reagan's economics – Reaganomics – is working at last. Since the
election is generally taken to be a referendum on Reaganomics, the White House
wasted no time celebrating this news in a well-publicised ceremony. They called
to the White House some leaders of small business. Bankruptcies of small
businesses are running at a rate worse than anything known since the Great
Depression of 50 years ago. These men and women shuffled obediently into the
White House and presented the president with a doll's house marked 'Sold' and
you may be sure that is was shown in triumphant close-up on the networks'
evening television news.

Well, now to go back to the moment when the announcement of the Nobel Prize for
economics appeared like a beacon amid the encircling gloom. Why? Well,
Professor George Stigler is a conservative economist but not, somebody in the
White House should have noticed, not an ideologue. Talking about Dr Milton
Friedman, the last university of Chicago economist to win the Nobel Prize,
Professor Stigler said, 'Milton has the answers to how the world ought to be,
I'm interested in finding out how it is.'

Still, Professor Stigler has had, in the past, kind words for Reaganomics. He
said openly that the war against inflation is a remarkable success. What a boon
and a blessing to have the beloved Swedes, on the eve of the election, choose
Professor Stigler to honour above all the world's economists! So the White
House rushed an invitation to him to come and be congratulated by the president
and to have the rare privilege of saying his say before the White House press
corps, which was hastily assembled for this emergency injection of good hope.

There were several other things about the character, the whimsical character,
of Mr Stigler which the White House had not checked on. He has a brand of
offhand sarcasm and a waggish wit which makes him a popular teacher. He's
unpredictable in answers to questions. He is, in fact – a friend paid him the
best compliment – 'a freewheeling intelligence'. Now, if they'd known this, the
White House staff would certainly have jerked at the reins of their enthusiasm.
Freewheeling intelligence is just what the doctor ordered during a war, in a
crisis when you can't see the way out and in fact, in day-to-day government,
but it's a treacherous thing to let loose on the eve of an election where the
freewheeler must go into the ideological gear that the party has prescribed.

Well, Mr Stigler came to the White House, was ushered before a lectern, the
White House press correspondents gave him the rare tribute of a hand clap and
the president's staff men, all smiles, retired to the wings.

'Now sir, how do you feel about the state of the economy?' 'Well,' he said, 'I
want to see what's going to happen in the next two years. I think we're bumping
along and we're on our way up.' The White House aides purred quietly. He hoped,
he said, that sooner or later, but he didn't know when, we'd pull out of 'the
depression' – panic in the wings, President Reagan writhes at any repetition of
the word 'recession' but the word 'depression' is as unforgivable as the word
'cancer' at a Victorian tea party. But the professor had used the word. Did he
really mean it, he was asked?

'Well,' he freewheeled, 'I think that's linguistics. I'm so old now that I
remember depressions. I know they're not polite and I think they're not to be
spoken about within the city limits of Washington DC...' – the press corps
scribbled fast and the aides in the wings suppressed their groans – '... I
don't mind changing words', the genial professor went on. But the reporters
came back at him hoarsely crying, 'No, no! No! Depression is just fine!'

After this appalling opening, the White House aides started glaring at their
watches and believing that the professor had a pressing appointment and had
better be on his way. He was quite relaxed. 'How about Reaganomics, the
president's supply-side economics, the theory with which Mr Reagan, in a final
flurry of weekend campaigning, is begging everybody to stay the course?'

'As I understand it', said Professor Stigler, 'it's not an orthodox economic
category. It's a gimmick, or if you wish, a slogan that was used to package
certain ideas.' Before he could take it back, the reporters were scribbling
'gimmick, slogan'. Sensing their evil delight and catching the whiff of
smelling salts from the wings, Professor Stigler felt indulgent, 'That's all
right!' he said, 'I think sloganeering is one of the larger products of this
town. Seriously though,' he said – always a word which suggests that you were
kidding when you planted a stiletto between a man's shoulder blades –
'seriously, the supply-siders had put a crimp in unnecessary government
regulation, they'd cut taxes BUT they'd gone too far in making bigger boasts of
success.'

Well, by this time, the White House aides were fidgeting to get the man off the
stage and back to Chicago before he performed any more disastrous freewheeling.
All right! One more question! Some villain dared to ask if the current
depression was the worst since the Great Depression.

'Er...', said the professor, 'I think in terms of magnitude it is. It bears the
striking similarity of a high rate of unemployed and a low level of private
investment in basic manufacturing.' Both these dread symptoms are ones which
also the president hates to dwell on. There was nothing more to do than break
in on the performance, the White House men came with arms outstretched,
silently pleading with him to have done and say goodbye and be off to Chicago
or any other place he could get lost. The press couldn't bear to have him
leave, 'No, no! Come back little Sheba!' He laughed and waved.

'Do you enjoy visiting Washington?' somebody managed to get in. 'Oh, I love it!
' he said. You can imagine that this astounding performance, like that of a
turning worm in an old Frank Capra movie, is one that has been noted by every
Democratic candidate in the country. There must have been some frantic
rewriting of election-eve speeches. From coast to coast, I can hear Democrats,
before huge audiences, saying, 'Don't take my word for it, the Nobel Prize
winner in economics said it at the invitation of the White House, that we are
in the worst depression since the Great Depression, that Reaganomics is a
gimmick.'

It must be almost a relief for devote Republicans to turn from the election to
the sinister, if non-political, story of Tylenol, the painkiller, which caused
seven sudden deaths in Chicago, a week or two ago, in people who'd bought the
drug, in its capsule form, in bottles whose seal had been tampered with. The
capsules had been laced with cyanide. It's been a colossal blow to the
manufacturer who pointed out that it's impossible to lace the tablet form with
any foreign body but they've had to withdraw from the whole country every
bottle containing the capsules.

As I talk, the police and – since this missing criminal could have crossed the
state border – hundreds of FBI agents have been trying to track him or her
down. No doubt, in the days before television, the horror would have stayed
frozen in one place, with one drug but, as we've noticed before, mad men pick
up shortcuts to fame or notoriety from the tube and soon there were rumours and
reports of other tamperings with other drugs in other places, so much so that
the United States Department of Health warned parents to check this Sunday
night the treats, the candies, that small children might receive in lieu of
performing a Halloween trick. There is the hazard of razor blades in apples,
cookies laced with LSD, pins in candy bars.

Some towns have got out hasty ordinances forbidding door-to-door trick or
treating. It's a mad, mad world, my masters, and, quite seriously, a cheerful,
healthy child on Monday morning will come as a vast relief to millions of
American parents.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP