Presidential memory loss

One of my favourite writers, Calvin Trillin, has a character called Harold the
Committed who may or may not be a real person, since Trillin says he's giving
up writing satire because the news itself, these days, gets ahead of a
satirist.

Anyway, Harold is, was, an assistant editor on the weekly journal for which
Trillin wrote what most people regarded as a humorous column, but which Trillin
insists is fearless commentary on our life and times written with malice
towards practically everybody, especially to anybody in the White House.

This editor used to wriggle and fuss when he read Trillin's copy because Harold
was a very serious, political observer, a type that is rife in all political
weeklies throughout what we call the free world. Harold got annoyed when he
proofread Trillins's stuff because it was, by his lights, too flippant, too
ready to believe frivolous rumours about great events.

As when a deadpan Trillin revealed the real reason why Mr Reagan's first
secretary of state, Mr Haig, was fired, Trillin wrote that it had nothing to do
with disagreements about foreign policy. It came about when the Belgian royal
family visited Washington – an extremely successful visit to the White House
marred by an unfortunate remark by the then-Secretary Haig.

The Belgian embassy, according to Trillin, put out a stern statement to correct
the impression Secretary Haig might have given that he was in the line of
succession to the Belgian throne. The State Department had to admit that one
phrase Mr Haig uttered seemed particularly offensive to the Belgians. It seems
that on greeting the King of the Belgians, Mr Haig said, 'I happen to be a
Hapsburg on my mother's side, so la-de-da!' The State Department said the
phrase was taken out of context.

Harold, the serious editor, was probably the only person on the staff, or for
that matter among the readers, who didn't know how to take this. Everything he
read by way of political reporting or commentary was true. The question was,
was it worthy of a serious weekly magazine? In other words, he was looking for
commitment, as television documentary directors in the early 1970s were always
looking for commitment.

You'd be telling the story, say, of how Congress passed a law in the 1860s
giving immigrant farmers 160 acres of land free if they could produce a good
crop within five years – that's a fact, by the way. They were named
homesteaders after the act that created them and then how somebody invented
barbed wire which helped the homesteaders to fence in their property, and how
the cowboys in the south-west, driving their yearling calves north to the feed
lots in the Midwest would come on these fenced-in lands and have to divert the
herds. Finally, how the cowboys, who were in large measure nothing but land
pirates just hacked the fences to bits and rode roughshod through the
homesteaders' holdings. And, in one ghastly episode in Wyoming, massacred most
of a homestead village.

You'd get through filming and telling this chilling episode and the director
would tend to say, 'Yes, but you must commit yourself to a position. You must
make a statement.' The only statement I could think of at that point was, well,
the cowboys done wrong. It was inadequate as the comment of a committed writer
so we let it go.

Well, Harold was like that and he kept asking Trillin, where is your
commitment? Do you believe that in the nuclear age we may well see the end of
civilisation as we know it? Or do you not? Well, yes, Trillin would say, but
not this weekend.

Trillin came to give Harold a nickname which I'm often tempted to apply to one
or two men I know who edit what an old American newspaperman called
'double-dome weeklies'. Trillin called him Harold the Committed. I thought of
him during the bustle and the traffic jams and the blazing lights of the
department stores and the sidewalk Santa Clauses with their runny noses and tin
cups and people waving and stopping and wishing each other all good things. And
I decided that this is no time to go on bashing President Reagan. Even Harold
the Committed, I feel might choose to take a rest from topic A, even if he
wouldn't stoop to wear a funny hat.

But I can't do it. I have to fill you in with the good news that after the
reams of rumour, speculation and, let's face it, dismaying facts, at last the
Congress and the Department of Justice have agreed on a final, new procedure.
Remember, Congress has gone home, or rather the 99th Congress is dead. The new
one, elected in November, finds the Democrats in a majority and, therefore, in
control of the Senate, as well as the House. Which means the chairmen of the
vital committees will be Democrats.

I think I mentioned that nine committees, for instance, banking, armed
services, foreign relations, have a legitimate interest in the Iranian-Contra
horror, but two special select committees, one from each House, have been set
up to take care of the congressional investigations and they will begin in
January. Also, finally, to everybody's relief, there has been appointed a
special prosecutor, as was done in the Watergate case. His name is Lawrence
Walsh and we shall hear much of him in the months, I fear, to come. He's a
former federal judge and a former president of the American Bar Association.

Everybody – the president, both parties, the justice department, the media –
seems to be agreed that it would be next to impossible to find a more
disinterested judge. I say we may hear about him and from him for months
because, first, his own staff of investigators will have to be screened and
cleared for security by the FBI, then they will have to go through all the
testimony presented to the two intelligence committees, one in the House, the
other in the Senate, that have just wound up their preliminary investigations.

Then they will have to go off tracking down clues to the original sale of arms
to Iran, who ordered what and when, then the increasingly sinister business of
the transfer of funds to the Contras, who got what, and the whole maze of the
Swiss bank accounts, the actions of the National Security Council, the minutes
of a commission already investigating where and how the council exceeded its
function or illegally hid its actions, and so on and so forth.

It could take the special prosecutor from now until I'd guess at the earliest,
the late spring, to get through. Anyway, from now on, it's up to the two select
committees of Congress and the special prosecutor. The one institution that is
not going to suspend its enquiries is the Fourth Estate – the press, the media.
Whatever you hear until the select committees meet is what you hear from the
press. It will be confirmed or disproved by the committees or the prosecutor.

We can leave it there, I hope, except for one, quite new, bizarre note struck
by several doctors. One, in particular, wrote to James Reston, the veteran
political commentator of the New York Times. He, the doctor, suggested that
perhaps, after all, nobody was lying, by which he means that quite possibly the
president did give permission to Admiral Poindexter and Colonel North to get
money from the arms sale to the Contras and perhaps, in the first place, he did
hear from his chief of staff, Donald Regan, about the sale of arms. Simply,
maybe, he honestly doesn't remember.

When he says, the doctor wrote, that Israel did not send arms and that he never
condoned such a thing, he's telling the truth as he remembers it. In the
elderly, recent memory begins to fail. His staff may brief him immediately
before a press conference but in a few minutes, he could honestly forget almost
everything that had been prepared. This doctor is 74. Mr Reagan will be 76 in
February. And he added, 'At my age, I can go into the next room to get
something, only to find when I get there, that I have forgotten my original
purpose.'

That letter adds a new poignancy to the last, reported sentence Mr Reagan has
said about the affair. Senator Dole, the Republican leader in the Senate, came
from seeing the president the other day and quoted him as saying, 'People like
me but they don't believe me. Where we go from there, I don't know.' If true,
it would confirm the practically universal belief that whatever else you may
think about the president, he's so generally liked because he appears to be a
decent, honest, rather simple man, closer to what millions of Americans take
themselves to be than perhaps any president in memory.

It also could explain, Reston thinks, the president's unpreparedness at
Reykjavik and his later conviction that he'd never offered what Mr Gorbachev
and many of the people on both sides said he'd offered, namely an end to all
ballistic missiles. Reston puts it this way, 'The unpreparedness was clearly
not a calculation the president had in mind in advance. It astonished both his
supporters and his adversaries. The problem in all these things is that he had
nothing in mind but improvised along the way.'

Well, if that memory loss is there and got worse, that would bring up the
disability clause of the constitution, by which a president can be gently and
honourably removed from office. There were times, by the way, towards the end
of the last ministry of Winston Churchill, when such a drastic decline could
have been proved, but so far as I know, there's no disability clause in the
unwritten British constitution. No doubt, I'm wrong; I await the scolding
letters.

Still, we're certainly not going to go into that. Let me end on a puzzling, but
timely note. I saw the other evening an episode of the television adaptation of
J. B. Priestley's 'Lost Empires', about a touring music hall company
celebrating Christmas 1913. J. B. Priestley didn't say it in his novel, but the
young adapter had everybody wish everybody, 'A Happy Christmas'.

I dare to say that nobody in England said 'Happy Christmas' in 1913 or 1923 or
'33 or '43 or maybe '53. I wish Fritz Spiegl or Kingsley Amis or some other
linguistic watchdog would tell me when the change came in.

In the meantime, let me offer you, if a little late, the greeting that is still
universal and unchanged in America, 'A Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year!'.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP