Kennedy quits presidential bid

Would you like to live to be a hundred?

If the question came out of the blue to a startled audience of several
nationalities, it's my guess that the first people to say yes would be
Americans. I'm not saying that they would stay with this instinctive response.
If a Frenchman or a sceptical Scotsman said, 'But to live like what? Like an
animal, vegetable or mineral?', second thoughts might introduce at least some
reservations or conditions, such as having enough money to guarantee some
comfort, having, most of all, enough health to be comfortable at all.

But Americans, of all peoples, believe most steadily in progress, especially in
the progress of science and assume that, saving some natural catastrophe or the
final war, tomorrow will be better than yesterday.

A distinguished American surgeon of my acquaintance, once told me that he found
it difficult to convince his students that the essential techniques for
operation on a rectal fistula and the ones that must be followed today had been
laid down by a surgeon who travelled with the French armies in the thirteenth
century on the Seventh Crusade. These soldiers were particularly liable to such
afflictions because of the great weight of armour they had to bear in walking
through the hot and foetid landscape of what we call the Middle East.

The doctor told me that his students were less fascinated by this information
than depressed by it. The general reaction being, 'Have we come no farther than
this in seven centuries?'.

Well, several things have happened this week that turn on the American love of
what, in medical matters especially, they call 'a breakthrough' – the
assumption being that any new technique, new drug, new diet, giant step will be
a giant step forward. At the University of Utah Hospital in Salt Lake City on
Wednesday, an attempt was made to implant into a human being the first
permanent mechanical heart. The only surgeon whom the government allows to do
this has done it on animals and extended their life by, at best, nine months
and though, as I talk, the 20 members of the surgical team are satisfied with
the immediate result, they have warned us that the first three or four days
will be critical and that the great hazard is pneumonia.

At any rate, there's little doubt among them that the implanting of artificial
hearts will improve to the point – nobody knows how long from now – it will
become standard procedure. For the rest of us who are not yet sick enough to
face the dire prospect, there was not a breakthrough but a setback reported
today in the most eminent of American medical journals, the New England Journal
of Medicine. The word, fellas, is that starch blockers don't work! This will
come as grumpy news to millions of Americans who, again, more than any other
people alive, are obsessed with diet and dieting.

At the moment, there are on the non-fiction bestseller lists of this country
four books prescribing quite different ways proffered as painless and fairly
quick ways of losing weight, keeping trim, invigorating the vital organs and
feeling fine, with no nasty side effects – none, anyway, that will appear in
the time it takes you to buy and read the book.

One of the favourite magical pills of the day is this so-called 'starch
blocker'. There are several brand names. 200 actual varieties for what is
usually an extract of kidney beans. The manufacturers claim, to put it simply,
that these pills stop the body from absorbing the calories of starchy foods.
'Inhibiting the starch calorie absorption in human beings' is the claim
rejected by the researchers who've just published their findings in the New
England Journal. It has a long editorial that asks some awkward and
long-overdue questions about what it calls 'the grey zone' between foods and
drugs. These products, it notes, are always marketed as foods or dietary
supplements, not as drugs, and were sold heavily in health food stores as well
as in pharmacies but, once a claim is made or a product is promoted for use in
changing a physiologic function, then the matter ought to go the protecting
government agency, the Food and Drug Administration.

The FDA has, in fact, acted in this case and ordered these 200-odd products to
be taken off the shelves. The New England Journal wonders why it took so long
after there'd been increasing reports of bloating, indigestion and omens, at
least, of long-range disorders. The editorial writer puts his finger on a
national characteristic which I think goes far to explain this long flirtation
with new diets. He says, 'The public are remarkably responsive to claims for
diet and food supplements, particularly when such claims seem to offer a
shortcut to weight control or health without prolonged dietary discipline.' The
title of the editorial implies what responsible doctors have reluctantly
preached for years and years, there is no way to lose weight sensibly and
safely except by taking in less calories. The title is, 'Still No Calorie-Free
Lunch'.

Well, the American element in all this is what the Journal calls 'the shortcut'
and what today tends to be known as 'the quick fix'. I notice, by the way, that
when Mr Reagan was campaigning for the presidency, he offered to 'turn the
country round', his favourite phrase, and revitalise a sleepy economy certainly
by the spring of 1982. Once he got into the White House and was amazed to
discover the complexity of money and jobs and their distribution, he began to
say that, after all, you couldn't expect to reverse overnight a 50-year habit
of spending and spending and taxing and taxing. 'There is', he said, and as the
economy goes on slumbering without a sign of coming awake, he goes on saying
it, 'there is no quick fix.'

The most memorable offer of a quick fix that comes to mind is a newspaper ad I
saw a couple of years ago. It was published in February. It said, 'You can
learn to speak French by April with no effort on your part.' But if the
absolutely reliable artificial heart is a long way off and quick-fix diets have
now been debunked, how come that in the small, mountainous Soviet Republic of
Abkhazia, population half a million, there are 548 residents who are a hundred
years old or over. That certainly is a blockbuster of a news bulletin. Why
haven't we heard of this before? What is their secret? We must assume they have
a secret, a quick fix rather than a way of life which is the long, dull
prescription.

Well, first of all, let's calm down and look with all available suspicion at
this figure, this claim. You may have noticed, from time to time, that whenever
we hear of some old gaffer who's crowding 110, he or she always lives in some
mountainous and remote Russian village or in that enormous stretch of country
in Brazil, the Amazon Basin, which has yet to be explored, except by almanac
editors looking for natives older than a hundred.

An old friend of mine who was brought into New York as a child from Russia
always chuckled at these revelations. 'Ask me', he used to say, 'how old was my
mother or my father at any time in their lives and I couldn't tell you. Simple,
my dear boy,' he used to say, 'there was no compulsory registration of births
until after I was born which, my parents told me, was either in 1900 or 1901 or
1902.' Whenever the report of these hardy Russian or Brazilian centenarians
came in, this friend used to recall an old woman alive and much venerated in
his village when he was a boy there. She was undoubtedly old, he said, but
since she'd outlived everybody around, they had to take her word about life in
the old days. Every year, the kids who used to hear her tales would add another
five years to her suspected age. By the time they were 20, they figured she was
a hundred. When they were 25, she was 116.

The point about the registration of births is the key to these legends but now,
a team of Russian and American ethnographers have been over to the Caucuses and
worked the mountains over and they came back this week and held at Columbia
University a symposium on longevity research in the Caucuses. They focused on
Abkhazia. They checked this and that and they paired the number of centenarians
down from 548 to 241 but that's till 500 per cent heartier and hailer than the
oldsters of the United States or Britain.

They came to swear over the stubborn doubts of two of the Americans that church
records of births and marriages went to confirm the figure of 241. And what was
their secret?

Well, they drink little alcohol and they've never heard of diets. Their blood
is no different from ours, no genetic peculiarities. The best the team could do
by way of description with no explanation was that they live in the mountains
and have almost no cancer. Oh there's... there's one another thing which might
be the key! They live in a society which begins by respecting the elders and,
as they get older, reverences them. Their advice is sought by young and old.
They are thought to be wise. They feel secure, wanted, never at risk. So the
best prescription I can pass on to you is, 'Get your children to respect you
and your grandchildren to reverence you.' That's it.

A question of age tiptoed on to the political front his week when Senator
Edward Kennedy announced that, what with the emotional pressures that followed
on two assassinations and the emotional strain of an impending divorce, he has
to decided to devote himself to his family and will not run for the presidency
in 1984. The newspaper columns and the TV screens are now open for at least
half a dozen other Democrats, their aides and wives and publicity men, to guess
and hedge and ponder whether Kennedy's withdrawal will help or hinder their own
ambitions.

As for the senator, note that he said 'not in 1984'. He discovered in his
recent campaign for the Senate that Chappaquiddick, though a 13-year memory, is
not forgotten. Maybe by 1988 or '92 it will be. His children will be grown and
on their own way. Suppose he waits till the year 2000? He will still be a
little younger than Ronald Reagan when he walked into the White House.

We've certainly not heard the last of Ted Kennedy. He's 50. In 2004 or 2008 or
2012, he could still make it. After, that is, a successful heart implant.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP