Bush to be Reagan's running mate

Last week you may remember in our exciting radio serial 'The Race to the White
House', Ronnie Reagan, the California hot rod, was wondering whether he hadn't
better have along as navigator Gerry Ford, the Michigan all-American who won
the White House Cup, though by default, in 1974.

The problem here was that Reagan insists on staying in the right lane all the
way and Gerry Ford has the same prejudice but to get to the White House you
sometimes have to make left turns, so in the end Ronnie chose Georgie Bush –
Andover and Yale – who, while he drives mostly on the right, can go for long
stretches in the middle of the road, so that the crowd on the left can see him
and think he's their boy.

Now read or, rather, listen, on! Well, in this week's episode, the captains of
industry and the kings of the Republican party have departed from Detroit,
having enriched the shopkeepers and hotel owners by several hundred thousand
dollars and left its run-down black quarters and its unemployed automobile
workers more or less as they found them.

A convention city, a week later, is like Wembley the week after the Cup Final.
Looking over the exhausted balloons and the empty bottles, you marvel that this
should have been the scene of so much carousing and panic and jubilant emotion.
Everyone, including me, said that the Republican convention was going to be the
dullest in years, a coronation ceremony in which the only conceivable suspense
would be the choice of the heir apparent. But presidential nominating
conventions, though timed and staged to the last spontaneous cheer, have a way
of getting out of hand.

Well, until the third night at Detroit, there was so little genuine emotion, so
little political sparring that the Republicans had to do something
unprecedented to while away the hours. They put on what you can only call 'a
rock review' – something that would not only have petrified such old party
leaders as Lincoln and Teddy Roosevelt, but as late as 1964 would have
horrified the entire convention. 1964 was the time in San Francisco when a
famous Republican party bigwig from Illinois looked up at the fishbowls the
television commentators sit in and, spotting the early mod outfits of the
younger of them, thundered that what the Republic needed more than anything was
fewer sideburns. It brought down the house of men in business suits and
regulation 1940 haircuts.

However, in Detroit, it could be seen the Republicans, too, have succumbed to
the 1980s – the early 1970s, at any rate – and the auditorium was bounding with
rumps ensconced in polyester-tight pants and jeans and not one delegate in 20
was wearing a tie. The Republicans stop short only of beads.

Well, the first juicy hint of mischief, or of confusion in high quarters, was
dropped on the third evening. It was dropped by Reagan's men who were on the
floor and were close to the begging microphones of the TV network commentators.
Every network has an anchorman or two in a fishbowl and a team of reporters
wandering around the convention floor, grabbing anybody who might know
anything. Now the interesting point here – which shows up a glaring change in
what makes news at a convention – is that the entire episode of Reagan's
negotiations with Gerald Ford provided a mounting drama for people chained to a
television set anywhere from Florida to Alaska, but was quite unknown to the
delegations on the floor and they are, after all, supposed to be at the heart
of the matter.

In the days before television, before 1952 at the latest, a reporter was a
newspaper man and from the first morning to the last midnight he wedged himself
in to his assigned seat in the press section at the convention, dutifully
reported the keynote speech, the nominating and (seconding) speeches and the
rest of the formal mumbo-jumbo and that was the convention's story, except for
one or two mavericks who roamed the hotel lobbies and buttonholed delegates and
the party chieftains on their way to and from the convention hall.

Well, television has changed not only the reporting of the news, it has helped
to expand and then massage it. Nowadays, there is absolutely no reason why a
newspaper reporter should be in the convention city at all, except for the
prestige touch of bylining his stuff from the proper place, but he'd do as well
– in fact much better – if he stayed home with one or other of the TV networks.
That way he gets as much as matters of the speeches, most of which don't matter
at all, but he also has the luxury of being 20 places at once, hearing the
television reporters catching key delegates on the floor, in their hotel rooms,
in garages, bars, automobiles. The humble citizen sitting at home gets, of
course, a lot of rumour, but he gets also a composite drama, a gathering plot
that was beyond any newspaper reporter or team of reporters in the old days.

So, what happened? Well, during the early evening of that third day, we saw and
heard chairmen of state delegations, Reagan aides, random delegates from dozens
of states, giving their opinions on who would make the best vice-president, the
best running mate for Reagan. The westerners were hot for Jack Kemp, a New
Yorker who'd once worked close to Reagan and an uncompromising right-winger. A
couple of New England delegations, where George Bush had run well or beaten
Reagan in the primary, were still hot for Bush, and so on.

Then the tom-toms sounded. Now, remember when former President Gerald Ford
arrived in Detroit he repeated, with offhanded firmness, what he'd said at home
in California, 'under no circumstances' would he run as vice-president. You may
recall that many months ago he'd said publicly that Ronald Reagan could not be
elected over Carter and this was taken, I believe correctly, as a strong hint
that he knew somebody else who could – Gerald Ford – and the polls agreed with
him. But Reagan had so organised the party and won so many primaries that, in
prospect and in fact, the nomination was sewed up.

At that point, Gerald Ford suffered from two groups of friends. One told him to
come out then and offer himself as a candidate for president. The other said,
'Wait till we all meet in Detroit and if the polls show that Reagan would come
in a poor second to Carter, then tell the convention that you'll make the
supreme sacrifice!' Ford must have guessed that the polls weren't going to go
up for Carter. Indeed, they were going disastrously down, as they are still
doing.

So, he listened to the first group and rushed in to say, 'Here I am! Take me!'
(and) that was months ago. His bid was received with thundering apathy. He went
back to practising his putting and resolved to be no part of the presidential
campaign. But, by the time he got to Detroit, the party was already divided on
the question of who'd be the best Reagan running mate between two sets of
advisers round Reagan, those who said that if both Reagan and his running mate
were right wingers, they'd alienate millions of voters and those who said the
party always makes the mistake of tempering its conservatism at the last minute
with a moderate and losing to the Democrats who are better at capturing the
centre.

There were a couple of other close friends of Reagan who said the answer is
neither an uncompromising conservative like Kemp, nor a
conservative-to-moderate like Bush. The answer, they said, is Gerry Ford and
they began to dream of a dream ticket. Reagan had his scouts beat the bushes of
the convention and the word came back, 'Gerald Ford, the beloved former
president as vice-president. What a noble sacrifice! What drama! What a ticket!
'

By early evening on that Wednesday, the gathering plot came out over
television. Walter Cronkite got Mr Ford in his fishbowl and Ford confessed that
he might be amenable to the idea if he could have, as vice-president, and I
quote him, 'a meaningful role' and, from then on, the rumours and the true
issues, all mixed up, snowballed through the television sets, while most of the
delegates on the floor were snoozing over speeches, waving banners, eating hot
dogs or, as they say in the Midwest, 'visiting' with their friends.

The networks alerted their floor reporters to get hold of any and all the
Reagan men and women, not the enthusiasts, but Reagan's floor managers.
Television then achieved one of its most hectic but finest hours. Cronkite said
Reagan was on his way to the convention with Mr Ford. It was not so. The
rumours dissolved and snowballed again. Eleven o'clock went by and then an NBC
reporter had the luck to be at the elbow of a very close Reagan crony, indeed.
He caught him on the telephone to Reagan's suite and the crony put the
telephone down and said firmly, 'It's Bush', thunderstruck. It was, indeed, so.

Next day, and the day after that, it all came out. Reagan and Ford had met many
times, their staffs had met, they'd gone back and forth with proposals and
counter-proposals like American and Russian delegations at a failing summit
conference. In the end, it wouldn't work and it can be said now, it's amazing
that Reagan and his men knew so little of the Constitution and how the
presidency works to believe that it would ever work.

Every president since Eisenhower has solemnly announced that his vice-president
would have extraordinary powers unknown to American history and every one of
those blushing running mates has discovered that the vice-president, once in
office, at once declines into a vice-president, not even an assistant and
rarely an adviser. The cronies, the 'kitchen cabinet' so-called, they're the
only close advisers. He becomes a bored official on the sidelines who attends
all the best funerals in the world.

Ford luckily remembered this in time. After all, he'd been that sidelined
figurehead. Yet, what he was proposing was a man sharing the executive power
with the president. Mrs Thatcher and Mr Heath as joint Prime Minister? Well,
the Constitution simply does not allow for such a grandee. Reagan and Ford
might have made a dream ticket, come January they could have made a nightmare
presidency.

Well, that's the end of the story of Ronnie Reagan and Gerry Ford. Next week,
back to real life, back to Billy Carter.

Meanwhile, the 103 degrees in New York City has plunged to a delicious,
seasonable 85. Hand me my gin fizz, son! Preferably in an air conditioner.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP