TWA plane hijack

It's only once in a very great while that I feel there's only one possible
topic to talk about, that it would be irresponsible to talk about anything
else.

And it is the episode, the outrage, the crisis, however you want to call it,
that has completely monopolised the television news here. Indeed, there've been
hours on end, through the day and night, when it seemed that the rest of the
world was permanently on hold. Certainly, I can't remember a time when the
newspapers performed a new function – it used to be their exclusive function –
of telling you many things that were going on at home and abroad.

But since Saturday 15, not only the one-hour nightly television summaries of
the news and the networks' half-hour summaries and the previous and the
subsequent discussion programmes have been given over almost entirely to the
crisis – and, for once, surely the word is the right word – of the hijacking of
the TWA jet plane and the holding of the, mostly, American hostages.

We have a time problem here and one that often bugs or threatens my talk,
except when I'm on about some timeless topic like the rich vagabond spending
two years looking for an island paradise or how to make the perfect hamburger.
It's no secret that some listeners are on hand on Friday evenings, others on
Sunday mornings and that, as I have reason to know from the mail, as well as
foreign journeys, that many countries, Mexico and New Zealand among them, will
not know, shall we say, what to think until the following Tuesday.

There was a time during the agonising last phases of the Watergate scandal when
Friday's talk was meaningless on Sunday and Sunday's talk was ancient history
by Tuesday. So, I am bearing in mind – in fact, I'm hoping and praying – that
the hostages and that indomitable, really heroic, pilot will all be safe and
free by the time many people hear this talk.

Well, whatever happens or has happened to the hostages, or what is happening
now in El Salvador or elsewhere, the hijacking episode has brought up, in the
most merciless way, the whole question of international terrorism and what to
do about it.

What to do about it is so obviously the essential, the pressing, question that
I notice a quite new modesty among the different schools of commentators and
onlookers. I mean, there's a unique absence of cockiness, of ideological
infighting, of telling us all what must be done or what is idiotically not
being done among the dogmatists of the right, the wiseacres of the left and the
'on the one hand, on the other hand' pundits in the middle.

For once, I hear friends and informed and uninformed of all parties saying,
'Well, thank God, I'm not the President of the United States'.

Where to begin? Looking back over what seems an age since the first hectic news
breaks, the interruption of every sort of programme from classical dramas and
symphony concerts to golf championships, the scene that sticks in my mind is a
family scene – and we've moved in on scores of them – in which a woman, in the
Midwest somewhere, had a son aboard the plane and he was still being held
there. And she stroked her forearms in a quiet ecstasy of frustration and said
there was nothing she wouldn't do and there was practically nothing the
president shouldn't do to have the hostages set free.

She anticipated the next question which no interviewer seems to have had the
wit to ask, that up to now, she'd been a gung-ho backer of the president in
saying you should never give in to terrorists – don't weaken, don't negotiate,
don't bargain. Give them the 700 men back, she said, give them 7,000. I don't
care.

Now that may have been an extreme reaction, but its extremity is the only odd
thing about it. There must have been scores of families who, at the first dread
word that one of their own was aboard, muffled their automatic echo of the
president's proud assertion, once he was in the White House, that America
stands tall again.

And, here, I must mention a cruel consequence of being president today that's
quite new – new, that is, since the networks began to amass immense television
stockpiles of old presidential campaign appearances, news conferences and the
like. In the old days, I should say any day before Jimmy Carter, a candidate on
the campaign trail would have his writers bone up on the old speeches of the
opponent and trot out a quotation here and there to show, usually, that the
opponent was a hypocrite or worse. But not too many people read those campaign
speeches or heard them.

Now, President Reagan, wherever he is, at a fund-raising dinner, an airport
arrival, a Rose Garden ceremony, an interview, speaks, makes any dogmatic
statement, at his peril. On the evening news now, he will be shown where he was
today, but then, they will insert an old television clip from a speech, a
rally, a passing thought, which runs directly counter to what he's saying now.
So – and this happens several times a week – he's visibly held up for ridicule
to millions of citizens and this week, on many news programmes, the president
has been the helpless victim of this trick.

I see no way that this is going to change. It feeds the self-righteousness of
even the dumbest viewer. It gives mean satisfaction to the political opponents
waiting in the wings for 1988. It produces an unworthy, wry smile on the faces
of the men who were in the White House in 1980 and wringing their hands and
brains over the plight of the American hostages in Iran.

Not all of them. Mr Carter's former national security adviser – I guess they
have clips of him too – said he could never forget the tension and the
frustration of those many months in the White House. He knew what Mr Reagan was
going through and he wasn't going to second-guess him.

Then, Dr Henry Kissinger, Nixon's old secretary of state, was on for a long
interview and he said that any policy seen from the outside is simpler far than
one seen from the inside and that he grieved for the president caught in the
toils of the hijacking complexity. Dr Kissinger did go on to make what one
commentator called a deplorable point. It was, however, exactly what the
president the next evening made the point of his policy. 'No negotiations with
the terrorists, no concessions', said Dr Kissinger. Said the president, 'We
will never make concessions to terrorists. To do so would only invite more
terrorism.'

From the start it seems that that was the president's firm decision. Over the
weekend, the smart word from all the Washington pundits was that, plainly, the
three main parties – the United States, Israel and Nabih Berri, who then
appeared to be the Shi'ite Moslem with the whip hand – that these three were
engaged in a wriggling exercise to save face. In other words, the expectation
then was that Israel could be persuaded, without any public persuasion from the
White House, to release the 700 Shi'ites it held, that it must be seen to be
doing this on its own accord, that Mr Reagan must be seen as not having given
in and that Mr Berri must be seen as not accepting a deal. Sounded like an
impossible way out. In fact, at that point, Mr Berri was saying that he washed
his hands of the whole thing, that the solution lay entirely with the White
House.

Now that was a situation complicated enough, especially since we then expected
that there would be a lot of bold speeches and vows never to surrender or
yield, and then, to save the American hostages, Mr Reagan would twist Israel's
arm, Israel would say it was only doing what it had long ago arranged to do,
would release the Shi'ites and somehow the hostages would be released
simultaneously or just afterwards.

Well, the president, on Tuesday night, took on what I think was the toughest
ordeal of his presidency – a press conference at this delicate and horrible
juncture – and received a pitiless barrage of questions and accusations and
snide reminders of his old posture of standing tall. To the surprise, I think,
of the press corps, he spoke no weasel words, he prepared no Band-Aids to mask
a deal.

Still, right away, he was asked, 'What happened to the policy of swift and
effective retribution you announced four and a half years ago to deal with
international terrorism?' The president's immediate answer and his line from
then on was, 'In the Iran hostage crisis, it was a government that was the
enemy, but that here we don't know,' as he said, 'who is perpetrating these
deeds, who their accomplices are, where they are located. Just to strike a blow
in a general direction would be a terrorist act in itself.'

Well, he may have spoken even truer than he knew, then. Mr Berri, the moderate
leader of the Amal Shi'ites may or may not be in control. In the shanty town
where the hostages are, or were supposed to be, hidden, radical Amal Shi'ites
were fighting Palestinian guerrillas and, not far away, Moslems and Christians
were exchanging artillery.

Meanwhile, Sunni Moslems were trying to destroy the Shi'ite television station
and, at the same time, clashing with their usual allies, Druze militiamen.
Another radical Shi'ite group, the Imam Ali Brigade, threatened to blow up the
house of Mr Berri, the Shi'ite. And there was a time early on when the
hijackers said they belonged to the Hussein Suicide Commando.

Who can police or speak for so many warring policemen? The word 'suicide'
points to a new, grim element in terrorism. Once, terrorists did their dirty
business and fled for their lives. Now, they are quite willing to blow
themselves up with the victims.

Another element goes back to that frantic mother in the Midwest. An emotional
switch in the minds of doughty citizens whose own kith and kin are caught – the
switch from defiance to surrender. There is one other unspeakable thought, that
every American who travels by air to troubled countries should be willing to
die for his country. Preposterous!

However, the end of air traffic would mean the end of tourism, trade, bank
loans, of their economies. It's a desperate thought that no president, I
believe, dare possibly act on.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP