Literacy rates falling

Maybe it's the arrival of the first heat or maybe because some people, of whom
I seem to be one, feel the juices flow quicker in the spring, I get up early
these days – not Harry Truman early at 05:00, God wot! – but early enough to
hear the New York Times thump on the kitchen mat. I seize it with great
rapidity and not without a spasm of guilt because, whereas I normally turn
first to the obituary page to see, in the words of an incorrigible old friend
of mine, to see who's had it, I now track through the index and turn at once to
the dispatch, sometimes dispatches, from London or Ipswich or wherever, by the
correspondents covering the British election.

Why should this alacrity to see how things are going there induce any guilt?
Well, on these occasions – elections – I always remember the sorry fate of Sir
Lionel Sackville-West in the presidential campaign of 1888. He was the British
Minister to the United States, the top man. America did not, then, rate an
ambassador.

At the height of the campaign, Sir Lionel received a letter from a man in
California claiming to be an Englishman naturalised as an American. He was in
doubt about how to vote. Which man, he wondered, President Cleveland, the
Democrat, or his Republican challenger, Harrison, would be better for Britain?
Such a letter then or now would, in the ears of even a junior official in the
British embassy ring like an alarm bell, but Sir Lionel was a simple man or, as
an American historian put it later, in a kindly phrase, less than astute. He
replied at once and wrote back to California, 'I think Mr Cleveland is the
man';Cleveland, the Democrat, who was against the Republican's crusade for a
high tariff.

Well, the letter was what they called out west 'sucker bait'. It was not
written by an Englishman, naturalised or unrepentant. It was written under a
false name by a California Republican. Within the month, the Republicans
published the exchange of letters and scattered the text far and wide, most
lavishly in the states – New York, for instance – that had a large number of
Irish Americans, usually Democrats to a man.

There was a well amplified outcry and much manufactured indignation against
Cleveland who was made out to be truckling to Britain and a free trade policy.
Cleveland lost. To be exact, he got a hundred thousand votes more than his
rival but in the wrong places. He was defeated handsomely in the electoral
count and significantly lost the most populous state, New York. He would
probably have lost anyway on the hot issue of the tariff but Sackville-West's
blunder did him no good. In fact, President Cleveland was so appalled when the
correspondence was published, ten days before the election, that he at once, on
the same day, ordered that Sackville-West be handed his passport, which was
done and the poor man departed.

Whatever sins have been committed by the British diplomatic establishment in
Washington in the intervening one hundred years, this is one that the foreign
office has never forgotten and each incoming ambassador, whether astute or less
than astute, is warned about the dreadful incident.

I've noticed whenever, at the time of a presidential election, I decide to do a
little mischievous telephoning, I've noticed that the British ambassador has
usually hotfooted it for home or been reported to be out of town or otherwise
indisposed.

So, whenever the shoe is on the other foot and Britain is holding a General
Election, my own lips are sealed. I resolve not to commit myself one way or the
other or even the third way. You will not hear from me the shrewd appraisal of
the comparative campaigning styles of Mrs Thatcher and Mr Foot which the New
York Times' chief London correspondent attempted the other day. I can only say
for now that there is, I believe, more general interest here in the British
election than usual, if only because Mrs Thatcher campaigned the first time on
a programme and a policy which Mr Reagan practically echoed in his 1980
campaign.

You'll see that after that introduction it will be necessary to tiptoe round
the Reagan policies as they are being supported or rebuffed in this country for
fear I might be accused – at 3,000 miles – of exercising cunning influence by
remote control. Well, there is one issue that, so far as I've heard, is not an
issue in British politics, though it's almost certainly a back burner in any
English-speaking country that has, within the past generation or so, taken in
large numbers of immigrants whose native language is not English.

I guess, literally, that it is, or will become, an issue in Australia. It is
certainly burning in the United States and it was brought to the front burner
by the publication of the findings of a national commission, roughly the
equivalent in this country of a Royal Commission. It was called the National
Commission on Excellence in Education. The title of its report suggests that
the commission's main concern, after studying all the evidence, was the steady
decline from excellence in public education – the title was 'A Nation at Risk'.

Now this complaint is by no means new. For the past 30 years or so, this
foundation, that study group and some other fund have been warning and
deploring that the standard of competence, never mind excellence, of elementary
and high school graduates in reading, in writing, their own language, in
mathematics, has been falling to such an extent that functional illiteracy has
become a byword among teachers, employers and even school athletic coaches.

Nothing striking has been done about it over the country as a whole, though our
spirits are frequently lifted by brisk little television documentaries about a
lively experiment in Chicago, some inspired maths teacher in New Jersey, a
madcap language teacher in California who starts with no grammar, no exercise
books, nothing but emotional situations, like, 'Why were you late?' or, 'If
you're hungry, what would you like to eat?' or 'How do you describe the girl
sitting next to you?' and has the merry class speaking French in five weeks
flat.

The report of this national commission covers the various state systems –
education is something that is the responsibility of each state – various city
experiments, and looks over the national picture by way of stressing the
hazards and deficiencies of all sorts of ethnic groups, especially the blacks
and the fairly recent and continuing arrival of, literally by now, millions, if
you lump them all together of Chicanos, Mexicans, Hispanics, Puerto Ricans,
Cubans, Haitians and Asians, refugees mostly from Korea and Vietnam.

There seem to be two sources of this decline. One which affects the majority of
American children at school is the acceptance by school authorities of such a
low standard in what used to be called 'the three Rs', that graduation from
high school is looked on as automatic, however pathetic your marks. How this
has come about is a matter of much argument and passionate belief. Some say
that throughout the Second War and the prosperous Fifties and Sixties, the
American people grew too complacent about America's superior technology, from
nuclear energy, the early triumphs of the space age and industry in general. –
call it, as we once did, American know-how – that teachers and employers
forgot, or neglected to teach, the elements of that know-how that had made
America superior in the first place. This argument adduces the shock and the
overtaking triumph of the Italians, the Germans, most of all the Japanese, and
the consequent flooding of the American market with their products and the
arrival, once for all, of a problem that 40 years ago didn't exist – an
American balance of payments problem.

On the same topic, the decline of basic education, other people say we're
reaping the harvest of the pioneer progressive John Dewey and the theory
derived from him, whether legitimately or not, that education is more of a
breathless adventure than a grind and that it's better for a child to be taught
how to grow a vegetable or learn the history of its own state than bother with
such stuff as grammar or the main body of English literature or quadratic
equations.

Well, there is something to both these efforts at discovering the cause. What
matters, however, is the result and the result is that about 17 per cent of
children graduating from American schools are illiterate or, as we now say –
I'm not sure why – functionally illiterate.

The other, and the more conspicuous, source of the decline is the feeding into
the schools of these millions of strangers – strangers to the land and the
language – and this has become so dense and so rapid in some places, in New
York City, for instance, that the city law now requires voting ballots to be in
two languages and requires bilingual instruction to be given to all children
who need it. And who gives the English instruction to Hispanics who desperately
need it? Hispanics, who may have been here ten years or less or more and are
often not very good at English themselves. This is an immense problem.

At the turn of the century when millions of immigrants poured in from central
and eastern and southern Europe, President Theodore Roosevelt practically
proclaimed that there must be an end to what he called 'hyphenated' Americans –
German-Americans, Italian-Americans, Polish-Americans and so on. The immigrant
children were thrown into the swimming pool of English and nothing else. It was
the parents who were taught English at night school to catch up with their
children.

Well, the national commission says that this, and immersion system, must be
done again, otherwise we shall begin or continue to fragment the American
people into colonies of many languages and tenacious, old-country habits.

The motto on the seal of this country is 'E PLURIBUS UNUM' – Out of many, one.
If the present trend flourishes, it could be turned around. Out of one country,
many, which is not a recipe for a strong nation or a united people.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP