The World Series gets the vote

I'm talking at a time when mysterious rumours are flying around about the
hostages. I must leave to the weekend to prove them true or wild or just
politically planned.

If you can imagine that the British soccer Cup Final was played not on one
Saturday afternoon, but could run through ten days and seven afternoons, the
winner being the team that won four games, you'll get some idea what it's like
being in America just now.

The baseball championship fought out between the team that came on top of the
National League and the one that headed the American League started last
Tuesday night. It came down, in the end, to a battle between the Phillies and
the Royals which, being interpreted, means Philadelphia and Kansas City. The
newspapers and television may go on, as usual, about the Iran/Iraq war and the
continuing dogfight between Mr Carter and Mr Reagan, but something like 50
million television sets are tuned at eight o'clock most nights to the so-called
World Series. Why so-called?

Well, when the first National Championship was fought out between the two
leagues in 1903, baseball was such an exclusively American game that it would
have been pedantic to call the champions the American champions. They were, for
lack of any international competition, the world champions and so, to this day,
that's the name with which the four-game winner glorifies itself and the city
it calls home.

I hear voices – still, small but persistent voices – from many Englishmen
listening. I recall the late Stephen Potter saying what they are saying but he
put it in a typically mock-modest, calculating way, 'It seems absurd to say so
but isn't baseball, after all, simply rounders?' The answer is, 'Yes, it is'.
Or was. Even though 20 years or more the Russians came out with the blustering
assertion that B-E-I-Z-B-O-L – beizbol – was invented by them, there seems, for
once, no question that it started in England, probably as far back as the
sixteenth century as a children's game. By the eighteenth century – and we're
still talking about England – it was actually called 'baseball'. Only later it
was re-christened 'rounders'.

How come, then, that the Americans always called it baseball? They didn't. Not
the early settlers, the seventeenth-century ones. They modified the English
game into something called 'town ball' which was played in various forms
throughout the eastern states. Most of today's west, of course, was not, then,
American at all. The birth date of the modern game though is 1845. That was the
year in which, for the first time, a club wrote and adopted a codified set of
rules. The club was the Knickerbocker Club of New York City.

That sentence may produce a puzzled wrinkle on the brow of any Englishman,
Australian or whoever who knows his New York clubs. Wasn't, and isn't, the
Knickerbocker Club one of the most swagger, socially explosive clubs of this
city, something like White's in London? It was and it is, but then an
interesting point not even known to many a baseball buff – baseball, like golf,
in the nineteenth century, was a game for wealthy amateurs, what they used to
call 'a gentlemen's game'. It didn't remain for long an upper-crust amusement.
One thing you can always be sure of in New York. If somebody introduces
anything as a minority privilege, somebody else will manufacture something very
like it on an assembly line.

You may remember how, after the War of Independence, some of the more lofty but
defeated loyalists, still clutching their allegiance to England, banded
together into an exclusive club called the St George's Club, whereupon the
hoi-polloi, about to form a political club which would be one hundred per cent
American, decided that they, too, ought to have a patron saint to name their
club after. They found an Indian chief in Delaware named Tammany and sanctified
him and organised themselves as the Sons of Saint Tammany.

When Mrs Simpson married King Edward VIII in France in 1937, the wholesale
dress houses had spies there who drew rapid copies of the bride's wedding dress
and, within a month, indistinguishable replicas of the Duchess' wedding gown
could be bought in a department store for something like $29.95.

So, baseball attracted humble onlookers of the games being played between the
Knickerbocker Club and similar genteel clubs in Boston and Philadelphia and the
onlookers liked what they saw. Within ten years of that first Code of Rules,
there were 50 clubs, still of amateurs but now all members of something called
the National Association of Baseball Players.

The Civil War, at one and the same time, stopped the game and revived it. The
clubs, of course, suspended their competition but the game was played behind
both the Union and Confederate lines. The demobilised soldiers took it home
and, by 1870, the number of clubs in the association had quintupled. By then,
too, professional teams had sprouted. One, the Cincinnati Red Stockings, went
off on a triumphal tour, hypnotised the cities. The amateurs backed off and the
pros formed their own national association.

But the, er... the 1870s was not the most virginal decade in American history.
Mark Twain called it 'an era of incredible rottenness'. Corruption raised its
prosperous head in Congress, in the Navy Department and among the first, lusty
and ruthless generation of robber barons. It almost killed off baseball
because, like any other game – especially one whose fortunes can go up and down
dramatically – it attracted gamblers and gamblers are great arrangers of fixed
games. There were illegal pools, newly famous players were bribed and the
newspapers and the public raised a howl of outrage.

The game was saved by disciplining itself by forming a National League of
Professional Players and instituting a controlling body. That was just over a
hundred years ago. At the turn of the century, another league of teams from
other cities was formed, the American League. They both agreed to abide by the
same rules and a new controlling body. And in 1903 the first World Series was
born.

Any intelligent games watcher who's looked at the game long enough, on
television especially, soon realises that there's nothing like it. I mean,
literally. The physical movements of the pitcher, the batter, the runners, the
motions of the fielders which they've practised thousands of times of scooping
their arms into the ball on the bounce and hurling it to a base in one action.
All these things look like a new form of ballet or a game invented on another
planet by men who have never seen how the rest of the world throws a ball or
hits a ball or catches a ball.

Well, now the World Series, played under blinding shafts of light, attracts
about 60,000 people a night to the stadiums – the teams switch between playing
at home and away – and it's figured about a third of the population of 220
million watches on television or listens in cars or trucks or taxis. And the
cities, especially the cities of Philadelphia and Kansas City, Missouri, are
strangely silent on these crisp fall nights, except for the babble of the radio
and television commentators, a unique language, rattling out of open windows or
the lobbies of apartment houses where the doormen are keeping tabs on the game.

So, Philadelphia was much in the news this week. Not only Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. There's a small town in Mississippi called Philadelphia and this
week a famous black man recalled ugly memories of that Philadelphia and was
promptly repudiated by the White House. You will remember Andrew Young as the
able, and once cherished by the president, chief American representative to the
United Nations. His tongue, his sharp and impromptu remarks, tripped him in his
diplomatic career and he resigned last year.

Well, Mr Young is still faithful to President Carter in his fashion and last
week he was out campaigning for him in Ohio, a crucial state which, if it's
going to go for the president, will need all his most eloquent supporters, Mr
Young, for instance, and if the president's prayers are answered, Senator
Kennedy. Mr Young, a black man talking to a white audience, unfortunately
recalled a remark made by Ronald Reagan in Philadelphia, Mississippi in August.
Mr Reagan's remark can certainly, by most people, be regarded as harmless.

'I believe in states' rights,' said Mr Reagan, 'I believe in people doing as
much as they can at the private level.'

States' rights, to the vast majority of Americans, means those rights of
self-government reserved to the states by the Constitution, as distinct from
the rights of the federal, the national, government.

Well, Mr Andrew Young recalled that simple remark and said, 'If he, Reagan, had
gone to Biloxi, Mississippi and talked about states' rights, if he'd gone to
New Orleans or Birmingham, Alabama, I would not have been upset but when you go
to Philadelphia, Mississippi where James Chaney, Andy Goodman and Michael
Schwerner were murdered by the sheriff and the deputy sheriff and a posse
protecting states' rights and you go down there talking about states' rights,
that looks like a code word to me, that it's going to be all right to kill
niggers when he's president.'

Those three men, by the way, were black civil rights' workers killed in 1964.
The killers, all white, were convicted by an all-white jury.

What was doubly unfortunate about Mr Young's last sentence was that it
repeated, in a more flagrant form, an aspersion for which President Carter had
apologised only two weeks ago, when he, the president, had suggested that, in
that Philadelphia, Mississippi speech, Mr Reagan was suggesting a sinister
privilege in the phrase 'states' rights'.

Lamentably, Mr Reagan's campaign chief called Mr Young's remark 'part of the
continuing Carter hatchet attack' which put the odium of Mr Young's
intemperance right back in the White House. The White House gave out a general
groan and issued an immediate disclaimer. We don't know whether or not the
president has begged Mr Young, please not to help him any more.

The New York Times came out with a hand-wringing editorial entitled 'What's fit
to say in a campaign?' First it said Richard Nixon insisted he was not a crook,
now Jimmy Carter insists he is not a meany. Whether the candidates are
sufficiently decent or fastidious is small beer. What counts is whether they
are clear about where they would have the country go.

With less than three weeks left, isn't it time to stop berating each other? The
public knows whom each is running against. What it needs to know is what they
stand for.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP