Presidential press conferences

The other night, Thursday night, watching a beleaguered president being
interrogated and chivvied, at times more like a prisoner at the bar than a head
of government who had kindly consented to see a few members of the press, I
recalled a time, a particular occasion, in London shortly after the United
States came into the Second World War.

It must have been no later than the spring of 1942. The first batch of American
correspondents had settled into London, one or two of them, as I remember,
provoking ribald remarks by hunkering down on the front line in the bivouac of
the Savoy Hotel. But there were others, the best of them who, no matter where
they slept, got out into the night bombings and, pretty soon, would manage to
go along on bombing raids over Germany and in the fullness of the spring of
1944, be in on the first landings on the Normandy beach.

But in that first spring, both the good and the bad were puzzled to find
something missing in Britain in the relations between the government and the
press. There were of course regular briefings, as there were in most
departments of the government in the United States. What puzzled them was the
missing link. There was no such thing as a press conference, regular or
irregular, held by the Prime Minister. Why was that?

They'd all been brought up to take the presidential press conference as a
normal, necessary, democratic institution, though I imagine few of them knew
that it has no legal sanction. It's not prescribed by the constitution. In
1942, it was, indeed, only about 30 years old. The point was put in a memo, or
petition, to Mr Churchill. Why no press conferences, Prime Minister? This is a
democracy, isn't it?

Mr Churchill didn't hesitate for a second. 'Indeed it is,' he said, 'and in
this country, the obligation of the Prime Minister is first to the people who
elected him, to the common people through their representatives in the Commons.
That is the place to ask questions and the people who have the first right to
ask them are the members of the Commons.' That was that.

And, after the war, whenever American politicians visited Britain who wanted to
sit in on a debate in the House of Commons, I used to urge them to get in early
and watch a session of Question Time – an institution which clearly does not
exist in the United States, since the head of the party in power, the
president, does not live and have his being in the legislature. Indeed, he may
never visit either House of Congress except by invitation for special
occasions, like making his annual State of the Union address, which is the
ceremonial and political equivalent of the Speech from the Throne.

One old and powerful senator, I recall, was a veteran of American politics;
Senator Vandenberg of Michigan, who, yet, had never heard about or, anyway,
thought about, the vital institution of Question Time. He was sitting in the
gallery during a pretty brisk and acrimonious hour with Prime Minister Attlee
in charge. At the time, the American view of Mr Attlee was that artfully
composed by Mr Churchill in two or three mischievous strokes – 'a sheep in
sheep's clothing' and, 'Most certainly he's a modest man but then he has so
much to be modest about'. And so on.

Well, Mr Attlee put on what to the regulars was a perfectly regular performance
– sharp, short, on the ball, well-informed, fielding questions on everything
from a reported move to approach the Russians to the intrusion of a policeman
on the slumbers of an innocent householder in Yorkshire. He was asked, I
recall, about a rumour that there'd been rumblings of a mutiny in a British
ship on duty somewhere in the Mediterranean. Would he care to comment?
Certainly not, he snapped.

Senator Vandenberg was fascinated and amazed and when it was all over, he came
out and said, 'Boy, they are tough babies and that Attlee, he's the toughest of
the lot!' 'He was a major and a survivor at Gallipoli,' I said. 'Is that so?'
said the senator, in wonderment.

Of course, a similar institution is not possible in the American system since
the Cabinet is a collection of the President's cronies, not recruited from the
Congress and they, like him, have no reason or right to appear in Congress.
They call press conferences from time to time if they feel like it, but the
only way they can be challenged by the people's elected representatives is when
they're called to testify before committees of Congress and that can be rough
too.

So the nearest equivalent to Question Time in the Commons is the presidential
press conference and it is, as I say, in the history of the republic, a
comparative newcomer. It started on the initiative of one man, of Theodore
Roosevelt, the day he became one of what we call the accidental presidents,
immediately after the assassination of President McKinley. That was in 1901.

During his time as governor of New York, he'd started a unique practice of
having the press in twice a day – twice a day! – at eleven and five, to feed
them bits of information about the goings-on in the state. The very first day
in the White House, he called in the very small press corps and told it that he
would regularly see two reporters he had known and trusted in Albany and he
would give his news to them but, for the time being, to nobody else. Others
came along he trusted; if they violated his trust by spreading confidences
abroad, they were banned for ever.

A pretty dictatorial routine but far freer than any known before. He came,
however, sadly but honestly to expect and accept violations on the principle –
which was remarkable for a president to announce in those days – that if there
is one thing we ought to be careful about, it is in regard to interfering with
the liberty of the press; we have to take the good with the bad. It's a good
deal better to err on the side of having too much discussion and having too
virulent language used by the press, rather than to err on the side of them not
say what they ought to say, especially with reference to public men and
measures.

Now that would not be a remarkable thing for a president or a prime minister to
say today, though most of them might wish they could. But in 1901, those were
brave words.

After Teddy Roosevelt, the practice lapsed under Taft. Woodrow Wilson took it
up and instituted the first formal and regular press conferences. He, too,
believed in what he called 'pitiless publicity for public business' but when
America got into the First World War, pitiless publicity could mean open
publicity for wartime secrets. Press censorship put an end to the press
conference.

Later on Coolidge, an easygoing man who spoke and thought in monosyllables,
revived it for a time, but all the questions had to be sent in in written form
and screened by the president's secretary. In a word, Coolidge chose what he
wanted to talk about and after a while he got bored even with that concession.

Hoover came along and dared, after a year or two, to take spontaneous
questions. Not for long. He committed a couple of bloopers and in those far-off
days, if the president got his facts muddled or confessed to not knowing what
was going on, his reputation would have suffered disastrously. Hoover abandoned
the habit.

It was left to Franklin Roosevelt to revive the press conference in its
liveliest form, to revel in it and to make it a permanent obligation of the
presidency, one that no succeeding president has ever dared abandon. Roosevelt
held two conferences a week, 998 in all his time and, at the start he set four
rules, four categories of news. He would retail news that could be attributed
to a White House source, not to him. There would be background news not to be
attributed to anyone. Very rarely, his own words could be quoted as coming from
him. This happened so rarely – about two or three times a year – that it made
the headlines, like the Oracles coming from Olympus and he would, when he
chose, say, 'No comment'.

These rules were to be strictly followed and – amazing to consider today – they
were not broken. The same rules went for Truman. I think the big – for the
president perhaps fatal – change came with President Eisenhower. Acting on what
some people, even some of his aides, deplored as a mistaken view of democracy,
Eisenhower held televised press conferences, brought in the signal corps to
transcribe them and, from then on, everything was on the record. In fact,
Eisenhower's press conferences were much less helpful to the reporter than
Franklin Roosevelt's. Obviously, the president still couldn't say out loud
everything he knew everything on his mind, so instead of saying, 'No comment',
he had to waffle around pseudo explanations. Eisenhower, I think, managed to
say less in more words on more topics than any president before or since.

So this is the parlous institution that Ronald Reagan inherited. Like most of
his predecessors, he was almost impatient at the start to get going, to rollick
in the free-for-all of spontaneous, unedited questions. Well, what with his
hazy way with facts, his fondness for encapsulating complicated problems in
old, cosy anecdotes, his love of patriotic rhetoric, he has found, in the
twilight of his presidency, that the press conference is a perilous high wire,
that he's best at performing a written script in his incomparable, affable,
gutsy fashion.

But the televised press conference has become to the media and the public the
one certain revelation of the president's competence and character and it is
not to be denied, so that Mr Reagan actually lost ground and credibility simply
from not having held one for four months. And so, on Thursday, he had to hold
what everyone said would be the most direct and intimate test of his
presidency.

He did far better than his detractors had anticipated and not as well as his
disciples had hoped. But he did not stumble. He was good-tempered, if not
relaxed. Surely it's time for him to declare, 'I have had my say about Iran,
the arms, the Contras, now please wait for the findings of the joint
congressional select committee!'

Any earlier president would have said that at the start. But he didn't. And the
appetite of the media is insatiable in the new era when everybody claims the
right to know everything, all the time, preferably tonight.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP