US troops in Lebanon

When I was a little boy, a big boy, a schoolmaster of ours decided to give us a
treat. He'd come on a news item in an English paper which had picked up the
current syllabus of studies at some American college or other. In those days,
our knowledge of American college life was restricted to what we learned from
the movies of Harold Lloyd – knowledge that was confirmed later by an American
musical comedy that arrived in London.

There were apparently no classes, no studies at American colleges. Football was
the reason for going there. The head boy, or the big man on campus, as we
learned to call him, was not, as you might expect, the captain of the football
team, but its weakest member. He didn't see very well. He wore what were than
an exclusively American type of spectacles, comical dark circles known as
horn-rimmed glasses. This weakling, though he was a joke to his buddies,
somehow attracted the prettiest girl on campus. Another outrageous thing about
American colleges, we discovered, was that young men and women went to the same
college.

While this numbskull dashed around the field mixing up the plays and causing an
uproar of ridicule from the crowd on the sidelines, the prettiest girl
alternately cheered and wept. Finally, the numbskull broke out of the pack,
scored an incredible try or touch down and won both the match and the heart of
the prettiest girl.

Well, our genial history master had news for us. There were classes. There were
academic studies at American colleges. He read from the syllabus. There was a
course in real estate, estate agentry. There was another in something called
business management. Most hilarious of all, there was a course in hair cutting.
How we laughed! We were left to figure out for ourselves, if we ever came to
think about it, how and where the telephone came into being and the electrical
light bulb and the oil refinery and the assembly line and brain surgery and why
the Americans began to pick up Nobel prizes in medicine and science, not to
mention, so help us, in literature.

Well, move on, say, 40 years or so. An English friend is staying with us in New
York. One day when he's looking over the New York Times, he laughs out loud,
with much the same satisfaction as we had laughed at that old college syllabus.
He read that the University of Minnesota was starting a research laboratory in,
what? In sleep! A sleep research department. 'Sleep!' My friend said, with, I
imagine the same inflection that King Edward VII once used when he enquired
about the identity of a guest at the far end of the table and was told that the
man was an authority on bacon. 'Bacon!' cried the incredulous monarch.

'Oh dear, oh dear!' sighed my friend, 'What will they think of studying next?'
Well, down the intervening years, the University of Minnesota has punctured a
lot of myths in the process of discovering how sleep works and how it doesn't,
which should not have surprised us if we'd ever taken time out to reflect that
practically everything most of us know about sleep comes from the same source
that we call on to know about climate and weather, namely old wives' tales and
hand-me-down superstitions, like, you need about eight hours sleep to be
healthy, that two hours' sleep before midnight is sounder and healthier than
the sleep you get later, and so on.

Minnesota discovered that there is no healthy norm, that some people need ten
hours and some five, that everybody dreams a lot, as indicated by the frequency
of REMs (rapid eye movements), that 24 hours is only an arbitrary division set
up by the calendar and that human beings have accommodated themselves to it.
When you put them in a darkened room and remove the clocks, radios and
television, some people develop a 26-hour cycle, some a 20-hour cycle and so
on, which means they lose track of the date. They also discover their own
feeding cycles which varies very widely, enough, anyway, to suggest that three
meals a day is a convention developed by the civilised routine necessary for
working, playing, running an office and so forth and so forth.

A new study has just come from the University of California. I don't know
whether it should be called a social or a neurological study. It has measured
the effects of various facial expressions on skin temperature and respiration
and, what is more fascinating, on the people out front, the people to whom the
expressions of smiling, frowning, ridicule, sympathy, are addressed.

The first tentative findings say that while the expression on the face of A may
not be instantly reflected by the same expression on the face of B, B begins to
feel what A is feeling inside. Somebody dug up a surprising passage in Edgar
Allen Poe, in which he says that whenever he wanted to know what emotions were
being felt by a person he was describing, he would adopt that person's facial
expression and then tap a surprising flow of new feelings. Poe maintained that
this was the secret of his ability to get under the skin, so to speak, of
criminals.

Is all this going to help much? Well, yes. For the happy news is that genial
people tend to generate geniality, that laughing reduces blood pressure, is
better for the skin than cosmetics and takes the strain off the nervous system.

The study I'm waiting for is one about the effect of weather on human beings in
general and politicians in particular. In this, we are roughly as ignorant as
we've been about sleep and yet, nations that lie in the path of a wayward wind
– usually a hot, dry wind that comes in from some adjacent desert – have
actually written into their criminal codes statutes of forgiveness for crimes
committed under the influence.

This indulgence has not yet spread to California where I found myself last week
in pursuit of cool weather and sunless skies. After over two months of the most
infernal summer in 50 years, I got out of New York and went to London.
Hopeless! While London was 15 degrees or so cooler outdoors, it was boiling
indoors. So, a quick retreat to Edinburgh. Cooler yet outdoors but every
restaurant, theatre, bedroom was an oven.

In desperation, finally, and knowing very well what I was up to, I took off for
a week to San Francisco. August into September is a very reliable cool, even
cold, time out there. Anybody with any money or spare time or both who lives in
San Francisco gets out of town in August because it's the month when the
well-known air-conditioning system, provided by the Pacific Ocean, goes to work
with a vengeance, pouring in the dense, white fog through the Golden Gate from
mid-afternoon, through the night, till mid-morning. This is what I craved,
since I decided I never wanted to see the sun again for the rest of my
lifetime.

The San Francisco mean temperature varies by no more than seven degrees, winter
and summer. Perfect! Relax, do no work, play golf... you know what happened?
For the first time on record for so long, the prevailing westerly wind, in from
across the cold Pacific, failed to prevail. What happens very rarely happened
all through July and August – the wind came in from the east, from across the
California desert, the well-known Santa Ana wind.

Result? On three successive days when I'd arranged to follow that damnable
little ball over the rolling, lovely fairways of the Coastal Hills, it was 87,
then 94. Last Monday, 98 – the second-highest temperature ever recorded in San
Francisco – people prostrate on the grass or boiling indoors because San
Francisco, like London, boasts that since it has such an equable climate, it
has no need of air-conditioning.

Anyway, I'd had it after some days and flew back to New York. And there, at the
airport, I came on what I'd been searching for for three months. Brilliant and
crisp and 60-something. Bliss!

Whether or not my hunch about the effect of weather on behaviour is correct, it
was very noticeable this week that the Senate and the House stopped jumping at
each other's throats and began to work in almost sweet reasonableness on a
compromise over the knotty question of Lebanon and the status or future of the
marines there.

The conflict goes back to 1973 and something Congress passed towards the weary
and frustrate end of the Vietnam war. It was called the War Powers Act. It
requires the president to report to Congress within 48 hours of committing
troops to foreign combat, why he's doing it and how long they'll be there.
After 60 days he must stop their combat duty and have another 30 days to bring
them home. Congress could either approve his action or defeat it by a
resolution to bring the men home, which is not subject to a presidential veto.

There's nothing fundamentally new in this. Simply, ten years ago Congress was
fed up with three presidents who, alone, had committed troops to wars abroad,
thereby defying what was written into the constitution nearly 200 years ago,
namely, that Congress and only Congress can declare war, can raise and support
armies for no more than two years, can maintain a navy, can make rules for the
government and regulation of the land and naval forces.

After Korea and Vietnam, Congress was simply reasserting its constitutional
right to have the main say about American troops abroad. Most of the Senate and
the House approve of the marines being in Lebanon, most don't want to see them
embroiled there forever. The president has maintained that the marines are,
like the other NATO forces, forbidden to launch attacks or retaliate and so
cannot be covered by the act defining combat.

At the moment, Congress wants the president to invoke the War Powers Act and
then leave it up to both of them to agree at some unstated future time when to
say, 'Hold! Enough!'

Beyond this constitutional quibble, the president has to face a popular outcry
about the death of several marines. Lebanon would not be helped and the
Lebanese Druze militias would rejoice if everybody knew the date when the
marines were to be brought home and we all have to face the fact that soldiers,
of any branch of the service, are not sent into trouble for show, on the
general understanding that, on no account, shall they be killed.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP