Tougher smoking warnings

You know how, if you're in the habit or the business of looking things up, how
easy it is to get sidetracked by some fascinating topic that lies
alphabetically next to the thing you're supposed to be looking up or, as the
Americans say, researching.

I had a tough time the other day with my tenth volume of the Encyclopedia
Britannica because it's the volume which has printed boldly on the spine,
Garrison to Halibut. I was looking up the short biography of George V but
didn't get around to him until, once for all, I'd satisfied my long,
unsatisfied curiosity about these two end pieces.

The garrison turned out to be not about troops stationed in a town or a
fortress, but about a particular man, William Lloyd Garrison, an early
nineteenth-century man from Massachusetts who became a famous name in the north
and a name execrated in the south, almost as much as the name of Lincoln.
Garrison was the leader of the so-called abolitionists and, when, at the end of
the Civil War, slavery was abolished, Garrison declared his duty was done and
abolished the anti-slavery society. He died in New York 105 years ago today.
That's a pure coincidence.

And, oh yes! I knew his great grand-daughter. That's all, I think, ye need to
know about William Lloyd Garrison.

But, how about, I thought, halibut? Of course, I know halibut. It was one of
the few fish that we had when I was a boy which varied the dreary alternative,
to me dreary, anyway, of plaice or fluke, but did I know that the halibut is
more accurately known as Hippoglossus hippoglossus? I didn't. Or that the eggs
are only three and a half millimetres in diameter, that the finished product,
so to speak, can live well into his twenties and can be several hundred pounds
in weight and over five feet long. Not any I ever saw or caught in the Irish
Sea. But, ah, the big babies, wouldn't you know, are caught off the Pacific
coast of North America which provides over 70 per cent of the total annual
commercial catch of 90 million pounds.

Well, that's the halibut and what more we don't know about him, surely won't
harm us.

A day later, I was feeling a little surge of guilt at not having talked for a
couple of months or so about the presidential election, but lots of you will be
relieved to hear that I managed to suppress that guilt and decide we won't
touch topic A until all the main primaries are over, two weeks from now.

However I was checking the details of the 1952 conventions when my eye caught,
under historical events of that year, a press conference which I attended
called by one Dr Keiler Hammond. My paper did not then make a point of covering
medical conferences, let alone press conferences called by one doctor, but Dr
Hammond was in charge of a research project undertaken two years previously by
the American Cancer Society. As I recall, no results were going to be published
for five years but at the end of two years, the society had made such dramatic
and disturbing findings that, in the public interest, it felt duty bound to
publish them. I got wind of this and was on hand when Dr Hammond, who was in
charge of the research, made his first, stunning announcement.

It was that cigarette smoking had proved to be a leading cause of cancer of the
lung and, quite possibly, could also have much to do with heart disease in
smokers. I wrote up these results at great length and, shortly afterwards, I
went down to Florida to visit an old Long Island neighbour who'd retired to Key
Biscayne, an idyllic little peninsula south of Miami and quite unknown to fame
until 20 years later we knew it as the Florida retreat of one Richard M. Nixon
and his buddy Bebe Rebozo.

My old neighbour was then just on 90 – a frail, but wiry little grasshopper of
a man who weighed not much more than seven, I should say, eight stone at most.
He had, as we say, all his marbles and as he rolled them out impressively, he
also had at his elbow, always, a pack of cigarettes. The filter business had
not come in then. No, these were the original, lethal type. He smoked them
almost continuously. He was a subscriber to the transatlantic weekly edition of
my paper and he'd read my pieces. 'What are you going to do about it?' I asked
him. 'Well,' he said, 'I went to my doctor and he said if you stop smoking even
now, you will probably lengthen your life.' 'By about how much?' The doctor
pondered. 'By about maybe three weeks.' 'I thought a long time', the old man
said, 'and I said to myself the heck with it.'

Well, this, needless to say, is a story that the tobacco companies would love
but old Nathaniel Foster, he died about three years later, was a freak, a wild
and lucky exception. Down the years – goodness, down three decades – the
research has been repeated and extended in a dozen countries and its
conclusions are overwhelming. As the Surgeon General of the United States said
last Wednesday, in simply the latest declaration of a public health authority,
'We now estimate that between 80 and 90 per cent of the chronic lung disease in
this country is directly attributed to cigarette smoking and we can say again,
with greater certainty than ever, that cigarettes are the most important
individual health risk in this country responsible for more premature deaths
and disability than any other known agent.'

He said something else, however, which will certainly brew a fine storm of
controversy and, I should guess, thousands of law suits around the country,
from non-smokers who come within breathing distance of cigarette smoke however
widely diffused. Dr Koop – he is the Surgeon General – was holding a press
conference to deliver a 500-page report on cigarette smoking which now
represents the government's official beliefs.

To the coming dismay, I should imagine, of restaurant owners, airplane
companies, the builders of waiting rooms and any other entrepreneur who gathers
two or three together, there was a short chapter nestling in those 500 pages
which somebody spied and dragged into public view. It said in some that
non-smokers, too, can suffer various similar ills from association with
smokers. Children whose parents smoke have more bronchitis and pneumonia early
in life than the children of parents who don't and there follows other
evidence.

Oh well, it's only fair to say, at this point, that the Tobacco Institute of
America quotes other studies which dispute the Surgeon General's report. So,
there, I'd better say that there follows other claims as, for instance, that of
a Japanese study which finds slight increases in bronchitis and emphysema among
wives of smokers as against wives of non-smokers. The general claim is that
there's such a thing as illness from what they call passive smoke or passive
smoking – from, that is, being in an atmosphere that receives cigarette smoke.

Well, another government department, the National Institute of Health, no less,
has also made studies which conclude in this way. 'A review of the data which
addresses the effect of passive smoking on the respiratory system suggests that
the effect varies from negligible to quite small.'

But some communities have already started to move fearing the worst of these
studies. San Francisco recently passed an ordinance that compels offices to
have separate quarters for smokers and non-smokers. Several suits have been
brought by individuals to make airlines have separate compartments, not just
cubic space and some have done it, but one small airline which would have had
to redesign its small planes won its case as the defendant.

Now Congress, of course, had wind of the Surgeon General's latest report and a
move started at once to strengthen the warning that must be printed on all
cigarette packages and on all cigarette advertisements. It has for several
years now been both sad and ridiculous to see the brave efforts of the
advertising companies in full-page ads showing you splendid manly types out
shooting moose or camping in the mountains or riding the prairie, symbols meant
to take the curse off the prominent white rectangle which says, 'Warning, the
Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your
health'.

Well, Congress is now about to vote a new compulsory warning to replace the
old, one which could say, cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, emphysema,
heart disease and other respiratory ills. There are variant suggestions but the
new one will be just about as tough as the one I suggested.

This is rough on the senators and congressmen who come from states – the
Carolinas more than any – whose economy is practically rooted in tobacco, but
every straw poll shows that the new warnings will be passed by huge majorities.

Since we're on this cheerful subject of health and what can impair it, there is
a new, exhaustive and – to some people – gloomy, study just out from the United
States Department of Agriculture. It's a study of America's changing diet
habits between 1950 and 1983. This covers the whole population. It was, I
think, some time at the end of the Fifties that we first heard the dread word
'cholesterol' – the waxy substance which helps produce certain hormones and we
always wished it well. Our own bodies create the necessary stuff until we heard
that certain foods, and for some nations, the staff of life, dangerously
increase cholesterol, producing fatty deposits in the blood vessels that can
cause stoppages and heart attacks.

Well, since 1950, Americans have eaten remarkably less of the villainous foods
that contain saturated fats and, therefore, cholesterol. Since 1950, 32 per
cent fewer eggs, one-third less whole milk, half as much butter, 80 per cent
less lard. However, they do eat 50 per cent more beef than they used to and,
considering the succulent quality of American beef, I think this is the last
suspect they're likely to give up.

But, Americans, on the whole, have strikingly changed their diets in the
direction of more vegetables, fibre and fruits. And, to let in a little glimmer
of light on this dark subject, today, the incidence of heart attacks in this
country is down more than 20 per cent since 1950.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP