James McGill Buchanan

This is the week of the year when, if you were a visitor from another planet
and were able, with your superior technology, to fly between a hundred American
cities in one evening, you'd be bound to assume that the people of the United
States had just come through a successful revolution.

The crisp, silver fall has given way to the golden Indian summer and in all the
cities, you'd see people out on the streets on these hot nights, small huddles
round taxi cabs, families out on their stoops, surging crowds in the lobbies of
airports and hotels, in the cities, in the mountains and the western desert,
thousands of bars and saloons, packed with cheering customers.

Only in Boston, on Tuesday and Wednesday nights would you have seen the eerie
spectacle of 30,000 people in a stadium sunk in gloom, evidently the
counter-revolutionaries who failed.

In other words, it's been the week of the World Series, the national baseball
championship, the finale of the most tense and subtle of all team games. The
tension was always there if you knew the game and even if you were up against
the night sky on the back row of a stadium looking down on a diamond spotted
with midgets, but the subtlety was never disclosed to the many millions of
watchers until baseball got on to television.

Then and now, you see the whole field of play but only in rare long shots. The
visual staple of the coverage is the close-ups of the pitcher adjusting his
cap, licking his lips, tweaking his ear or adopting any one of the variety of
signals every pitcher gives to the catcher. Then cut to the dug-out and see a
manager sniffing or dropping his head or taking two paces – another signal to
the pitcher, and the field. Then cut to the infield, if that's where the pitch
is designed to be hit. And then the play.

Now that's only the most elementary, crude description of the uninterrupted
movement of the game. While the good commentators guess, more often correctly
predict, that the next ball pitched will be either a curve ball or a screw ball
or a knuckle ball or a slider, a sinker, a fingertip ball or a palm ball.

I hear some dedicated cricketer saying, 'Wait a minute! Are you telling me that
a ball which is always a full toss is always thrown through the air and doesn't
touch the ground, can have seven different flights?' That's what I'm saying. I
never really believed it myself until about 15, 20 years ago when they
introduced the instant reply in slow motion, so the pitch was filmed from
behind the pitcher's arm and you could see, by the very hard-earned magic that
pitchers have to practise and practise all through the winter and spring
training, you could see a ball thrown from six o'clock, veer out to eleven
o'clock and duck to one o'clock. Or go in a high loop from five o'clock and
staying high until, suddenly, a yard short of the batter, it drops like a stone
over the plate.

Those are only two of the repertory of amazing trajectories that good pitchers
can manage through the short stretch of air between them and the batter. The
nightly revelation of this magic to riveted millions across the country is the
gift of one American to his fellow men and women.

A few years ago – I don't believe it can be more than four years – I did a talk
about the annual awards of the Motion Picture Academy of Arts and Sciences, the
Oscars. There came up to the rostrum the usual dazzle of radiant and weeping
stars, blessing their managers and agents and studios, and jerking random tears
from the theatre audience with their heartfelt tributes to all the people who'd
intimately helped them to glory, including the husband or wife and mother and
father and three little children.

That particular year, I was most taken with an old man, not a sprinkle of
glitter about him, in a homely suit and a crinkly, modest smile. A man so
likeable on sight that you shared his slightly uncomfortable feeling that he
didn't know what he was doing amid all this glitz and hype and mascara and
spidery eyelashes. He was being given a special award for his lifetime
contribution to the cinema. He took it gratefully with a nod and a few words of
thanks and was gone.

A few weeks later, I was delighted to have a letter from him which I've kept.
It was a letter of thanks, as simple and genuine as you might get from a
carpenter you'd congratulated on doing a good job on your new bathroom doors.
It seems that some friend of his in Mexico had heard the talk, taped it, copied
out the relevant sentences and sent them to him.

His is a name which rates in all the best guides and encyclopedias of the
movies only a few lines, if it's there at all. The name is Joseph Walker. He
got his award for cinematography but I don't believe they detailed the
innovations he was responsible for, most of all for the device which passed
over to television and made our actual view of events so eerily intimate, of
political rallies, of revolutions, of terrorist attacks, protest marches. Most
of all, carried our eyes in a flash from 50,000 spectators in a stadium to the
drops of sweat on the brow of a soccer player, a tennis player, a golfer and,
in baseball, helped us see in menacing close-up the index fingers and the thumb
on the ball that a pitcher was about to throw. The miracle invention was the
zoom lens and its inventor was Joseph Walker.

He died last year, I think, in his middle eighties and I never watch a golf
tournament or a tennis match and now, for several nights on end, the World
Series, without thinking of Joe Walker and blessing him.

Well, this is also the time of the year when I don't suppose quite as many
people get worked up over the award of the Nobel Prize for Economics. I have to
say I always begin to twitch with curiosity when it's coming up because in a
field, a specialty, which affects every human on earth – money – the prize
always goes to somebody who has enunciated a theory about money that sounds
like, and usually is, an abstruse theorem in mathematics: here's a winner who
has finally discovered the deflationary-inflationary cycle in retarded interest
accumulation.

One year a man got it for something called monetarism. Another man for telling
us that the engine of a nation's economy, which used to be freight loadings,
was the GNP – the Gross National Product. Whenever the economics prize is
announced, I find myself sadly lisping, but how about us?

Well, last year, the Nobel Awards Committee seemed to come down to earth, to
the pocketbook of you and me. It was given to one Dr Frederico Modigliani, for
a method of finding out whether a company's financial worth is what it says it
is and, also, for his original work in discovering when people save money and
when they don't. That doesn't offhand sound like original work. Go and look at
the man's bank account!

But there must be more to it than that, I realised, when I remembered a
Yorkshireman I knew on a fellowship at Yale and on the never-to-be-forgotten
day of 4 March 1933, the day the money stopped when the banks were frozen, my
friend never batted an eyelid. He simply lifted up his mattress. There was the
bank of Croesus. He told me it was an old Yorkshire custom.

Well now, this year, the prize has gone to an economist who, until now, has
been even more obscure to the general public, even to economists, than most of
the recipients. His name is James McGill Buchanan, a man from Tennessee who's
been slogging along with a theory that most of his professional colleagues
either ignored or spurned, because his theory runs foul of a belief that is
held by roughly half the population in any country whose politics sets
conservatives against socialists.

Capitalists act in their own self-interest and expect the rewards of their
labour to pour down, or trickle down, on the people, whereas the true
politician, the public servant, certainly the socialist, acts primarily to
serve the people. Right?

Wrong, says Dr Buchanan. Politicians of any party, he says, act primarily to
promote their own self-interest in the sense that they vote for things that
will get them re-elected, just as markets work through what consumers choose to
buy for themselves. He says this public choice theory explains government
deficits. People don't want deficits but they want somebody else to reduce
them.

We had a startling example of Dr Buchanan's theory in practice as the 99th
Congress rushed, last week, to adjourn and die. They were tacking on essential
expenditures to a mammoth spending bill. What is essential?

Well, there's a trainer airplane in the works called the T-46A. The air force
has no use for it and doesn't want it but if $2 billion were saved by
cancelling it, 1200 people on Long Island who work on the plane would lose
their jobs. Senator Barry Goldwater, the chairman of the Senate's Armed
Services Committee, who comes from Phoenix, Arizona, kept saying that the air
force doesn't need and doesn't want it, but the two New York senators, one
conservative, one liberal, forgot their ideology and lobbied madly to keep
those 1200 jobs and, incidentally, their own. They got it.

Now, let's see where somebody else can cut his spending. It's the old American
maxim, 'Don't tax you, don't tax me, tax the man behind the tree!'.

By an odd coincidence in my bedtime reading, I came on this passage written by
a passionate Russian revolutionary, for a time. He wrote it in 1897, 20 years
before the Communists took over his country and the Marxian Utopia was about to
be realised. This is what he wrote: 'Even if what Marx predicts were to happen,
then the only thing that would happen next would be that despotism would be
transferred. Now the capitalists are in power. Then the workers' bosses would
be in power. The main misjudgement, the main error of Marxist theory, is the
supposition that capital will pass out of the hands of private individuals into
the hands of the government and from the government representing the people
into the hands of the workers. It is a fiction, a deception, that the
government represents the people.'

I forgot to mention the author's name. He was Leo Tolstoy.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP