A dirty campaign

A year or two after my daughter was married, she and her husband moved into a
house in northern Vermont, one of those graceful, wooden colonial boxes which,
kept painted white, stand out on the winter landscape like elegant snow houses.
This one was built in the early 1770s and the essential element for surviving
the Arctic winters was still there in running order – the primitive, but
effective form of central heating which Benjamin Franklin had dreamed up 30
years before, to the eternal gratitude of his countrymen.

Until then, a log fire in the living room and hot-water bottles, I suppose you
could call them, metal boxes filled with live coals for the bedsheets, that was
the best they could do, just like my house in London in the 1930s. Franklin,
who, by the way, invented also bifocals and the lightning rod, Franklin had the
ingenious idea of a stove in the main room, at first open in front but then
having an open circle on top with a moveable lid. The smoke passed over the top
of a separate air chamber and down behind it before going up the chimney. The
principle was that of a down draught and it's still wonderfully effective in
houses that are not, as we must now say, 'winterised'.

Well, my daughter's 1770's house also had iron grilles in the floors of the
upper rooms which allowed the heat from the main room to come up into the
bedrooms. The rest of the house, the structure, was still sound but the plaster
on the walls and layers of paint and then other layers of nineteenth-century
wallpaper were cracking badly, so they tore the walls apart and, in the end,
came on the original insulation – wads of spread newspapers, perhaps not the
original ones. These were New England newspapers for the spring and summer of
1800, published during Thomas Jefferson's first run for the presidency.

Talk about inflammatory reporting! Candidates did not then, of course, rattle
round the country. Rutted roads, 1500 miles from Maine to Florida, and
mountainous roads as far as 200 miles west made campaigning impossible. You
depended for your view of the candidates on published speeches, on the
dispatches of partisan correspondence out of Washington, but mostly on what the
political leaders of the two parties, the Federal and Jefferson's Democratic
Republican party, chose to say about each other.

We could find no statement of issues, only tirades from one side aimed at the
other. Tirades so explosive, so virulent with slander that the potshots Mr Bush
took at Governor Dukakis and the governor at Mr Bush seem, by contrast, like a
boy scout exercise with popguns.

These old papers which, remember, were northern papers, were pledged at the
start to the Federal party and determined to guarantee the defeat of Jefferson,
this detested Virginian with his brazen use of the word democracy – a dreadful
doctrine threatening private property and the sacredness of marriage and one
which spewed sentimental twaddle about the essential goodness of the common
man.

From these voluminous reports out of Washington, we learned that Jefferson was
a thief, a congenital liar, an adulterer, very likely a murderer, advocating
the possession of property and women in common. A maniac. Early on, the
Federalists dubbed him 'Mad Tom'.

A Fourth of July speech by Timothy Dwight, the president of Yale and a big man
in New England, warned everybody that if Jefferson and his so-called Democrats
came to power, the churches of America would turn into 'temples of reason so
that we may behold a strumpet impersonating a goddess on the altars of Jehovah,
and our wives and daughters the victims of a legal prostitution, the loathing
of God and Man'.

The closest anyone came in the recent campaign to this sort of outrage was a
Bush television commercial which assured us all that murderers and rapists
would vote for Dukakis: a bit of rubbish that Mr Bush was quick to disown once
it was out. In those old 1800 papers, there was a cartoon which in several
terrifying variations became standard – Jefferson, with his partner, Satan.
This one showed the two of them heaving away on a rope encircling a column
which they're straining to pull down, and chiselled on the column are the
lines, 'A Federal Government founded by G. Washington, J. Adams'.

Mr Timothy Dwight's outcry was not, from all the surrounding evidence, an
oddity, an aberration, it set the tone of even the most respectable
Federalists. The eminent Dwight followed the high road. You can only guess at
the horrors being spouted along the low road. For then, as now, there were
surely partisans – members of a campaign team, we should call them – who knew
from previous experience of dirty campaigns, as one old Washington I know used
to sing, 'You take the high road and I'll take the low road, and I'll be in
Washington afore ye'.

In fact, looking back over some of the presidential campaigns of the nineteenth
century, I've decided that the distinction between the high road of dignified
oratory and the low road of slander and innuendo is a comparatively modern one.
From the founding of the republic on to, say, the First World War, the low road
was the tactical ground for all parties. There are slogans and campaign songs
from the nineteenth century that would be instantly rejected by any
presidential candidate today.

Lincoln was not only jeered at by his opponents as an uncouth rail-splitter
from the prairie, he was regularly referred to in polite papers as 'the Ape'.
During the Civil War, the London Times called him 'the Baboon' and I can't
believe that, today, either party would compose and chant a song such as the
Democrats of 1884 sang about their opponent who had denied, not very
persuasively, some shady dealings with a railroad, 'Blaine, Blaine, James G.
Blaine, the continental liar from the state of Maine'.

By contrast, the campaigns of this century have been almost genteel, so much so
that in last week's, at least last weekend's, interminable television
post-mortems, there was only one thing that the coroners agreed on. This, they
said, was the dirtiest campaign in living memory. I noticed that the
commentators who said this were young or early middle-aged so they may be
excused from remembering the election of 40 years ago. Oddly, many of them
referred to it in a false comparison between the campaign style of Harry S.
Truman and Governor Dukakis. False, I think, on two counts.

One was to lament that the governor had not conducted a slam-bang Harry Truman
campaign, but no campaign has room for two slam-bangers and, in this one,
surprisingly, Mr Bush was it. By the time, about ten days before the election,
Mr Dukakis woke up and attempted an impersonation of Harry Truman, the part was
already filled.

The other fault was either a lapse of memory in people who'd been there, or a
too-willing acceptance by the young of the prevailing myth about Mr Truman's
countrywide safari. The myth is that his 1948 campaign was gutsy, passionate
but clean. It was the dirtiest campaign in living memory and the down-to-earth
mudslinger was Harry Truman. There was no television in those days, no
television reporting, no coast-to-coast relay stations and, even before the
campaign got under way, the popularity of Truman in the polls was so low, the
general assumption that Governor Dewey of New York was practically elected,
that many newspapers didn't bother to send reporters off on what has become
Harry Truman's famous whistle-stop train ride.

Governor Dewey was in big cities before great crowds and on the radio making
dignified, chiding speeches in his beautifully modulated baritone. Most of us
heard about Truman's railroad campaign from snippets in the papers, picking up
the news that he was endlessly denouncing the do-nothing 80th Congress, then
expiring, and that small crowds at railroad stations in the southern swamps, in
the mountains, in desert towns, rattling along the west coast, small crowds had
picked up the welcoming cry, 'Give 'em hell, Harry!'.

There came a day when alarming news came into Governor Dewey's headquarters. Mr
Truman was referring regularly to the governor as the American Mussolini and
comparing the governor's toothbrush moustache unfavourably with Adolf Hitler's.
The governor was sufficiently aroused to wire his state chairmen and wonder if
he shouldn't switch his tone and reply in kind. 'No,' they said, 'you stay on
the high road to the White House'. That year, 1948, was the year the phrase
came in.

Well, as we now know, Dewey's decision was fatal. As for the do-nothing 80th
Congress that Truman lit into every night and day, it performed, in fact, some
memorable legislation. It passed the first act which banned the closed shop and
required unions to make their finances public. More than anything, the 80th
Congress passed and voted the enormous sum – then – of $12 billion for the
Marshall Plan, which in Dean Acheson's memorable phrase 'repaired the fabric of
European life'. But Truman won and how he won has never been allowed to
interfere with his subsequent works and his reputation.

Which moves me to bring a little consolation to all the nervous Europeans who,
in the echo of Mr Bush's promises, fear for the deficit, for the maintenance of
Star Wars, for the sacred promise of 'Read My Lips No New Taxes' – the first
job of any new administration is to liquidate its campaign rhetoric as soon as
possible.

Mr Bush's liquidation is likely to be very swift, though I think he's not
likely to be as swift, or blunt, as an old Southerner, a famous governor of
Louisiana, who got elected on a promise to stop the appointment of local
sheriffs and allow the voters to pick them. When he got in, he immediately
banned such elections. A crowd of protesting delegates came to his office and
he refused to see them.

He told an aide to go and talk to them. 'But,' asked the aide, 'what'll I tell
'em?' 'Tell 'em,' said the governor, 'I lied.'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP