Satanic Verses outcry

Three of the largest American retail chains of any product sold are chains of
book stores. The largest has 1200 book stores scattered profitably from Alaska
to Florida, from Boston to Los Angeles.

This week, the president of that chain withdrew from the display shelves, but
not from sale, a book that had been elaborately publicised and displayed, until
the Ayatollah Khomeini issued his astonishing sentence of death against the
author of the book which is, of course, 'The Satanic Verses' of Salman Rushdie.
In response to the Ayatollah there was here, as in many other countries, an
immediate outcry from American authors, from civil libertarians, clerics, the
media and a competing uproar from outraged Moslems.

A friend of mine, at the beginning of the week, went off to buy the book from a
small local book store which had no connection with the chains. It had not
removed the book, it had no new policy about it, it happened to have sold out,
but the young salesman had a complaint; 'Our boss doesn't care what happens to
us.' Presumably when the reordered books appear, they will be sold and that
salesman will still have anxious days and nights.

This, to me, puts in a nutshell the dilemma of the big chains. Authors,
commentators, judges, libertarians of all parties may rise, commendably, as
they have done and remind us all that suppression of even loathsome literature
is not in the democratic tradition or in our law. Some of them talked
witheringly about the cowardice of booksellers who bowed before the Ayatollah's
edict.

Listening to them, I couldn't help wondering if they, themselves, worked in a
bookshop or employed people who did. It would have been brave of Mr Harry
Hoffman, the president of the largest chain in the country to declare that all
1200 of his stores would go on displaying and promoting Mr Rushdie's book, but
he felt that his bravery would have been flourished at the expense of over
5,000 people who sell his books, not to mention the customers who come to
browse.

Two days after he was attacked in print for caving in to the Ayatollah, Mr
Hoffman replied in kind. He began by wholeheartedly endorsing the First
Amendment which guarantees a free press and which, in all such arguments, is
recited like an opening prayer. But noble and necessary as the amendment is, he
decided that 'because of the number and seriousness of the threats that are
being made against our store personnel and customers, we feel we owe our first
allegiance to the safety of our employees and patrons'.

Even so, while he ordered the remaining inventory to be removed, copies could
still be sold to any customer who asked for them and by the end of the week,
there'd been a complete turnaround. Most book stores, big and little, were back
to bold displays of the book. I have to say, too, to the credit of a pack of
famous writers that they appeared in a public hall to give readings from 'The
Satanic Verses' – provocation, indeed, for any fanatical disciples of the
Ayatollah.

Early in the week, there'd been quickly expressed admiration here for the
action of the 12 European Community nations in recalling their top diplomats
from Tehran. In fact, that was the big front-page story last Tuesday and Sir
Geoffrey Howe's picture was the favourite illustration of it because it
stressed the point that Britain had gone farther than anybody in withdrawing
its entire diplomatic mission.

Inevitably, the promptness and severity of the European Community's action
roused Washington to say, 'How about Mr Bush?' Why has he said nothing?' Well,
the news roused him too and at a quick press conference held just before he
took off for the royal funeral in Tokyo, he said that the Ayatollah's decree
was deeply offensive to the norms of civilisation, but, frankly, he didn't know
what to do about it. And so far no-one has come up with a solution, short of
putting a blanket embargo on the Iranian oil that Europe needs.

The comparative sluggishness of the administration in reacting to the Ayatollah
has nothing to do, I believe, with the never-ending anxiety about American
hostages or with any reluctance to offend the Ayatollah. The fact is that the
Bush administration is hobbled by a most unusual problem, which is that of
being weeks, almost months, behind putting together a Bush administration.

Parliamentary countries frequently envy the American tradition which, after the
election of a new chief executive, allows the new man not 24 hours, but the
better part of three months to assemble his team. Of course, there's one snag
in the American system which doesn't stop the free flow of one parliament into
another, there's no such thing here as a shadow Cabinet and can't be in a
system in which the chief executive – here, the president – lives and has his
being separated from the legislature.

In other words, the president doesn't live and work in the Senate and the House
and when he comes to pick his Cabinet, he invariably chooses men and women who
have never been in the Senate or the House, or even elected to public office.

Even so, each party has its experts there on everything from foreign policy to
small business and they're always in close touch with men involved in those
specialties in private life. But, usually, by the end of January, not only the
Cabinet is in place, but the assistant secretaries and under-secretaries who
will put together their own staffs and begin to run their departments. It has
not been done. There was no assistant secretary for East Asian affairs to go
along with Mr Bush to Japan and China.

And suppose, suppose things got bad in the Middle East or the Gulf and that Mr
Bush decided to take, as we now cautiously say, direct action, that would bring
in quicker than anybody the Secretary of Defense. But, incredibly, there isn't
a Secretary of Defense because of the time it has taken the FBI to finish its
several investigations of the life and times of Mr Bush's choice, his nominee,
Mr John Tower.

I can't remember a time when a president's choice for a Cabinet post has been
held up at such ridiculous length – two months, instead of two days – by the
committee responsible for confirming him, in this case, the Senate Armed
Services Committee. It all started with one gossip – an active, far-right
conservative who came before the committee and said that several times he'd
seen Mr Tower drunk. Of course, as a witness before a congressional committee,
he didn't use such crude and manly language, he said, I quote, 'There have been
encounters on several occasions with Mr Tower in a condition lacking in
sobriety'.

From that first, mealy-mouthed charge, which has not been confirmed by any
other witness, the FBI was then asked to look into rumours of – dreadful, but
now required word – womanising, the circumstances of Mr Tower's two divorces,
his behaviour in Geneva when he was negotiating arms reduction three and four
years ago, as well as, which is really relevant, his financial dealings as a
private consultant with arms' contractors who are most likely to have to do
business with the Pentagon, and on and on. All together, interviews with over
300 people and the FBI's docket now running to thousands of pages.

Finally, the Senate Armed Services Committee had, presumably, digested this
gargantuan record and on Thursday evening it voted. It turned Mr Tower down,
the nine Republicans voting to approve, the eleven Democrats to reject. It's a
great pity, I think, that it was a straight partisan vote, which is very rare,
because it implies that the pressure of party loyalty paralyses a man's ability
to reach an independent judgement.

Well, unless Mr Tower asks to have his name withdrawn, the question will go
next week to the whole Senate for a, no doubt, unholy debate. It's ironical
that the main drag on Mr Bush's work as a Cabinet maker is his insistence on a
new, high standard of ethics for his men just after he'd failed to check on the
going ethics of several men he'd already appointed.

The most embarrassing example is that of the man who is to be the ethical
policeman of his administration, his legal counsel, Mr Boyden Gray. It took a
humble – not so humble, a very smart – newspaper man to discover that Mr Gray
was the chairman of the board of a communications company doing a $500 million
business. Mr Gray was appalled to hear that this was wrong in a high government
servant, inconceivably dumb in its chief ethics enforcer. 'Oh dear,' said Mr
Gray. He resigned as chairman of the board and hastily put his holdings in a
blind trust.

Well, as an end piece, I think I ought to give you an up-to-date report – what
am I saying? – a state-of-the-art report on one section of American society.
It's from the University of Illinois and it took two years to do. Four hundred
and eighty students, aged ten to fourteen, were given beepers which went off
every two hours or so. They were asked to say what they were up to at that
moment, doing, thinking, not doing. The result, 20,000 musings about the real
life of ten- to fourteen-year-old – just what you've always wanted to know!

Biggest surprise, they are not besotted with music. Boys and girls listen for
no more than 1.8 hours a week. They don't much care for television. They do six
to seven hours homework a week and – this is the big news – they don't like it.
The great discovery, however, was boys spent more time doing odd jobs. Girls
did more cooking and cleaning. And this was evidently a disappointment to the
lady in charge of the project. She sighed, 'We're still treating kids in the
expectation they will become traditional men and women'.

Ah, so!

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP