Testing public opinion

I'm sure you can bear to wait a week or so for a comment on the second and
final debate, so-called, between the two presidential candidates.

What I, or for that matter any other individual, thought about it is of no
consequence. What matters is what the people who saw it thought about it. In
other words, the millions who tuned in to one or other of the four national
networks on Thursday evening or rather the 2000 or so people tapped as a
statistical sample of the whole. I'm told there are still people, otherwise
intelligent, who say, 'How can they possibly tell what a whole nation feels
about anything by interviewing 1100 or 2000 individuals?'

We went into that in a talk after the death of George Gallup, who was surely
not the father of statistical method, but he did, more than anybody before him,
refine it and apply it successfully as a gauge of what used to to be called
public opinion.

Polling, so-called, started before he came on the scene. It was not, in the
beginning, remotely scientific and the naiveté of it was exposed and exploded,
once for all, in 1936 when an American magazine, the Literary Digest, polled
the voters of the United States about the forthcoming presidential election
between the incumbent, President Franklin Roosevelt, and his Republican
opponent, the governor of Kansas, Alfred Landon.

The Digest announced on the eve of the election that Governor Landon was going
to be a clear, a very comfortable, winner. In the result – this was before
Hawaii and Alaska had joined the Union – in the result, Roosevelt took 46
states and Landon took two, the rural New England Republican states of Maine
and Vermont. Up to that time, even the most astute politicians who had not
travelled around the country used to guide their hunches with old political
maxims and mysterious sayings.

For many years, the most northern, north-eastern of the New England states,
Maine – anyone remember the book or the movie, 'Way Down East?' – Maine was
watched, almost revered, as a barometer of national politics and it did happen
that Maine always seemed to vote for the winner in presidential elections.
Hence, the saying, one of the first bits of Americana I picked up, 'As Maine
goes, so goes the nation!'.

After the Roosevelt massacre of Governor Landon in '36, Roosevelt's campaign
manager amended the old folk saying, 'As Maine goes, so goes Vermont'. We never
heard the original again.

The Literary Digest, it came out, had simply telephoned a lot of people at
random and asked them who they were going to vote for. To begin with, the
actual gesture of telephoning cut out of the sample all those people who hadn't
got telephones which, 52 years ago, was a considerable number of Americans.
Secondly, the question was put bluntly and undoubtedly isolated only people
with their minds made up. No account was given of the undecided, in fact, the
notion of a body of undecided opinion had not occurred to the pollsters.

Well, I won't poke around any longer in the wound suffered by the poor old
Literary Digest. It – the magazine – didn't merely go out of the polling
business, it went out of business and its dramatic collapse was what actually
inspired the young George Gallup to ponder and work on the prospect of applying
statistical method to public opinion.

I think I once mentioned the time I talked to Dr Alfred Kinsey, the American
zoologist who, in 1948, released a bombshell on the world. He'd turned from his
study of bats and mice to the human being, specifically to the sexual habits of
the human male. He was the first person, I believe, to generalise about human
sexual conduct not from the cases, the people, he'd known, but from several
years of interviewing men, over 18,000 in all, using scrupulous interviewing
techniques and meeting criteria acceptable to professional statisticians.

When he published this first book of findings, 'Sexual Behaviour in the Human
Male', it appeared – it was proved – that men did not, in their behaviour, fall
into a few simple categories accepted for generations by doctors, parsons,
publicists, novelists and other students of human behaviour. Dr Kinsey shocked
everybody, in public anyway, by describing very wide variations in male sexual
behaviour.

The shock was severe in proportion to the depth of your feeling about how
people ought to behave. This, swore Dr Kinsey, is how they did, and inevitably
the professionals, the doctors, the psychologists, the novelists, who'd always
assumed they had a monopoly on knowing about human behaviour, were the first to
protest and say the Kinsey sampling was irregular and the manner of personal
interviewing must have been prejudiced, and so on.

But Dr Kinsey's work was a landmark and, after him, more and more people, the
public opinion pollsters especially, went to work to refine their techniques
and see how small a sample of the public could be dependable.

Well, after a lecture at the New York Academy of Medicine, I got hold of Dr
Kinsey and, in time, asked him just how far he thought he or any other
statistician might go in using a sample as an accurate reflection, microcosm,
of the whole population. I was thinking then of people's opinions, war, peace,
political issues, so on. He said, quite slowly and gravely, 'The time is coming
when we can go down to Time Square and choose a sailor, a housewife, a
businessman, a waitress and a truck driver, perhaps no more than a dozen
individuals, and tell you pretty accurately that they represent the gamut, the
variation of American public opinion'.

I goggled, as I was expected to do. I never took it up with him after that but
I can say for certain that we are not there yet. However, the techniques are
advanced enough to make a careful nationwide sample of something over a
thousand adults a reliable guide to the ebb and flow of public opinion. The New
York Times and the Columbia Broadcasting System together published such a poll
on Thursday morning, on the eve, or the dawn, of the Bush-Dukakis debate.

This was not a survey, as often sloppy news reports say, of 'the American
people' – the American people, whoever they are, except 245 million individuals
– the American people don't vote, not even all the registered voters vote. Only
about 52, 53 per cent usually vote – the smallest participation of the voters
in any participatory democracy.

However, for the first time that I've noticed anyway, this latest Times-CBS
poll selected 1518 people qualified to vote and asked them all first how sure
they were that they would vote at all. This brought the surveyed sample down
from 1518 to 1009 and before the interviews continued, it was decided that 509
were almost certain to stay away from the polls. The main questions were more
interesting than most because they addressed an anxiety about Mr Bush's choice
of vice president that has, if anything, deepened since the two vice
presidential candidates, Senator Benson and Senator Quayle, debated a week ago.

Soon after that debate, the three or four most responsible pollsters reported
much the same conclusion, that while the young Senator Quayle started out firm
and confident, reciting practised answers to questions he'd expected, he
wobbled badly when he got one or two he hadn't anticipated, especially the
question, what would he do if he suddenly became president?

He was thrown. 'Err...'. He would pray. He then desperately bypassed the
question by saying it was hypothetical and what the questioner really meant
was, what were his qualifications? He then went on about his experience in the
Senate, but that's not what the questioner wanted to know. Three times they put
the same question. Nothing.

Well, the Times-CBS poll asked, 'If you had to vote only for vice president?'
The result 55 per cent for Benson, 30 per cent for Quayle. Two voters in three,
invading party lines, do not think Mr Quayle is qualified to be president. It's
the one drag on the Bush campaign.

The Dukakis camp is naturally greatly cheered by this thought, but not so
cheered by a Bush advantage that has been there from the start. It's called the
Solid South and, these days, it's an ironical phrase because it was invented to
describe, through the first half of this century, the certainty that the whole
South would go wholly for the Democrats.

Eisenhower broke the bloc and Nixon took most of it away and in 1980 and 1984,
the whole South went for Reagan. The Solid South was now solidly Republican.

And in the South, today, Bush leads by 51 per cent to 36. Now since it's not
the total number of votes but the electoral votes that count, Mr Bush could win
in each of nine states by only one vote and take the whole electoral pot. Not
counting Texas, it looks to him and to the Dukakis camp, as if he would take 97
electoral votes down there – more than a third of the 270 electoral votes
needed to win.

It's a giant lead to have to overtake.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP