Seeing justice done

Does the name Joe Biden strike a chord? No punishment if it doesn't. I tried it
out on a few friends whose interests go beyond their separate specialties of
economics, gardening, music, Wimbledon. Blank stares, filled in by knitted
brows and followed by that human sound that defies musical notation, but was
always recorded in Victorian novels as 'Humph!' Then somebody says, 'Wait a
minute!' And after a racking interval, it was the sports buff who cried, 'Neil
Kinnock!' Right on.

I'm sure that Mr Kinnock has ahead of him a powerful political career and will
be remembered for his own derring-do, but if it is not to be, he will remain
immortal in the lexicon of American politics if only, years and years from now,
as a footnote on a par with such forgotten Englishmen as Captain Boycott and
Samuel Maverick.

For Neil Kinnock was, quite innocently, Joe Biden's fatal stumbling block on
the way to the presidency. Senator Joe Biden was caught out reciting a speech
of Mr Kinnock's as his very own. It was such an effective, such a moving,
speech after its try-out before an electioneering rally that the senator came
to use it again and again. And who, what caught him out? A new device. The
people's memory bank that is known as the videotape library, something that all
politicians and public hypocrites have got to dread from now on.

Now obviously, politicians for centuries have been recalling other men's
quotations and digesting them into their own speeches. No doubt digesting whole
passages, but who was ever going to find out, except some polymath with
voracious reading habits and a miraculous memory, who also happened to be
present at the recital of the man's purple passage? No longer. Candidates for
the presidency or their aides now keep files of the TV appearances,
speech-making, press conferences, waving and shouting from cars, of their
opponents and these, often fleeting, appearances are stacked away on videotape
and re-run by candidate A to recall the foolishness or knavery of candidate B.

Somebody on the staff of Governor Dukakis who had followed the last British
election was riffling through the videotape speeches of Senator Biden, another
candidate for the Democratic nomination and, presto! What did he come across
but the senator proudly declaring that he was the first member of his family in
2,000 or 200 years who'd gone to a university, and his wife, also, the first in
2,000 or 200 years. Funny coincidence department. You can imagine with what
triumph this alert aide showed this tearful speech to the Dukakis camp. The
accusation was made, the senator's stolen speech was broadcast, telecast and
Joe Biden retired from the race.

Of course, Governor Dukakis was appalled at such underhanded hanky-panky from a
member of his team and the man was fired. Nevertheless, deep in the heart of
Michael Dukakis, a sense of satisfaction must surely have moderated his sense
of horror.

Of course, in this new era, in which all politicians have to remember that they
have always at their back a witness for the prosecution, a witness with total
recall, in this era, nobody has suffered more from it than President Reagan. He
must scream or faint every time he sees, slipped into the evening news, the
visible, audible reminder of his 1981 speech about the evil empire. He's
constantly peppered with the same question, do you still feel the Soviet Union
is the evil empire? After we saw him in Moscow, with his arm around Mr
Gorbachev, he was, inevitably, asked again. He said, quite simply, 'I was
talking about other leaders, another time'. That, let us hope, has taken care
of that.

But, on Wednesday evening, there was another swift dash by the television
networks' sleuths back to the videotape library. We'll come to that in a
minute. What provoked the sleuths to their gleeful search was a judgment handed
down on Wednesday by the Supreme Court of the United States, which has wound up
a term bulging with decisions, the last of which can fairly be called historic.

By a deafening vote of seven to one – the ninth judge excused himself – the
court declared that there was nothing unconstitutional about a law passed by
Congress after the Watergate scandal which allowed the setting up of special
prosecutors to investigate charges against, to have the power of subpoena,
summoning of grand juries, eventually to prosecute in court, any official of
the presidential branch of government accused of crimes or misdemeanours.

Before that law, in the Watergate hullabaloo itself, the only prosecutor of the
presidential branch allowed by law was somebody from the presidential branch,
from the Department of Justice, or, as President Nixon demonstrated, a special
independent prosecutor brought in from the outside by the president himself.

For once, an issue that is central to the running of the American system of
government is not hard to understand. The law that was being challenged by the
president and all conservatives said, in its preamble, that when anyone in the
president's branch of government is charged with serious offences, it's absurd
to have the president do the investigating. If not absurd, then inhuman to
expect a fair and objective verdict. It's the old Roman question of who shall
police the policemen?

President Reagan insisted all along that the constitution gives the president
this extraordinary power. All along, I should explain, means all along the
rocky road of the past few years, during which at least three high officials of
his own White House staff were investigated by a special prosecutor appointed,
as the new law requires, by three independent judges. All three of these
suspect men went before grand juries, went to trial and were convicted. They
have been pacing around in limbo ever since, waiting to see if the Supreme
Court would declare their prosecutors to have been unconstitutionally
appointed, and if that had happened, their cases would have been abandoned, and
today they would be free. As it is, they now await their sentences.

Apart from the White House defendants, there are five men at present under
indictment who are of much livelier interest to the public at large and who
have, themselves, been at large hoping they would never be brought to trial.
And they are the defendants in the Iran-Contra scandal, accused of many
offences in connection with the supplying of arms to Iran and the transfer of
the proceeds against the law to the Nicaraguan rebels, known as the Contras.

Surely, there is no need to wonder if two of those five strike a chord. They
strike a discord. They are Colonel Oliver North and his boss in national
security, John Poindexter. Their special prosecutor, Mr Walsh, was all smiles
after the Supreme Court decision and no wonder. He's been ploughing through
thousands of pages of testimony, hunting down hundreds of witnesses, spending
his days before a grand jury and his nights pouring over the interminable
record of Iran-Contra for, by now, just about two years. There is, of course,
no appeal against the final arbiter, the Supreme Court. Colonel North had filed
a personal suit claiming that Mr Walsh was an unconstitutional institution.
Wrong, said the court.

So, presumably, Colonel North and Admiral Poindexter, and the rest, will now go
to trial. When is an interesting point. I should guess they would press for an
early, speedy trial, though speed in the American courts, especially in federal
courts, can have the lightning motion of a turtle. But if they came through and
were convicted before November – indeed, before next 20 January when Mr Reagan
will cease to be president – it's possible that they could then appeal to
another extraordinary presidential power, which is the power of pardoning
government officials in the presidential branch found guilty of crimes and
misdemeanours, as President Ford pardoned Mr Nixon, to the rage of the
Democrats, the liberals and many Republicans who'd voted for Mr Nixon's
impeachment in the hearings of the House Judiciary Committee.

The written opinions of the justices, even in the most peremptory cases, are
never short. In this case, there was one dissent from the fairly new judge,
Justice Scalia. He started, uncharacteristically, short and sharp. 'This,' he
declared, 'is what this suit is about. Power. The allocation of power between
Congress, the president and the courts in such fashion as to preserve the
equilibrium the constitution sought to establish.' He maintained that the
equilibrium had been tilted unfairly by the new law away from the president.
The other seven said, 'Not so'.

Now, even excerpts from these learned opinions run to five full page columns in
the New York Times and will not be read by more than a tiny minority of
citizens, but the telly gave them the gist and the telly gave them, on
Wednesday night, much more. Lovingly rescued from that wonderful new resource
of the investigative and even the mean reporter, the videotape library. We saw
shots of Colonel North and of the president in the not so long ago proclaiming
the colonel to be a national hero. We saw President Nixon, 15 years ago,
avowing he was not a crook. We saw a crumpled Mr Archibald Cox on the night
Nixon fired him as special prosecutor. We saw Judge Bork rejected by the Senate
for the Supreme Court, declaring months ago that the role of a special
prosecutor was unconstitutional.

Combine these vivid images and the Supreme Court decision turns into a Cup
Final in which Reagan, Nixon, Bork, North become a team thoroughly thrashed by
the team of Chief Justice Rehnquist, Judge O'Connor, Mr Cox, Mr Walsh and, the
implication is, all good men and true. Such a simple, smashing outcome will
give joy to some, bitterness to others.

What the new device does, though, is to reduce government of the people in the
people's imagination to a simple melodrama. It could, I'm afraid, I suggest, in
time, oversimplify the difficulties of good government in the interests of a
good show.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP