Golf in Russia

For personal reasons, I had to make a flying visit to England last week and so
had the luck of not joining the 400 correspondents who were in Moscow telling
us exactly what happened at the summit. Astonishing to read now how many of
them must have been at different summits.

One of the useful things about a flying visit to the listeners' country is the
discovery that something I've been usually deploring as an American novelty has
already passed over into European life and is taken for granted. I watched the
Derby on the telly in London and was shocked to see that it's no longer the
Derby, but something called the Ever Ready Derby. It was even more of a shock
when the moment came for what a commentator called the ancient ritual, the
laying of the treasured blanket on the winner, to see the splendid Kahyasi as a
galloping reminder that perhaps you need a new battery.

One time, oh it must be ten years ago, I did a talk which, if talks had titles,
would have been called 'the money game'. It was a sustained lamentation for the
over-commercialising of most sports with a bitter note to the effect that
tennis had now joined the money-grubbing parade and it ended with thanks to God
that golf remained untainted, uncorrupted, squeaky-clean. My gratitude was
premature.

The prize money for the professional golf tournaments in this country, as also
in Europe, has been going up and up in the past few years, so much so that when
a commentator remarked of an American pro on a streak, when he turned to the
veteran star, Byron Nelson, and said, 'Do you realise, Byron, that he's won
over $200,000 in three weeks?' The southern Mr Nelson plaintively replied,
'Nobody has to tell me! That's more than I earned in my entire career!'. The
young man on the regular tour today who never comes in higher than, say, 15th,
will wind up the season with more money than the great Hogan earned in 20
years.

And now the tournaments which we used to identify as the Los Angeles Open or
the Colonial are called things like the Singing Sam Coastal Savings Open and
the Romanov Brothers Equity and Mutual Colonial.

Last April, the president of the Augusta National Golf Club which, alone, runs
the sacred Masters since Bobby Jones started it in 1934, said at the annual
dinner honouring, of all people, the invited amateurs, 'Any time that the
Masters comes to be known as the Pizza Hut Masters will be time to close it
down'.

I should guess that no other sporting tournament in the world is so blessedly
bereft of a commercial presence as the Masters, the American Masters. The two
sponsors expose themselves at unusually long intervals on the telecast. There
are no placards or billboards or sportswear tents or other intrusions on the
rolling pastures or the flower-banked creeks. The caddies wear loose green
tunics. No commentator is allowed to mention the dollar value of a putt or even
the amount of the prize money.

However, there is one nasty innovation that the club regrets but can do nothing
about. It came in furtively only a year or two ago. Most of the competing pros
on tour now wear white visors, not because the American sun blazes brighter
than it used to, but because manufacturers of everything from golf balls to
biscuits and sportswear got to them and suggested no harm would be done if they
wore a visor carrying the company's logo or simply the name. No harm, surely,
especially since the manufacturers made the suggestion with a contract already
in their fists. How about 30 thousand a year, 50 maybe, for just innocently
wearing our visor? Fine!

So the visual effect has been to throw a black shadow on the faces of a whole
generation of young pros and make them indistinguishable except as clones of
any standard young, tall, tanned, grim Californian or Texan. It's got so that
from a distance there are only two pros who can be instantly recognisable. Most
of the time they wear only their own hair. They have not signed a contract.
They are Nicklaus and Watson.

Last winter, I was up in snow-bound Vermont watching, with my nine-year-old
grandson, the end of a tournament being played, need I say, somewhere in
California or Arizona. He's not a golfer but his horse had to stay warm in the
stable and I had to leave the house for some chore and when I came back, the
game was over. 'Who won?' I said. He looked up and said, with absolutely no
guile, 'I think Titleist beat Nabisco'.

And I hear from an old friend, a Welshman and an amateur who once dazzled the
world of international rugby, that it's the same with sports in Britain. And so
it will remain, I suppose, until the next recession – which, by the way, even
the most conservative economists and money men in the United States place next
summer – at the latest, autumn.

Which is one reason why I notice my Republican friends find themselves in a
pitiful and quite new dilemma. Naturally, they want to see Vice President Bush
move up to the presidency but they know that incumbent presidents, like
incumbent football coaches, always get the blame for a losing game and if there
is a slump, it and all its attendant evils will not be attributed to the old
Reagan game plan, but to the new captain in the White House.

The same horrid vision has occurred to some, not many, Democrats and I know
people who maintain that Governor Cuomo of New York knew very well what he was
doing when, with noble protestations of devotion to the people of New York
state, he thrice or more refused the crown.

I even know one shameless old pro who maintains that Governor Cuomo, a devout
Catholic, Governor Cuomo, at his daily devotions, prays fervently for the
election of Mr Bush so that in 1992 he, the governor, can emerge as Moses,
bravely willing to clean up the Republican disaster and lead the people onwards
and upwards to that well-managed Democratic Utopia which dear Mr Dukakis says
he'll initiate on the day of his inauguration next January.

Well, it's time to get back up to the summit. I've more than hinted that I have
become totally incapable of saying how much progress, if any, was made because
of my fatal habit of reading too many newspapers. There is, however, one
aspect, one theme, of the summit which, in the only paper I've seen it
mentioned, was falsely reported on. It says here, and I wish I'd been there, 'A
Russian on the platform of the summit nerve centre' – that's a very bizarre,
anatomical picture – 'the Russian offered to the world's press a definition of
golf. Golf, he said, is a sports game which originated in Scotland. The idea is
to cover a certain number of holes with a certain number of hits'.

Not bad! But what has this to do with the destruction of intermediate weapons,
which are known in golf as mid-irons? It was an introduction to Mr Armand
Hammer, the American oil multimillionaire who's been a pal of the Soviet Union
and each of its leaders since Lenin, and who, throughout all the successive
anti-Communist crusades in America, from 1919 on through McCarthy, through
Nixon, through Ronald 'Evil Empire' Reagan, has, so far as I know, never been
cited for contempt of Congress or refused a visa or otherwise persecuted for
his flirtation with the devil.

Mr Hammer is a placid little man, well along in his eighties and, sure enough,
he not only showed up in Moscow, but took to that platform at the nerve centre
of the summit. Mr Hammer was there to announce that he's responsible for
introducing the Russians to golf and is about to build their first golf course.
Well, I wish to say that Mr Hammer may have put up the money, which is his
usual privilege, but he's 14 years behind the times in introducing the idea.

The idea started with a Soviet diplomat in 1973 who returned from an assignment
in the decadent West, hopelessly hooked on the Scottish form of torture. This
man was a friend of the mayor of Moscow who was a friend of Mr Brezhnev,
remember him? Mr Brezhnev said OK to the mayor and the mayor got in touch with
an American golf architect name of Robert Trent Jones Junior, no relation. And
on a memorable day in 1974, Mr Jones telephoned me – I was in San Francisco –
and asked me to lunch with the Russian consul-general at the San Francisco Golf
Club.

I was assigned to his elbow and I convinced him that golf was not a rich man's
game, but the regular, humble game of the Scottish people. OK, he said, and Mr
Jones and his team got busy showing the consul-general a series of slides of
virgin landscapes in Sweden, Thailand, wherever, being bulldozed and seeded and
bedded and turned into golf courses. We even saw a stretch of land outside
Moscow being surveyed by the mayor and his relapsed buddy. Many nods and
handshakes. It was going to happen.

I did a talk about it and predicted that, I think this was... it was '74, and
predicted that any month Mr Brezhnev would approach a stretched ribbon with a
pair of shears and address the comrades of all the Socialist Soviet Republics
with the stirring invitation, 'Let us play golf, the people's sport!' Well,
relations went up, they went down, Mr Brezhnev disappeared and was succeeded,
it seems, by a whole troop of general secretaries. Young Mr Jones told me from
time to time it was on, it was off, it would never happen. Now, under Mr
Gorbachev, it is going to happen. Maybe.

Only one more thing to say about the general progress of greed, the money game.
It was said best by the immortal Mickey Wright, one of the handful of truly
great women golfers and she was interviewed the other week on television.

She said, 'Of course it's right that star athletes should be paid well, like
other entertainers, but when a golfer or a baseball player is paid four times
as much as the secretary of state, it's worse than ridiculous, it's obscene.'

So said the emperor's wife about the gladiators in the decline of Ancient Rome.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP