Time for more taxes

Well, where to begin? The problem being to find the news today, good or bad,
that will be the same tomorrow. So unpredictable are the games being played in
the Kremlin and on Wall Street that even the columnists and editorial writers
on the daily papers wake up to read their shrewd explanations of yesterday's
big move, only to find it's gone into reverse overnight.

When, as a blushing 15-year-old, I was being taught to dance in preparation for
the school's Christmas soirée, the only time that tactile with a girl would be
approved by our rather frightening headmaster, I remember being most
embarrassed by the polka. It was ridiculous! Dancing was supposed to be
carefree and continuous, but here in the form we learned, you had to take one
step forward, two steps backwards, then two steps forward and one step
backwards. It was invented, my history master told me, by the Poles – a
hesitant race. Later I learned it's a Czech word.

Well, Mr Gorbachev who wants a summit, then he doesn't want a summit, then he
does, seems, as I talk, to be dancing the polka. Wall Street is doing a
vertical polka and one morning's headline cheers, 'Market Rallies'. Next day
deplores, 'Market Slumps Again'. By the time listeners in India and Australia
hear these wise words, we'll either be in the pink or in the red. Only one
comment from the government and from Wall Street can be depended upon –
whenever the market rallies for even a day or two, we're assured that the
market correction is over, has been made.

I talked last time about some of the similarities and differences between
October 1987 and October 1929. We won't pursue that morbid exercise any
further, but I noticed that when, six months after the 1929 Wall Street Crash,
the stock market recovered more than 50 per cent of its value, President Hoover
and all the leading bankers of the day breathed a sigh and announced that the
long overdue adjustment had been made. 'Adjustment' was the word then. After
the slumps and recessions of the early Seventies and the early Eighties, the
phrase was 'a healthy shake-out.' What we call a slump now is or afterwards, 'a
correction'.

The other day I called a man who's been in finance – in the most conservative
and responsible way, I ought to add – for 50 years. I called him and said, 'How
healthy is the shake-out?' He said, 'I don't know anything any more, but if
you're off to the links, don't buy any golf balls, they'll be down to ten cents
tomorrow.' In a serious moment, he confessed to knowing one thing, 'This is no
longer an investors' market. It's a speculators' market and somehow, somebody
has to correct it.'

I ought to say now that I appreciate there may be many people who'll be
surprised that we should talk about Wall Street two weeks in a row. Let me say
that I've been surprised this week to see one or two English and European
newspapers in which the news of the stock markets has already been relegated to
the inside pages as something of interest only to those monied men who read
what are called the financial pages.

Not so in the pages of New York, Bonn and Tokyo who, together, in the months to
come, could hold the fate of all of us in their hands, and by us, I mean the
ordinary householder, farmer, shopkeeper, nurse, manufacturer, secretary,
waiter, bricklayer, everybody who is, at the moment, as we say, gainfully
employed.

Already, in New York city, Mayor Koch, preparing for a winter of discontent,
has frozen all hiring of city workers from policemen to secretaries, frozen
wages, frozen pensions and he's only the first of many political leaders across
the nation who have felt compelled to translate into human terms the sudden
financial losses that have hit the states and the cities.

Sadists will take some satisfaction from the news that a famous brokerage house
here has sacked 150 of its 2,000 employees and the average income of each of
the people fired was between 80 and 120,000 dollars.

Let me say, simply, that the general sense in Washington and in the state
capitals is that we are already launched on hard times and it's made the stock
market consequences far more important in the short run of a year or two than
any Soviet-American summit. All right! In the past ten days or so, I've
watched, listened to, at least a score of discussions about the stock market
and its effect on the American economy, world trade, Western prosperity. Not
journalists spouting their opinions, but men at the centre of the crisis.

Last Sunday, for instance, there came together the president's chief economic
adviser, the chairman of the New York Stock Exchange, the presidents of two
leading investment houses, a former secretary of the treasury, the chairman of
the Senate Finance Committee and the chairman of the House Appropriations
Committee and that last pair, of two men who can have a decisive say in any
legislation that affects the budget and the economy. Also, the secretary of
state, Mr Shultz.

None of these experts was ready to give a single cause of the sickness on Wall
Street though they were reluctantly agreed that human beings were as much to
blame as computers. In particular, a group we call 'the glory boys' – young
investment bankers who jumped out of business school into starting salaries of
80, 100,000 dollars a year who have little sense of the traditions of their
profession, who are interested wholly in the... the quick merger, in current
shareholder values, in 'the deal'.

The people around the table agreed that the market had been dangerously
over-inflated for some time and that on the Tokyo exchange especially the
relation between true value and market value was preposterous. One leading
director of a brokerage house said that one thing we've learned is that a stock
certificate whose value fluctuates with the consensus of the people in the
market now doesn't have even that wobbly value. Now its value is decided by
what the Tokyo consensus is.

And this led Secretary of State Shultz to comment – and remember that for most
of his life before he was secretary of state, he'd been an economics professor,
an industrial economist, secretary of labour, then secretary of the treasury –
Mr Shultz said we must learn and act on the knowledge that there is no longer a
New York market and a London market and a Tokyo market and a Hong Kong market,
there is a world market.

Certainly, most people agreed that last Monday's 150-point drop in the Wall
Street market was a reaction to the drop, in the middle of our night, in the
Hong Kong market. So far, nobody has told us how this reflex can be arrested.
How can one market stop reacting to another market's reaction?

Well, now, when all the doctors have done diagnosing the sickness and saying
they expected it all along, we've had to come this week to deciding on the
operation that will cure it and who is to perform the operation. Well,
financiers and politicians, at home and abroad, members of both parties in
Congress, economists, the lot, have had no doubt about the root disease – the
American budget deficit – and who the head surgeon is to be.

He's Ronald Reagan, who finally had to give up bawling over the noise of his
helicopter that all was well or the correction had been made or that he would
never raise taxes. This week the president sat down around the table with his
own men and with the leaders of the opposition. He finally conceded that he was
ready to discuss any cure, invade any issue – except social security.

Now trying to cut the national deficit and exempt any one huge outlay presents
an obvious problem at the start. The budget deficit is now $148 billion. Social
security has a current annual outlay of 214 billions. In short, between social
security and defence, together they represent exactly one half of the national
budget. Social security 21 per cent, defence 29 per cent.

By the way, under President Kennedy, defence gobbled up 49 per cent of the
budget. Odd that nobody at the time accused him of being a war-monger.

Well, if the problem were as simple as this choice implies – cut social
security or defence – then the battle would be on. Defence has already been cut
from a year ago and a majority in both parties is not disposed to trim it by
more than a few billions. The question is how to increase government revenues
and here it comes down to whether raising taxes is the answer.

This year's Nobel Prizewinner for Economics says, 'We must put an end to this
nonsense of saying taxes will be raised over my dead body' – an old, brave
quotation from Ronald Reagan – and even the recently retired chairman of the
Federal Reserve Board, in financial circles around the world the almost
sainted, Paul Volcker, says the same thing.

But there are equally knowledgeable doctors who say raising taxes would
aggravate the sickness rather than cure it. It was done after the '29 crash,
with by 1932 a doubling of the income tax rate and the result was disastrously
to restrict private spending and precipitate a rapid deflation of prices and a
depression.

This time, I don't think anyone is talking about income tax. The pressing
proposals are for consumption taxes – petrol, more and stiffer excise taxes.
Whatever president and the Congress agree to do together, it's pretty generally
agreed that if the taxes were too little or the budget was otherwise cut only
slightly, Washington would be seen to be doing too little, too late.

If the taxes were too high, that would cripple consumer spending and trigger a
serious recession. Whatever the solution is to be, there is a growing, almost a
yearning, in Washington, Bonn, London, for strong leadership now, which can
come only from the President of the United States.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP