McCarran-Walter Act repealed

I believe it was in an early Marx Brothers film that one of the brothers – and
I should guess it would have to be Groucho – was entering the United States on
a ship coming into the harbour and was being routinely questioned by an
immigration inspector. The man put what in those days was the key question, the
wrong answer to which could have you bundled out of the country faster than you
came in. 'Do you believe in the overthrow of the United States government by
force?' Groucho, or whoever, replied snappily, 'Yes, preferably tonight.'

I don't know who thought up this sublimely useless challenge, since any
anarchist, terrorist – anybody – who really did want to overthrow the
government by force would be the last one to say so. Still, it was legal
formula and it did imply that the wish to overthrow the government by argument,
by speechifying, by other peaceful means was not punishable by deportation.

And the constitution itself says, in the very first article of the Bill of
Rights, 'Congress shall make no law abridging the freedom of speech or of the
press or the right of the people peaceably to assemble and to petition the
government for a redress of grievances'. Begging for a redress of grievances
may not be quite the same as overthrowing the government, but it is a
permissible device for curing something that is rotten in the state of Denmark.

Anyway, from time to time in the history of this country, and especially at
times when there is a new flood of immigrants, there's been usually a
quickening of the impulse to watch out for troublemakers, in particular for
anarchists coming in under the guise of honest immigrants escaping from the
usual affliction – persecution, poverty, military service.

In jittery times, the Congress has passed laws that go far beyond questioning
new arrivals about their forceful intentions towards the United States
government. Such a time was the early 1950s when a high State Department
official, Alger Hiss, was found guilty of perjury in denying he had passed
State Department documents to an American Communist. It was called the trial of
the century and it fuelled enough popular alarm and indignation to propel a
House Un-American Activities Committee and then the late Senator Joseph
McCarthy into a furious hunt for domestic traitors and an almost pathological
suspicion of leftist liberals and many harmless people that some neighbour
thought was harmful.

When these inquisitors were riding high, two senators, McCarran and Walter,
turned their baleful eyes on newcomers to the country, not only immigrants, but
visitors, especially writers and other traffickers in ideas. McCarran and
Walter, in the feverish mood of the time, managed to get through Congress a new
law which gave the government unprecedented wide powers to keep out of the
country all declared Communists, suspected Communists and, beyond them, anyone
else known to hold beliefs either of the extreme right or the extreme left that
some member of the government – an inspector, a congressman – believed would
lead such people to engage in activities prejudicial to the public interest.
That's a pretty broad definition of possible public danger.

The president, Harry Truman at the time, thought this was a monstrous act,
which, he said, would have established an inhumane policy towards eligible
foreign persons. The president vetoed the bill but, under the Constitution, a
vetoed bill goes back to both Houses and to override the president's veto, they
must then vote for it again with a two-thirds majority in each House. And so
they did and the McCarran-Walter bill became law.

It has remained law ever since, but so quietly, so unobtrusively applied in
many cases that I believe most Americans over 50 who remember the uproar over
the passage of the bill will be astonished to know that the McCarran-Walter Act
is still in force. There are, however, distinguished foreigners who are all too
aware of it. When they have routinely applied for a visitor's visa, they've
been turned down. The former Bernadette Devlin is one of the better-known cases
because, as a militant Irish nationalist, some even liberal-minded Americans
feared she might, to put it in the dull language of the act, 'engage in
activities prejudicial to the public interest'.

For the same reason the Reverend Ian Paisley was denied a visa and El
Salvador's bristling rightist, Roberto D'Aubuisson, but so also were two of
Central America's most brilliant authors, Gabriel Garcia Marquez and Carlos
Fuentes. I ought to say that brilliance, of course, is no qualification for
entry. Lenin was brilliant, and so, in his malodorous fashion was Dr Joseph
Goebbels. Neither of them would have made it.

But I think that most literate Americans would be shocked to know that Carlos
Fuentes and Garcia Marquez and Graham Greene have regularly been denied the
right of entry. The pretext for excluding these novelists has not been that
their novels which, of course, have always been published here, contain
inflammatory material, but that at some time in the past, they'd been members
of a party of the extreme left or right. The excuse in Graham Greene's case was
that in his youth he had very briefly been a card-carrying Communist.

However, as I say, I'm sure that most avid book readers are only dimly aware
that the odious McCarran-Walter Act is still on the books. After all, this is a
country which as much as – indeed, more than any other – proclaims all the time
the right of free speech, the right of opinions to make their way in a free
marketplace of ideas. Public speeches, in and out of Congress, resound all the
time with brave quotations from Jefferson and Lincoln and Roosevelt, from Mr
Justice Holmes about the right of free speech to include the utterance of ideas
which you may find loathsome.

William Randolph Hearst, whose newspapers in the Forties and Fifties were
practically torch-bearers of the hunt to find Communists in every foxhole,
nevertheless printed every day in the top corner of his front pages Voltaire's
line, 'I disapprove of what you say but I will defend, to the death, your right
to say it'.

In this uplifting atmosphere, very few of us look down to notice how many
foreigners with provocative ideas were being marked for exclusion as contagious
newcomers. Well, shockingly late in the day, I'm happy to tell you the
McCarran-Walter Act is no longer valid. In December, in the closing days of the
last Congress, a senator from New York, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, got up to
sponsor its repeal. A law, he said, that was stupid, that made us look
sub-literate, fearful, repressive. Very quietly, in almost furtive shame,
Congress voted for repeal.

I don't know where the momentum for repeal came from. Quite possibly from none
other than a full-blown, bare-faced active Communist who was let into the
country in December without a murmur of protest or an immigration inspector's
question. His name is Mikhail Gorbachev and when President Reagan kept his
promise to lecture Mr Gorbachev about Soviet violations of human rights, the
general secretary replied, 'Yes, we keep some certain people in the Soviet
Union, but look at you. You keep some people out!'.

Anyway, as a news magazine's headline trumpets, 'Good Riddance to an Odious
Law'. The truly embarrassing thing about the whole affair is that none of us
has noticed the odious smell for the past 35 years.

Do you remember, it must be ten years or more, a doctor in California who
planned, indeed wrote, a book on how to avoid a heart attack? The publication
of the book was delayed because between the writing of the manuscript and the
correction of the proofs, the doctor had a heart attack. This embarrassment was
quietly hurdled and the book came out and was widely reviewed and remarked on.
I believe it became a bestseller. It certainly had the most dependable
ingredient for a bestseller. It had a thesis.

The thesis was that human beings fall into two types – all the easier to
remember because they were/are opposing types, Type A and Type B. A is
outgoing, high-strung, on the hop, always a little behind the work that has to
be done. A is more subject to heart attacks, whereas B – easygoing, placid,
orderly, is, as you'd expect, less subject. The thesis only confirmed, I felt
at the time, yet another glimpse of the obvious. Of course, the rest of the
book intended to show the impatient, high-strung As how to overcome their
nature and avoid a heart attack.

The item I remember best was the author's answer, when he was approached about
the healthy practice of jogging. 'Well,' he said, 'I really hate to have a
jogger for a patient because a jogger is, by definition a Type A.'

Well now, the authoritative, the greatly respected, New England Journal of
Medicine has published the results of a study of 257 men observed over a period
of a dozen years, all of whom had had heart attacks in the beginning and they
were labelled, at the beginning, either Type A or B. The study was done to see
which type, if either, died sooner after the attack. Twenty-six patients who
died within 24 hours of their attack were not differentiated as between Types A
and B, but of the other 231, over the following 12 years, it was found that the
high-strung type As lasted much longer, were less likely to die, than the
placid Bs.

I don't know, but I hope this has put paid to the A and B labels. It would stop
placid wives from scolding or cautioning high-strung husbands. Way back in my
youth, we divided humankind into extrovert and introvert and then it was
outgoing and withdrawn.

On the whole, I don't think we've come very far in 2,000 years in classifying
human beings according to temperament. In fact, I think we've gone back.
Looking around at my friends and acquaintances, I find it is shrewder, more
accurate, to divide them off into four types, the four humours invented by the
old Greek physician, Galen, who died nearly 1800 years ago.

He said humans came in four assortments – choleric, sanguine, phlegmatic and
melancholy. It covers many more of us than jumpy A and sleepy B.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP