Forget the smoking gun

I've had the extraordinary experience in the past few weeks of finding myself
closeted, or hunkered down with, a bunch of spies. I hasten to assure MI5, MI6
and the CIA there was nothing furtive in this.

It just happened that like millions of other people in the north-eastern
states, I was outraged every time I walked out the front door into the boiling
furnace of the streets, that I decided to reduce my excursions to a minimum. A
trip round the corner for a carton of milk, orange juice, bread, chilli,
newspapers – the staples – and then retreat into my study and sit back in the
purr of the air-conditioning and look over the latest batch of books from the
bookseller.

I bunched them in some sort of order for the arrival of a guest the other
evening and when he came in, he looked over the neat piles and said, 'Well,
well! Where do we begin?' I hadn't noticed till then that six piles of books
were topped by such titles as, 'The Agency: The Rise and Decline of the CIA',
'The Second Oldest Profession: Spies and Spying in the Twentieth Century',
'Witness: From the Shah to the Secret Arms Deal', 'An Affair of State: The
Profumo Case and the Framing of Stephen Ward', 'Mole-Hunt: The Full Story of
the Soviet Spy in MI5' and a new, shiny book with the catchy title,
'Spycatcher'.

Of these six, the only one that appears to be rocketing on to the bestseller
list is the last one, 'Spycatcher', which at first glance seems very odd, since
the search for a Soviet agent in the top echelon of British intelligence during
and after the Second War is packed with hundreds of names unfamiliar to
Americans, but the reason for its success is not hard to seek.

Its publication, as I speak, is banned in Britain and so the American reader at
once sniffs the odour of forbidden fruit and, like British and American readers
of 50-odd years ago, who were similarly denied James Joyce's 'Ulysses' and D.
H. Lawrence's 'Lady Chatterley's Lover', they leapt for it, even though they
had no prior interest in the day of the low life of Dublin or in the gamey life
of a North Country gamekeeper.

Now 'Spycatcher', as everyone must know by now, has very little to do and only
incidentally with sexual shenanigans and, I imagine, thousands of Americans are
going to be deeply disappointed, not to say baffled, on every page by a huge
cast of characters and assumptions about British government that are
meaningless to all but political scholars.

The sales of this book have been briskly quickened by the arrival, via
transatlantic jet, of people who purchase trunks, fill the trunks with copies
of 'Spycatcher' at $20 a throw and fly them back to England and, we are told,
offer them on the black market at anything from $100 to $150 each. The most
venerable of American publishers once said that there are three kinds of books
that will always sell in America. Books on Abraham Lincoln, on sex and,
figuratively, on how to build a better mousetrap.

Well, it seems today that while there's no doubt the bookshops and newsstands
of the airports and the supermarkets throughout the Western world groan with
the pantings of paperback bosoms, the audience that can afford hardback books
has switched its allegiance from sex to spies and, today, in spite of the
assurance from European newspaper leader writers that nobody is watching the
congressional hearings on the Iran-Contra Affair, the fact is that the three
national television networks are each taking their turn in covering them
throughout the day and, in the process, gradually losing over a million dollars
a day in revenue from the suspended commercials.

I'm not going to go into or go over the interminable testimony and even more
interminable cross-examination of the latest witnesses before the select
committees of the Senate and the House, but I think we have to notice that the
target of the hearings has significantly shifted. Since last November and on
and on through all the revelations and rumours of the winter and spring, the
question has always been, what did the president know, and it was assumed that
the chief object of the congressional search was a smoking gun, preferably one
whose lingering smell came from the White House.

Might be worth looking back to the origin of this vivid and tantalising phrase.
The first use of it I can find comes from a Sherlock Holmes story written by
Conan Doyle in 1894 in which, it is written, 'the chaplain stood with a smoking
pistol in his hand' – the inference to be drawn from then on, from any such
spectacle, was the guilt of the man with the gun.

At some time, I can't discover when, the phrase passed into the lingo of the
intelligence services, but it didn't come into common use until the Watergate
hearings, during the Senate select committee's hearings in the spring of 1973.
The date reminds us that if you think the Iran-Contra thing goes on and on,
President Nixon didn't resign for another 15 months after those hearings.

Throughout the whole Watergate investigation, after the Senate hearings, on
through the labours of two special prosecutors and then the impeachment
hearings of the House Judiciary Committee, President Nixon's defenders kept on
saying and correctly that there was no proof of obstruction of justice – that
was the main charge – that could be pinned on the president himself.

Nor was there, but at the very end of July 1974, over a year since the Senate
hearing, two years since the break-in of the Democratic headquarters at the
Watergate apartment building, in July 1974, President Nixon was compelled by
the Supreme Court to release yet another batch of tapes that had been held
back. Among them was one briefed taped conversation between Mr Haldeman, the
president's closest staff adviser and the president himself. In it, Haldeman
said that the CIA could be called on to stop the FBI investigating the source,
the chief instigator of the Watergate break-in.

Then followed a simple, two lines of dialogue. Haldeman: 'And you seem to think
the thing to do is to get the FBI to stop?' The president replied, 'Right,
fine!' Those two words, 'Right, fine!' were Nixon's sentence of execution as
president because they were spoken only five days after the break-in itself,
way back in June 1972 and a Republican congressman whose name will, I suppose,
go into the history books, as surely as Representative Gerry of Massachusetts
who coined 'gerrymandering'.

We ought to give his name – one Barber Conable remarked that that brief taped
conversation between President Nixon and Mr Haldeman looked like a smoking gun.
The phrase was picked up everywhere and only a few days later, Mr Nixon gave up
and left the White House forever.

Since the Iran-Contra affair is the biggest political scandal since Watergate
and since the main question of guilt seemed to be directed at the president
himself, everybody was looking, from the first day of the present hearings, for
a smoking gun. It's not too much to say that they have stopped looking. From
the testimony of Colonel North, of Admiral Poindexter, most persuasively of
Secretary of State Shultz, it's pretty clear that the president did not know,
never mind whether he ought to have known, did not know about the diversion of
funds from the arms sales to Iran to the Contras, the insurgents in Nicaragua.

More than anyone, Admiral Poindexter relieved the president of this charge. The
admiral purloined President Truman's famous phrase by saying 'the buck stopped
with me'. Of course it oughtn't to in the American system. Ultimate
responsibility stops where Harry Truman said it stops, at the president's desk,
but Admiral Poindexter, frankly, blatantly, said he had deliberately kept the
president in ignorance of the diversion of funds to the Contras. So he is the
self-declared smoking gun and it's universally agreed that there will be no
more talk of impeachment.

However, in losing its obsession with a smoking gun, the joint committee has
gained a far more important insight into the root mischief of the whole
Iran-Contra business, which is the problem of final accountability. There have
been newspaper editorials, stand-up comic jokes, savage cartoons across the
country picturing Colonel North as a military president or a loose cannon with
medals, Admiral Poindexter as a sailor prepared to go down with his ship,
President Reagan as a bewildered or snoozing onlooker.

But it was left to the New Yorker to write the most crisp, pointed little
leader in its Talk of the Town on how long we'd been blinded to the main issue
by our obsession with a smoking gun. Here's the gist of it.

The Watergate tapes narrowed the question to one of guilty knowledge on the
part of the president and thus helped us all to avoid harder and more crucial
constitutional questions. To what degree is the president responsible not only
for his own actions, but for acts of illegality and attempts to subvert
constitutional government on the part of his aides? And from the Iran-Contra
hearings, the New Yorker deduces that 'the president is protected by his
ignorance and his subordinates are protected by their belief that they were
acting solely for the president as he would have wished'.

This was precisely the issue that should have been confronted during Watergate.
As long as it remains possible for a president to shrug off unconstitutional
acts by his aides on the ground that he wasn't aware of the details, we find
ourselves moving frighteningly toward a system of government by plebiscite and
junta.

This is essentially the theory of government which has been proposed by
witnesses over the last weeks and it suggests that we've been conducting the
wrong kind of search. The object in question is the body of the constitution.
When we find it with a hundred stab wounds, there's no point in looking for a
smoking gun.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP