Papal visit

About a year ago, I came up from the subway (the underground) on to Lexington
Avenue at 96th Street and ran into such a huge crowd on the north side of the
street that I had to cross over to see what was going on.

It was a funeral service, just ending, at the Catholic church which stands in a
shabby block between Lexington and Park Avenues. It was a large, dense and very
sober crowd, mostly I guessed of onlookers, but many of them were dressed in
what you would be right to guess was their best dress or, in these freewheeling
days, their only suit. Very soon, the high doors of the church opened and a
coffin was borne out by eight men pallbearers. They were followed by a cluster
of grave men and women who were obviously relatives of the dead man.

It was the funeral of the old, cocky, unforgettable street urchin, James
Cagney. A man standing near me said, 'I didn't know he was a Catholic. I
thought he just played tough, Hell's-Kitchen types, the son of Irish
immigrants.' So he did, but in doing so, he played himself and, as always
happens when a famous movie star dies, the networks pulled out the old movies
and ran them at nights as a memorial salute.

So we could see over again those Warner Brothers films in which it seemed that
Cagney was always the bad boy of the family, Frank McHugh was the good brother
and Pat O'Brien was either the neighbourhood friendly cop or the priest
dedicated to reclaiming the soul of young Cagney. In perhaps the most
unforgettable dying close to any of his movies, we saw him a gangster, ruined
by the repeal of Prohibition and the treachery of his old gang, stagger
mortally wounded along a street and fall, at last, sprawled across the steps of
the nearby Catholic church.

That movie, called 'The Roaring Twenties', was made in 1939 and it would not
have occurred to us at the time to expect the doomed and drunken Cagney to head
for any other than a Catholic church. It would certainly have been a confusion
in the plot if he'd turned out to be a relapsed Baptist or Methodist.

In the movies then, as in life in New York certainly, all the Irish were
Catholics and in the movies then, in both dramas and comedies, the comfortable
middle-class families, the people who ran things in their own small town or big
city, had English names like the actors who played them, though many of them
had had their original Russian or Polish or whatever name changed – Emanuel
Goldenberg into Edward G Robinson. Danielovitch Demsky into Kirk Douglas.
They'd been changed for them by the old Hollywood producers who, almost to a
man, were immigrants from Russia or Poland. And their picture of New York in
the Twenties and Thirties, when it was about poor Irish, was roughly correct.

About the people who seemed to be the upper crust, it was, even then, certainly
wrong. It's been true for more than a hundred years that in this most polyglot
of metropolises, the Anglos, people of English origin, no matter how far back
the roots go, have had little political influence. Socially, they may still
preen themselves on being some sort of American elite, but in politics, they
suffer from the initial handicap of representing such a tiny number of the
population. The White Anglo-Saxon Protestant, the WASP, makes up only six per
cent of the New York City population.

So we have to be more careful than most of our neighbours in sounding off about
ethnic or racial or religious matters. However, we do have the advantage of
being if not above the battle, at least at the remove of war correspondents or,
in religious matters, of being comfortably ill-informed.

I asked a group of friends sitting around the other evening an innocent
question, as if I hadn't the foggiest idea of the answer. 'Just how many
Catholics are there in the United States, say, in millions?' The answers from
native Americans who've been here all their lives varied from five million to
20 million. The answer is 52 million and rising. That's just about one American
in four.

It makes you marvel that for the first 173 years of this republic, there's
never been a Catholic president. The prejudice of the English and the Dutch and
the German Lutherans and the Jews and the Scots Irish Protestants held a grip
on the country long after, in many places, their own grip on government was
loosening. However, as we all know, in 1960, John Kennedy made it. He went down
to Texas early in his campaign and met the old fear head on. 'His religion,' he
said, 'was a private matter.' And in any conflict of conscience in his
presidential role, his first duty was to the Constitution of the United States.
It broke the lock of the old prohibition.

Mrs Ferraro, who ran as Mondale's running mate in 1984, is a Catholic. Governor
Mario Cuomo is a Catholic and if he were to declare himself a candidate – he
has renounced the ambition – he would, according to all the polls, leap into
position as front runner, leaving the seven dwarfs far behind. It's possible,
it occurs to me, that the governor secretly suspects that the party might come
running to him in desperation next summer. He has several times made the
astonishing point of declaring that there is no such thing as the Mafia, which
does suggest he's well aware that one qualified American voter in eleven is an
Italian-American.

Well, that's a problem for Governor Cuomo. For most of the 52 million American
Catholics, the next week will present problems that are closer to their hearts
and homes than anything else that's happening around the world. And you've only
to look at a map of the Pope's itinerary to see that this is no ceremonial
tour.

The places he will visit and the speeches he will make have been plotted and
worked over for the best part of a year inside the Vatican. And the route of
his mission traces, you might say, the centres of American Catholic resistance
to the absolute power of the Church. He began in Miami, Florida, first to meet
and try to mollify the disgruntled Jewish leaders who cannot forgive him for
his recent meeting with Austria's President Waldheim and who deplore the
Vatican's refusal to recognise officially the state of Israel.

Well, that's a preliminary skirmish but Miami also confronted the Pope with the
first huge outpouring of America's new Central and Southern American
immigrants, the Hispanic population of Catholics who have their grievances,
mainly of social and job discrimination in the racial stew of Miami and who, a
Jesuit sociologist calculates, will sixty years from now constitute an actual
majority of American Catholics.

On Friday, he was in South Carolina meeting ecumenical leaders. South Carolina,
a fortress of Baptists and other non-conformists who can be as rigid as Rome in
their own dogmas. On Saturday, to New Orleans which, because of its old Spanish
and French heritage, has as long a Catholic tradition as any city in the
country. It also has the only black bishop in charge of an American diocese and
it was in New Orleans that the Pope was expected to face black priests and nuns
and meet their demands for the Church to recognise what they define as the
'unique identity and experience of black Catholics'.

So on to the Hispanics again in San Antonio, Texas and then to Arizona to
commune with Native American Indians, to Los Angeles for a conference of all
387 American bishops, north to Carmel and, there, possibly to proclaim at long
last the sainthood of Father Junipero Serra, an old, lame Spaniard who founded
the mission in the midsummer of 1771, by lifting a bell over the branch of an
old oak and ringing it, and crying aloud to a solitary Indian, 'Come O
Gentiles, come and receive the faith of Christ!' A postulator has been at work
in the Vatican for well over 50 years documenting Father Serra's life to see if
he may be sanctified. California Catholics believe it's none too soon.

Then to San Francisco for an outdoor mass and prayers with AIDS patients.
Finally, across the continent to speak on social justice to Polish-Americans in
Detroit, a flight north to meet Indians and Eskimos in Canada's Northwest
Territories and back to Rome.

Everywhere, he's bound to be confronted with the pressing issues on which an
actual majority of American Catholics either flout the teaching of the Church
or actively disagree with it – the right of abortion on certain conditions,
right of priest to marry, of women to be ordained. Three in four American
Catholics believe in artificial birth control and think divorced Catholics
should be allowed to remarry in the Church. And there are many other doctrines
and practices of the Church which over half of American Catholics want to see
abandoned or reformed and the opposition to them is well organised among the
women ministers, the liberal bishops, the young novitiates, as well as the very
vocal laity.

In the past week, I spent some time with two good friends, both lifelong
Catholics, one liberal, the other a conservative. The liberal accepts the
Pope's infallibility only on such matters as the divinity of Christ and the
Immaculate Conception. In almost everything else, she weeps with rage at what
she takes to be the Pope's insensitivity to the nature of modern society and to
the need of the Church to grow by accommodation to a democracy, and that's the
point that her conservative opponent seized on.

'Ah!' he said, 'A democracy. Well,' he says, 'we live in a political and social
democracy. The Church is not a democracy. It is authoritarian, in the best
sense. Catholicism is not a supermarket where the consumer can choose what he
likes and put together his own religious package. If you don't like it here,
why not try another religion?'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP