UN unanimous on Iran-Iraq

There used to be a job in journalism which, at one time, I think most good
serious reporters around the world would have been proud to be appointed to.
They were assured from the start that they could have as much space in the
paper and almost as much time on the radio as they felt they needed. Forty
years later, the vast majority of newspapers around the world have abolished
the job.

The New York Times, which has more resident foreign correspondents in more
countries than any other paper I know, used to have not one person in this
enviable job, but at one time a dozen. Today, I believe they're probably unique
in having two people do the job. It's the job of United Nations' correspondent
for a paper, a radio station, a television network.

I started with the old Guardian in 1945 covering the organising conference of
the UN in San Francisco and, for nine weeks, wrote and saw in print on an
average two or three thousand words a day, sometimes five thousand. Once the
thing was set up, the problem was where it was going to live. Where would the
new world organisation set up its headquarters? And this, of course, was to be
decided by the organisation, itself, by its, as I recall, permanent site
committee – that sounds straightforward. Far from it.

The moment it was announced that the United Nations was looking for a home, we
correspondents were brought up short with a very brisk example of practical
politics. We'd been dealing with and writing about such noble things as how to
organise a common force to stop wars, what to do with former colonies, how to
encourage agriculture in every poor country on earth, what sort of body should
be created to monitor, to watch and advise on the health of the world?

And here, I'd like to say as forcefully as possible, that of all the many
bodies the United Nations created, that one, the present World Health
Organisation is incomparable, irreplaceable, literally vital and the best thing
that ever came out of the second attempt at a League of Nations. By keeping
tabs on health statistics of nearly 200 nations, watching the actual movement
of airline passengers from countries with known epidemics and maintaining a
continuous 24-hour watch on these and many other health matters from its
headquarters in Geneva, the World Health Organisation has probably saved more
hundreds of thousands of lives by prevention than any other organisation on
earth.

Well, as I was saying, we lofty reporters who had spent our days listening to
how the world was going to be reorganised and spent our nights writing about
it, were suddenly brought down to earth by the healthy reminder that when these
51 nations agreed to live in perpetual peace and friendship, they had not
abolished nationalism or national pride.

The early meetings of the site committee were not held in public but, from
delegates who'd attended them, it was possible to get a picture of a bunch of
diplomats who, while remaining high-minded, weren't averse to practising the
arts of an advertising salesman. After all, it was like putting out bids on the
site for the next or next-but-one Olympic games.

The delegates, even though they were professional, austere diplomats, pictured
their own fair city as ideal and were quick to see the wonderful revenues that
would flow continuously in from tourism, from building new hotels, renting
expensive homes for 51 delegations, not to mention a stampede of top chefs and
new restaurants and prosperous days and nights for limousine services and
chauffeurs and armies of secretaries.

There was a moment there, I don't believe ever reported, when one or two of the
doctors who would eventually form the nucleus of the World Health Organisation
began to wonder, as all organisers of festivals, political conventions,
conferences, big sports events, must wonder, what to do about the probably
influx of gamblers, con men, call girls and prostitutes.

I believe the site committee, having listened to promotional speeches about the
beauties and peculiar fitness of Scandinavia or a town in the Alps, Paris – why
not go back and settle in San Francisco which had enchanted most of the
original 50 nations? Geneva was suggested and rejected at once. Geneva carried
a shroud. It was the graveyard of the first attempt at an international league
and I think everybody agreed that the new organisation should not dampen its
optimism by starting with a resurrection job.

The original list was paired down to 16 possible sites, which included such
exotic new homelands as Blackpool, England and a new town to be created in the
Black Hills of South Dakota. That really sounded bizarre and was much derided
by Europeans and reporters from the tonier cities of the eastern United States.
Yet to some Westerners and some foreign fans of the old West, the idea was not
without its fascination. The Black Hills is an area of about 6,000 miles,
straddling the western border of South Dakota and the eastern border of
Wyoming.

By the way, the hills are not black and nowhere else would they be called
hills. They rise between five and seven thousand feet, and when they were
discovered were very heavily forested with a species of yellow pine which, from
the distance of the Indian discoverers, looked black.

The Indians lost their hold on the lands when, as usual, some mineral – in this
case, gold – was discovered. Whites moved in and built such mining towns as
Custer, Lead, Rapid City, Spearfish and the legendary Deadwood where, you'll
remember, Jack McCall shot Wild Bill Hickok in the back while he was holding a
hand of aces and eights, every afterwards to be known as 'the dead man's hand'.

This location had its appeal for Western nuts which include some unlikely
people. I remember later over drinks in the delegates' lounge at what was to
become the UN's permanent home, I remember a fanatical Frenchman, a Dutchman, a
Korean and, as always, an Englishman, who gathered to swap tales true and
fantastic about the 1870s in the Black Hills. It was, need I say, an Englishman
who regretted to point out, when someone was in full flight about Gary Cooper's
splendid performance as Wild Bill Hickok, that in the subsequent trial, Jack
McCall was acquitted. Who then shot young Bill? History is dumb.

Well, the point of putting up the Black Hills – it was done by the Chamber of
Commerce of South Dakota – was that the hills were just a little more than
halfway across the United States, would give more or less equal access to
Europeans and Orientals, but – the big point – were in a remote place, sparsely
settled and not worth bombing when and if the Russians ever got the atom bomb.
The Black Hills were turned down. So, I'm afraid was Blackpool.

Moscow or Yalta, the Crimea, nowhere in Russia was ever suggested. The Russians
shuddered at having the delegates and families and professional hangers-on of
50 nations. All those spies at large anywhere in the Soviet Union!

It came down to Europe or the United States and Europe in 1945/6 was battered
and poor. In the end, the 16 suggestions were reduced to two – a bosky section
of hills and valleys about 30 miles outside New York City called Harrison, New
York and San Francisco. From my own posse of spies, I learned that the site
committee had travelled up to Harrison – it's still charming country – but was
nagged by a yearning for San Francisco. It came close enough for me to check
with my editor and announce that I was prepared, as now the paper's regular and
only UN correspondent, to move the family, gladly, to San Francisco.

The site committee was still weighing the comparative charms of Harrison and
San Francisco when the Rockefeller brothers announced that they owned a stretch
of real estate hard by the East River in Manhattan and were willing to raze the
properties there and present a great gaping patch of land for the building of
the United Nations headquarters. The offer was grand. It was done. And the
mayor of New York City, who'd done less lobbying than the South Dakota boys,
chuckled with delight. And there it is.

And, after a couple of years of moving the temporary headquarters from a
college outside New York City to a disused bomb site on Long Island, the United
Nations made its home where it is today. And when it opened, after another
fierce round of lobbying between the nations as to who would get the contract
for this and that, the marble for the assembly building (Vermont), the
panelling for the security council's chamber, the office desks with the
folding, built-in typewriters – America, of course? No, it was Great Britain.
At last we all poured into there and were assigned our offices and cubicles and
telephones and telegraphic services.

The organising conference in San Francisco was covered by about 650
correspondents. By 1948, the UN headquarters in New York housed something like
300, 350 full time correspondents. I can't guess how many – how few – are left.
They're like exiles from many invaded countries. Real life, real politics goes
on outside them and their world.

So, it was an immense shock to see, last Tuesday, a two-column headline from
the United Nations. The security council had passed a unanimous vote and for
the first time, I believe, in 42 years, the permanent members – the USA, the
UK, France, China and the Soviet Union – had voted together. It was to order a
ceasefire in the war between Iran and Iraq. And, we were told, this was only
the preliminary move for a resolution to be voted or considered within two
months to impose a worldwide arms embargo against either of the two nations
that does not agree or accede to the ceasefire. The UN had suddenly sprung to
useful life.

But wait! A day later, a Soviet official said that his country's vote for the
first resolution should not be taken to imply its agreement to embargo arms
shipments to its good friend Iran. Back to square one. Back to normal.

Those few United Nations' correspondents can go back to their doodling or
letter writing or poker or the batting out of little dispatches that will never
be printed.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP