The Augusta National

I've just had, for me, the most extraordinary experience of living outside the
real world for a whole week. No television, no newspaper that reported anything
but the matter in hand – which we'll come to in a minute – no contact with
people who talked about the real world or anything going on in it.

Perhaps I'm being a little snobbish in using that phrase, 'the real world'. I
suppose I mean the world we cannot help rubbing elbows with once you're home
from your job and, even on your job, you have to contend with traffic,
telephones or tractors, a crop not coming along as you'd expected, and in the
evening, unless you're a monk or a nun, you see and hear about the Cyprus
hijacking, the patrolling Israeli soldiers in the Occupied Territories, about
the French election, about Prince Charles and modern architecture, about Mayor
Koch in New York saying that any Jew who voted for the Reverend Jesse Jackson
would have to be, his word, crazy.

I learned about these things last Monday on my return from Shangri La. I should
say that Shangri La, which is way down yonder in Georgia, has newspapers and
television with all the regular national stations and a flurry of cable
stations, too, but there was never any time to read or listen. This was my
daily round in Shangri La. Wake, breakfast of various fruits and juices,
scrambled eggs, country sausage – that is, sausage patties, no skin, no bread –
crisp bacon, grits with pepper and butter and hot, southern biscuits which are
an unsweet, floury scone. Back to the motel room, grab a badge and a shooting
stick, the telephone rings. The car is there.

Whisked off, the last glimpse of the real world of supermarkets, petrol
stations, lunch counters, pancake parlours and the like, into a long driveway
bordered by magnolias, down to a circular lawn with flowerbeds and into a
small, white, Southern, colonial plantation house, flanked by what once were
slave quarters and are now, on one side, suites for the older members of this
club, and, on the other side, the locker room for the players. There. The word
is out. The word is golf and let me say, at once, that I have long appreciated
golf is possibly, next to chess, the most impossible game to talk about to
non-players so we're not going into the four-day tournament itself, but the
sanctuary from the real world in which it's played.

After nodding and chatting up various old friends and acquaintances, you emerge
from the far door of the plantation house into the burning Southern sun and on
to a lawn of blinding green, shaded by three immense evergreen live oaks and,
beyond them, are the rolling, the majestically sweeping, 300-odd acres whose
walkways and great stretches of grass between the different fairways are cut
finer than any lawn. The fairways themselves have been sculptured for the
tournament to different cuts of the grass so that over any hill there will be
three or four different carpets of grass in different shades, say, 400 yards
long, rippling over the undulating land like vast strips of velvet.

An English bible I keep close at hand when I'm at home, an encyclopedia of
golf, says it is probably the most beautiful course in the world for it has
made the most of its Berckmans' inheritance. This huge parcel of land had been,
during the American Civil War, a fruit farm for the Confederate troops, but
when the war was long over, it was bought by a Belgian, the Baron Berckmans, a
noted horticulturist who created there the South's first great nursery. So by
now the wide, sweeping fairways are fringed by trimmed forests of the slender,
towering Georgia pines. The Baron's son was also a flower and tree maniac and
down the years, father and son confined the wild flowers to the creeks of
running water and planted on all the banks all the native Georgia flowers, so
that you move down one cathedral aisle of fairway called Camellia and on to the
Azalea hole and then the Red Bud and the Firethorn and the White Dogwood and
the Pink Dogwood and on and on.

So you see it really is a magnificent park, kept immaculate throughout the day
by an inconspicuous army of men with spiked rods who spear every vagrant
plastic cup or cigarette butt. Incidentally, in our swiftly changing time, I
doubt whether there was one smoker in a hundred of the 25,000 people who padded
quietly, almost reverently around the course. It is Augusta National, as even
non-golfers know, a sort of huge memorial garden to the supreme golfer and
gentle man who acquired it and built the course and invited a few friends to
play it and never guessed, in 1934, that soon this would become one of the four
major tournaments in the world. The immortal, the unforgotten, Bobby Jones.

You wander around this paradise until the early evening, when the long inky
shadows fall across a horizon of emerald and then, if you're normal, you enjoy
what the former Speaker of the House, Mr Tip O'Neill, called 'a few poops with
the boys' and talk golf and nothing else. I ran into many men and women from
what we used to call various walks of live, but without compulsion or guidance,
they all seemed to talk about the golf that was going on, the golf that
happened here two, ten, thirty years ago, the rise and fall of great players,
the chances of this favourite and that. I gladly succumbed to this beautiful
tunnel vision of things. At the end of each perfect day, there was no
obligation on my part to catch up with the outside world and, after the first
day, I had no inclination to.

On a day at the end of the week I sat alone on a balcony of the clubhouse,
overlooking the lawn, and studied the numerous trios and quartets of people
sitting at tables under spreading umbrellas. Admittedly, they were a favoured
lot, favoured in the first place at having tickets to get in to the tournament
which limits the gate and closes down applications usually by the end of
November. The tickets cost $100 for the four days, which is not beyond the
reach of most people who have the foresight to write in the previous autumn.

By the time the tournament begins, you see lone men standing by the side of the
highway outside the grounds of the course, waving little placards or sheets of
paper on which are scrawled, 'Need two tickets' or 'Will buy Sunday ticket,
please'. They are very naive losers. By the weekend before the tournament, at
meetings of all sorts of people – businessmen, professors, other professionals
in various cities, in the north as well as the south – men are nudging up to
other men and wondering forlornly if a family illness or other emergency has
made a ticket suddenly available for purchase.

A friend of mine who was attending a fund-raising dinner for the centennial of
his old college told me about a Japanese guest approaching a man who was taking
his wife and son and daughter to Augusta this time. The Japanese bowed and
wondered with respect if it might be possible to buy the tickets. Four tickets
were just what he was looking for. 'Not for all the money in your corporation,'
the American said. 'Not,' suggested the Japanese, 'for $6,000?'. The man gulped
and recovered his family feeling. 'No, indeed!' he said.

I noticed, looking down over the smiling, affable people on the lawn, that
there was not a glum face. There were several players in there both famous and
less famous and pretty women and portly members of the club in their statutory
green jackets. Nowhere, I should say, a hint of what I called, at the
beginning, the real world. From time to time, a player would stop by or a
member I knew or a visiting Briton and a small troop of golf writers. They're
all genial and congenial types. Then, it struck me, I must say a little late in
the day, that they ought to be genial. What, for me, is a very rare, blessed
escape from the world and its troubles, is for them a regular routine. They
live and breathe and have their being in various Shangri Las, scattered around
the world.

Old Henry Longhurst, the most affable, but unfooled, of all golf writers, said
it in just about the last sentence he ever wrote: 'To me, golf has brought a
congenial life – a life spent among pleasant people who have mostly been at
their pleasantest in the circumstances in which I've met them, often in some of
the greatest beauty spots in the world'.

The giveaway phrase there is 'at their pleasantest'. You don't see them at home
wrestling with tax forms or gloomy school reports or at protest meetings to
stop them throwing a six-lane motorway across the Stevenson's place at bottom
of the garden. And the players, as one writer said to me apropos of some
menacing changes that are casting a dark cloud over the face of this
tournament, mainly money, he said, 'You're not going to get much of a protest
or an original idea from the players. They talk only among themselves. They
play golf by day and talk it by night'.

Well, mooching through a party once, among a half-dozen of the most famous
players alive, somebody broke into the general talk with a remark about a
politician. It was as if a man had broken into a prayer meeting to talk about
golf. A look of mild disdain rippled across the famous faces. Most of them, I
believe, knew who was President of the United States. I would not take bets on
their knowing this time who is running for president.

So the lesson from this experience is, it's not difficult to be genial and
friendly in a green paradise where the skies are not cloudy all day and never
is heard a discouraging word about the Russians or the homeless or drugs or
next Tuesday's New York primary in which, it occurs to me, as I come awake from
this guilty dream, we shall know whether the Jewish vote of New York city will
outweigh the black vote and move the Reverend Jackson back, if not to square
one, to a place in which he may begin to think of a job in the Cabinet of
President Dukakis.

That is, in the rosy, enormous hope that Governor Dukakis is going to beat Vice
President Bush.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP