Soviets need soap

Must have been 20 years ago, oh more, that I was attending a conference of a
board of advisers to an encyclopedia and listening to the experts give their
annual reports – they were a formidable bunch, Paul- Henri Spaak on the
international scene, James Reston on American affairs, Harrison Brown on
science, the incomparable Red Smith on sports, and so on – when a man got up
whose name I didn't catch.

I wasn't sure what he was doing there and he started to go on about something
called consumerism. I hadn't the remotest idea what he was talking about.
Perhaps he was a doctor – rheumatism, consumerism? Maybe it was some sort of
disease. Some people say it is, getting and spending, we lay waste our powers,
moaned the poet. A poet, I should say, from a prosperous society, certainly not
from Russia or Poland or Czechoslovakia.

Well, down the years we got thoroughly used to the word and by now it's even in
the dictionary with a rather stately definition, 'the protection of the
interests of the purchasers of goods'. The word came up last weekend when Mr
Gorbachev and Mr Bush were riding the swells on that Soviet cruiser. I'm not
sure that Mr Bush put it bluntly as in, 'How's your consumerism?' but it's been
reported by what they used to call a reliable source that after Mr Gorbachev
had assured the American team that he was very much in political control, the
same could not be said about his control of the economy and that he thought his
ultimate test was consumer shortages, simply, how to get more food, goods, soap
into the hands of the 290 millions theoretically under his control.

It must have bought the Americans down to earth when, at a lunch during which
bowls of caviar were circulating like pepper and salt and they were ready to
talk about such things as strategic and conventional arms cuts and the
unification of Germany, Mr Gorbachev kept coming back to the real threats to
the stability of his nation – too little sugar and soap.

Just to think, the two most powerful politicians on earth heaving on the
Mediterranean and glumly facing this radical problem, while every university
and political study group around the globe is busy teaching the elements of
government, such things as the structure of parties, control of the money
supply, free-floating exchange rates, Cabinet government, the basic tenets of
liberalism, conservatism, Communism – all the high-falutin' things that don't
mean a thing to people who have no bread and soap. Lenin drilled his finger
into this nasty truth when he wrote, one month before the 1917 Russian
Revolution, 'No amount of political freedom will satisfy the hungry masses'.

A world away from Malta and Moscow, I battled my way downtown this week in the
choking traffic that since the day after Thanksgiving has seemed to have only
half a dozen destinations – the department stores, those temples of consumerism
which we take for granted as the elementary sources of our goods and services.
From now till the first of January we will be possessed by an orgy of
consumerism. Getting and spending may have laid waste Wordsworth's powers, but
if we didn't go at it between now and the New Year like sharks in a feeding
frenzy, there'd be more filings for bankruptcy and an exodus of unemployed.

Most of the big department stores take in 20 or more per cent of their annual
revenue in those five weeks. These thoughts occur just when we see radical
changes, including collapse and bankruptcy happening to some of America's most
famous department stores. It's got to the point where a just-published survey
concludes, 'It is safe to say that the era of the big store is passing'. It's
as much of a shock to hear this from a knowledgeable team of economists as it
would be to hear that baseball or the drugstore or the United States Senate
were on their way out. Evidently, other times, other ways of mass marketing.

The department store is well over a hundred years old and, contrary to the
general belief, is not an American invention. It was the French who, in Paris
in 1852, opened the first one, the Bon Marché. But within the next ten years,
an American one appeared at the corner of Broadway and Eighth Street and
through the 1860s and Seventies they mushroomed in many parts of the United
States, in, of course, the big cities.

But another institution was born, thanks to the headlong development of the
railroads, the growth of a transport network across 3,000 miles – an
institution that suddenly brought a wealth of manufactured goods to the people
scattered across the prairie and the mountains and the deserts. You might call
it everyman's invisible department store – the mail order house which was, and
still is, a godsend to rural America and communities in remote and lonely
places.

It all started in a ludicrously primitive way in 1872 in a room 12 feet by 14
in Chicago. A man named Montgomery Ward spotted, before most merchants, that
Chicago would become the railroad hub of the country. Chicago, a thousand miles
from one coast, 2,000 from the other, but at a strategic point on the
north-south traffic run also, whether by river or rail. Mr Ward decided that
the way to reach the unseen remote consumer was by sending him a letter, a
catalogue, of goods he could write in for and have delivered to his one-horse
town or, now, his whistle-stop railroad station.

Mr Ward's first catalogue was a single sheet of paper, eight inches by 12,
offering a few, rude, necessary items – watches, trousers and other, as it
said, household notions. He was very soon flooded with mail from everywhere the
trains travelled and, within ten years, he'd opened a chain of stores and the
sales from the stores and from the unseen distant customers grew to $150
million. We're talking about the early 1880s.

Only three years after Ward, in 1875, a man in Buffalo, New York, John Larkin,
started a business exclusively to sell by mail something that the pioneers,
early and late and, indeed, all country people made for themselves, just like
peasants today in Armenia, in Georgia, in Siberia – soap. And then a man in
Minnesota in the Eighties, a Richard Sears, a railroad agent, started selling
watches by mail, in the beginning, writing out his ads in longhand. After a
year, he quit the railroad and hired a watch repair man, A. C. Roebuck. In time
they got together and became – what else – Sears and Roebuck, which by the
1890s was a general merchandise store sending out thousands upon thousands of
fatter and fatter spring and fall catalogues, the width and heft of
single-volume encyclopedias, detailing every item of clothing and household
gadget and farm implement and stove and watches and clocks and toys and wagons
and trim, cheap versions of the high styles the rich ladies of Chicago bought
in town. By 1895, within 15 years that is, the take was over $250 million.

Some time after the Second War, I was having dinner with an advertising tycoon,
a rock-bound Republican and a parson's son, very much a man against sin and
Communism. The Communist hunt of the early Fifties was at its height and
everybody had a solution of some dotty sort to hold off or defeat the Russians.

This old man said, in the middle of dinner, I recall, 'The Russians will be a
menace as long as they're Communists.' Ah so – but how would you cure or
convert them? 'I would get the United States Air Force to drop a million Sears
Roebuck catalogues all across the Soviet Union and they'd come crying.' He was
dead serious and, of course, we, the serious, intelligent, well-informed guests
thought he was downright silly.

I now think that if Mr Gorbachev can get the trade loans that he needs and set
up central supply stores in spaced cities, maybe the mail order catalogue would
be the answer to a general secretary's prayer.

Back to our problem – the death or decline of the department store. Of the
dozen biggest and most famous department stores in America, five are more or
less thriving, two in New York – Bloomingdale and Saks – are up for sale,
Altmans is closing for good next month, Bonwit Teller is bankrupt and on the
block. Chicago's famous Marshall Field is up for sale. What has happened?

Well, obviously the enormous growth since the Second War of interstate
highways, motorways, going along with the decay and crime of the big cities and
the increasing density of traffic, first drove the middle-class consumer out to
the new suburbs, then the department stores followed them in the sense of
starting suburban branches.

Many of them overreached themselves and, just when people were complaining that
lots of items in the parent catalogue were unavailable in the branch stores,
there arrived the shopping mall – or 'mawl' – with lots of regular shops and
stores for everything, grouped around a parking lot. Freight, the carrying of
the nation's goods, passed over from the railroads to the truckers and the
highways. Such staples as furniture and appliances could be ordered from mail
houses and delivered to your door.

The big-city department stores, losing the suburban shopper who used to make
regular trips to town, turned into specialty stores with boutiques, so-called,
selling a single item – shoes, perfumes, television sets, fancy foods. Fewer
and fewer of them are selling 30 types of kitchen furniture and 20 sorts of
underwear. The ones that have flourished are the ones that have concentrated on
fewer specialties and the boutique idea – which annoys old housewives who
bought just about everything at a department store – has been the salvation of
those big stores that got control of their inventories in time.

Well, these must seem very remote, high-flown, but enviable problems to Mr
Gorbachev. I still think his destiny, his survival, might lie in taking a page
from John Larkin's book, the mail order man marketing a single item. What item?

The sharp, savage Los Angeles cartoonist Conrad said it in a simple cartoon the
other week. He showed Mr Gorbachev saying to the Pope, 'Loaves and fishes are
fine. But how about soap?'

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP