Democrat agony

It seems like an age, but it must have been six weeks ago, when correspondents
from all over the world found themselves for the first time in their lives
flocking into that Midwestern state whose official song goes, 'Iowa, Iowa, the
land where the tall corn grows'. The song has long been in the public domain
and no royalties may be claimed for my performance.

What the correspondents were doing, probably to their great surprise and
bafflement, was reporting their first political caucus. We won't go into that
again, except to say that a caucus is a one-time political get-together of
party regulars and officials to vote for delegates to something or other, in
this case, to pledge themselves at their party conventions in midsummer to vote
for a particular candidate for president.

A primary is a much bigger thing and takes in as many of the registered voters
who care to go to the polls on a given day and express their preference for
president. Way back there in February, I didn't quite promise to say no more
about the presidential campaigns until the primaries were all over in
California in June. As I recall, I did leave myself an escape hatch from any
such reckless promise. If something happened that was wholly unpredicted, I'd
use the hatch. I'm already out of it and looking over a track with an outsider
leading the field and with a whole bunch of near-favourites either scratched or
down and out.

We all said back then that after Iowa and New Hampshire and the big sweep in
the south of Super Tuesday, we did say that by the time the Democrats got to
Atlanta this summer, whoever was the leading contender would have to sit down
and be very nice and respectful to the Reverend Jesse Jackson because he was,
even then, doing well enough to become the broker, the man whose delegates you
would need to put you over.

What nobody, but nobody, then anticipated was that by April the Reverend
Jackson would be himself the actual front runner, but to everybody's
astonishment after Michigan, he was either one or two delegates ahead of
everybody or just about tied with Mr Dukakis, the governor of Massachusetts.

Is it possible that only 30-odd years after blacks were allowed to sit in the
same restaurants as whites, to use the same lavatories and swimming pools, to
go to the same schools, is it possible that a black boy, brought up in poverty,
the grandson of a freed slave, might become the Democrat's choice for President
of the United States? It is possible. The governor of New York state, Governor
Cuomo, said on Tuesday, 'The Democrats' choice should be the man who receives
the most votes in the primaries and,' he added, 'if that's Jesse Jackson,
wonderful!'

Before we come to this rather dazzling prospect, let me just swivel and look at
the race, or the runaway canter, on the other track. The Republicans, when they
go to New Orleans, will have on hand over 2200 delegates. The winning candidate
will need 1139 votes. So far, Vice President George Bush has 813 pledged votes.
Breathing down his neck, about 20 laps behind is the evangelist, the Reverend
Pat Robertson, with – wait for it! – 17 votes. Another 260 are not decided but
will be in forthcoming primaries in New York, New Jersey and California.

If there is one absolutely sure thing in the two races it is that Mr Bush is
going to be the Republicans' choice, unless there's some appalling scandal that
touches him and hurts him. What could it be? The only plausible possibility is
further damaging stuff to come out of the Iran-Contra Affair which the special
prosecutor, Mr Walsh, is still investigating, still presenting masses of
evidence before a grand jury in Washington. He's been at it for more than a
year now and he's gone on so long because, well, in the first place, he
couldn't get access to all the implicated Swiss bank accounts. He's had them
and in spite of President Reagan's blithe remark that we don't know where the
money went and who got it, we know exactly how much, how little, went to the
Contras and how much went into the pockets of at least two individuals. And,
the other week, as you saw, the grand jury handed down four criminal
indictments against Colonel North, former National Security Adviser Mr
Poindexter, Mr Secord and Mr Hakim.

Again, Mr Reagan set up some kind of a record for presidential cool in saying,
about the defendants in a criminal case, not 'the people must decide through
the courts', but he saw no wrongdoing and he still thought Colonel North was a
national hero.

By the way, the top military man of the United States, the chairman of the
joint chiefs of staff, was asked the same question. Was Colonel North a hero?
'I wouldn't say so,' he said.

The Democrats have been screening and filtering and combing the many charges of
these indictments in the hope of finding something damaging to Mr Bush. They
haven't found it. They would love to pin on him any one of the dozens of
charges of corruption that have assailed the inmates of the White House in the
past seven years, but while Mr Bush professes steady loyalty to the Reagan
administration, he has managed to evade all guilt by association. He has, in
fact, done a shrewd thing that more or less disarms in advance any Democratic
attack on him. When it became clear a fortnight ago that he was going to be the
Republican choice, he said the first thing he'd do when he got to the White
House would be to set up an ethics committee, which implies that he recognises
the chronic White House problem without pointing the finger at any of the 59
Reagan appointees who have left under indictment or under a cloud or otherwise
decided not to face their accusers.

George Bush, it's just about as certain as anything can be, is going to be the
man the Democrats have to beat.

The Democrats – they are bewitched, bothered and bewildered. I was going to
blurt out, if the Reverend Jackson were a white man, they'd be in ecstasy.
That's something that no Democratic leader will say today. It's all the truer
because it's never said.

In the many television debates we've seen, it's been more and more noticeable
that while Mr Gephardt would attack Mr Simon, Mr Hart would go after Governor
Dukakis, ultimately six of them would take pot-shots at each other, I can't
remember a time when anybody attacked the proposed policies or positions of the
Reverend Jackson. They made fun of each other but not of the Reverend Jackson.
They didn't dare. It could be interpreted, however unfairly, as a racial slur
and bang would go the black vote, though to be truthful, the Reverend had the
black vote locked up in every state he campaigned in.

What the party never anticipated would be that the Reverend would, in
industrial states, take away from Mr Gephardt and, in Michigan, from Governor
Dukakis, a very sizeable proportion of the white vote. To be exact, the
blue-collar vote and the white liberal vote, so that suddenly we had the
astonishing figure of over 620 pledged votes at the convention, exactly like
Governor Dukakis. Why?

The answer's not difficult and the Democratic leaders know it. All the other
candidates, including of course the ones who've dropped out, had put together
earnest, humdrum policies, talked about a trade bill to resist Japanese
competition, about the deficit, promised to do something about housing, were
all for education, meant to keep social security intact, would look into fairer
welfare, would keep the country strong, talk tough but fairly with the
Russians, and so on and so on.

The Reverend Jackson, by contrast, sounded about as humdrum as John the Baptist
or Savonarola. He talked all the time with flowing passion about drugs and jobs
and race and the homeless. He is agile and he has a position on all the
standard concerns and abstractions, but he touched people where American
society today hurts most and even though more people are at work than ever
before, even though drugs affect five per cent of Americans, even though the
other candidates politely applaud how far the minorities have come, the
Reverend Jackson trumpets, 'It is not far enough!'. And he speaks for the
Hispanics and the Asians here as well as the blacks.

If the Reverend Jackson had been white, he would have been vigorously attacked
for many things – for his glib lamentations for all the Third World countries
as helpless serfs of the West, for blaming society for the plight of any
downcast individual, for his slick, dubious figures on the economy, for his
wholesale condemnation of big corporations, for his scorn of right-wing
dictators and his complimentary tolerance of left-wing dictators – for, in
short, his radical, over-simple populism.

Stealthily, and behind the palm of the hand, the Democratic leaders will
whisper their conviction that a black nominee would go down to thunderous
defeat before Mr Bush. But, at the moment, in public, they have to say that the
whole primary system is a wonderful democratic design to reward the man who
wins the most delegates.

For myself, I suspect that the agony of the Democrats will not last into the
summer. Ahead are four primaries, in Wisconsin and then in three states with
lashings of votes – New York, New Jersey and California. I should guess that
while the minorities will of course go on voting for the Reverend and a lot of
white liberals, the middle classes, the great majority, will close ranks behind
some man of the centre, behind, probably, Governor Dukakis with his balanced
budget, his high industrial employment, what they call the Massachusetts
miracle. And the fearful people, too, of all classes, will quietly think of
voting not for the governor, but against the Reverend.

Now these motives would not necessarily combine to give Governor Dukakis the
nomination, only to produce a deadlock in Atlanta, to break through which, some
dynamic office holder who has stayed in the wings – I wonder who? – would be
dragged out on to centre stage.

We shall see.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP