Pat Schroeder pitches in

'Do you remember,' I said to an old friend of mine, 'Geraldine Ferraro?' 'Ah,'
he said with a sigh, 'I'm sorry, she was long before my time but I've heard one
or two recordings. Lovely voice and I understand she was practically unique in
her time in being an opera star who was at once beautiful and not overweight.'

After a startled moment at this utterly unexpected reply, 'That she was.' I
said, 'In fact, I remember her fondly as the star of a half-dozen movies.
Silent films of course. She quit years before sound came in.' 'Why,' he asked,
'would anyone hire an opera star for a silent movie?' Good question.

Why would anyone fetch Sarah Bernhardt, famous for a voice that was sometimes
silvery and sometimes golden, to play Queen Elizabeth in a silent movie? The
early movie moguls assumed people would come to watch her wave her arms around
and batter her eyelids, which they did. It was Sam Goldwyn who decided that
Geraldine Farrar was beautiful enough to be a silent movie star and maybe the
reputation of her splendid voice would somehow echo through her silent
mouthing. Don't ask me how.

You'll have gathered that my friend was an opera buff and I'd let him out on a
loose line. Long enough. Now, I gave him the hook. 'However,' I said, 'I didn't
ask you if you remembered Geraldine Farrar, I said Geraldine Ferraro!' 'Oh,
her!' he said, 'Yes, barely.'

I ought to throw in that Geraldine Farrar, the once very famous opera star, was
born in 1882 and died in 1967, whereas Geraldine Ferraro was born in 1935 and
so is only 52. Last Wednesday, to be exact. And only three years ago, she ran
on the Democratic ticket as Walter Mondale's vice president – the first woman
ever to be nominated for president or vice president. Somebody once said, 'No
Americans are so quickly forgotten as failed vice-presidential candidates.' Mrs
Ferraro proves it. For one heady summer, her face was on every magazine cover.
The television cameras followed her like magnets. The crowds at Democratic
rallies shouted themselves hoarse and the cheering women could barely see her
through a blur of tears. All the best, and the worst, commentators wrote reams
about the historic breakthrough. Never again, it was written, would the parties
fail to consider putting a woman on the ticket.

Well, three years later, there are at least seven men who are declared runners
for 1988 as Democrats – there may be eight or nine before this talk is over –
and there are five or six Republican men. So far, nobody has demanded that they
should promise to run with a woman vice president. From time to time, a
columnist notices that India had a woman prime minister, that the Philippines
is led by a woman, that Britain has a woman as, it begins to seem, a fixture,
as a prime minister.

Well, suddenly, there has come charging through this bland regiment of males a
woman who has only to open her mouth for five minutes to leave the impression
of a human being more zesty, gutsy, funny, more of a character than any of the
– how many is it? – 14, 15 running hopefuls. And she's not running for vice
president. You don't run for vice president, you get picked as the running mate
of the man who's just been nominated by his party convention.

So, she's running for president. At least, she's charging around the states
looking for money, enough money – which is a lot – to warrant her getting
matching federal funds, so she can be a declared candidate. A lot of us,
Democrats, Republicans, independents, whatever, are hoping she'll make it, if
only for the selfish pleasure of hearing someone slam away at her opponents
with wit and force and relish. Since she's a Democrat, her bullseye target is
of course President Reagan. She was the one who coined the phrase, printed the
label that will not fade, she called him 'the Teflon President' to whom nothing
nasty sticks.

Patricia, always known as Pat, Schroeder is the lady's name and she's no
maverick feminist leaping recklessly into the political stockyards, she is now
in her eighth term in the House, which means she's been a congresswoman for
close on 16 years. She was 31 when she was first elected and is therefore now
47. Born in Portland, Oregon, graduated from the University of Minnesota, then
law degree at Harvard – naturally, like about two-thirds of the Congress, she's
a lawyer – moved her home to Denver, Colorado and so is always elected from a
Colorado district. There are no absentee or non-resident members of the House
or Senate. In the American system you represent the place you live.

She's married, has two children. She's on several committees of Congress,
including armed services, civil rights, child and family, judiciary. She looks
like a cross between Barbara Stanwyck and Carol Lombard, if you can reach back
so far, and if they'd written their own lines, that's what she sounds like.

Unlike the seven, eight, nine, male Democrats whose speeches and voices are
almost interchangeable and who monotonously tick off the issues on the fingers
of one hand, Pat Schroeder is not, at the moment, doing much finger-ticking.
She launches into the present administration with all the groaning exasperation
of a mother who's come home early from a party and finds the house in an
uproar, the children tossing pies and cushions at each other, the dishes
unwashed, the telephone disconnected, the dog chewing up the income tax
returns.

'All right,' she began, the other week, 'we've had "I love this" and "I love
that" bumper stickers and rainbows and unicorns and "It's morning in America",
but now let's face it, we've had our coffee and it's time for a rendezvous with
reality.' And, in a side swipe at her dull, parroting fellow Democrats and
their grinding campaigns, she says, 'There may not be enough caffeine in
America to keep the country awake during the coming presidential campaign.'

She doesn't merely admit the droning failure of the Mondale-Ferraro campaign
last time, she says, 'We, Democrats, have raised losing the presidency to an
art form' and she proposes to stop it. She calls herself a fiscally
conservative liberal. Everybody, today, on both sides, is a fiscal
conservative. Looking and shuddering at that $140 billion deficit, they'd
better be!

But it's something to come out these days and proclaim yourself a liberal. The
liberal tradition of the Democrats, which was loudly and proudly maintained
from 1932 to about 1972, has been so thoroughly savaged, so bruised by the
conservative tidal wave of the past 15 years that it's almost an act of
audacity and, perhaps, of political suicide for any presidential candidate to
come out and say, 'Yes, I am a liberal'.

The Republicans have been so successful, especially during the Reagan years, in
representing the liberals as being not so much as it used to be said 'soft' on
Communism, as being touchingly hoodwinked by Mr Gorbachev's good intentions so
as to sell America's security down the river – with the best intentions, of
course. And, with more credibility, the Republicans have dinned into the people
that the so-called Reagan deficit is not Reagan's doing, that each successive
national budget, however small, however huge, is ultimately the product of the
House of Representatives, where the Democrats have a large majority.

And it's true that all presidents can only propose a budget. The House decides,
so it's become conventional rhetoric for the Republican presidential candidates
to point to the former speaker of the House, Mr Tip O'Neill, the Democrats'
chieftain in the House, as the villain of the soaring budgets. Since Mr O'Neill
has retired, he's indisposed to get back into the fray.

The big, never-ending issue about the budget is, how much is to go for defence
and how much for social services? Mrs Schroeder has a blockbuster of a counter
charge. 'We spend,' she says, '$180 billion to defend our allies. Reduce that
amount drastically and the deficit would come tumbling down.' Of course this
would mean putting it up to the allies to spend a great deal more defending
themselves, which would not make Mrs Schroeder popular with European liberals.
But then, she's not running in Europe.

Adlai Stevenson once came back from making a speech or two in England. He was
rapturously received and when he got home and began to take his knocks during
his campaign, he sighed, 'I always seem to run on the wrong continent'.

Well, if Pat Schroeder gets the money, gets matching federal funds, launches
her campaign and emerges as the stand-out her style seems to guarantee, there
is one big burden she's going to have to throw off if she's to become a likely
choice for the Democrats. Ironically, weirdly, that burden could carry the
label, 'the women's movement'.

She remembers well that Geraldine Ferraro crashed with it. By too many voters,
Ferraro was seen as the women's lib candidate, as an aggressive feminist. She
was grateful for their help, of course, but it was an albatross. She said,
'Fine! Now we've jumped the hurdle of not having a woman running for the
highest office, let's get on with it on equal terms.' But in the result, more
women voted for Reagan.

Pat Schroeder is all too aware of the hazards not of running as a woman – 'Do I
have a choice?' she says – but of being a woman running for president. While
she talks as if it's taken for granted that women are equal citizens and she's
not going to go on about the feminists' issues as feminist issues, she knows
already how hard it is to campaign with the aggressiveness of a man – take an
insult, give an insult. She knows that this style is just as unattractive to
many women as to many men. This is her problem and, as usual, she, herself,
defines it best.

For a woman running a political campaign, she says the hardest thing is to
discover a day-to-day style, a manner of attack which is forceful but not
pushy, reasonable but not subdued. Hard for a woman, she says, to find a style
between a harridan and a bubblehead.

For our own entertainment, let's hope she finds it.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP