Fuelling Inflation - 25 February 2000

While the flags fly and the trumpets still sound first let me say, very
briefly, that Senator McCain's victory in Michigan is very deceptive and
doesn't mean he's going to get even all the Michigan delegates to the
Republican Convention.

Remember: in a primary the people vote for delegates who will vote for their
man at the convention and the trouble with Michigan was that it was a
free-for-all primary - anybody of any party could vote in this Republican
primary. And three quarters of Senator McCain's votes came from independents,
Democrats and young dazzled McCain groupies. Only one vote in four came from
Republicans.

Now on 7 March California and New York - with a huge, a decisive number of
delegates to offer the party - in those states only Republicans can vote and
the Republican establishment is belligerently for Bush.

Still McCain's Michigan victory makes just barely possible the miracle that he
might, by a hair's breadth, take California and/or New York. It would be,
though, a miracle.

However, the American people have another date in March which could more
radically affect the life and prosperity of this country than the choice of the
two presidential candidates or even the outcome of the election in November.

That date is 27 March when there will be held in Vienna a meeting of Opec - the
main oil-producing nations.

It will be the final meeting of a series and is known as its strategy session -
which is a high-flown term for deciding what your government and your truck
drivers and the grocer and the makers of plastics and the packagers everywhere
and you and I and the people next door are from a given date going to have to
pay for oil in various forms.

The big three of Opec - the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries - are
Saudi Arabia, Iran and Kuwait.

But when the bottom fell out of oil prices in the collapse, three years ago, of
the Asian economies, Mexico - which is not a member of Opec - and Venezuela
joined forces - or siege weapons - and followed Opec's dictate in drastically
cutting production.

Now, quite suddenly, only in the past six weeks or so has there arisen a
general gripe of mayors and governors and manufacturers and millions of
householders from New England down to the Carolinas.

Why? Well the last two or three winters have been milder than normal in the
large parts of the country - the North East especially - where the population
is most dense and where therefore the call on petroleum - on heating oil - for
the ordinary home owner has been unusually light.

But now we've had - are having - one of the fiercest winters in memory and by a
freak of the Western wind - too complex to go into here - the Arctic weather
has, this winter, descended down into the South. Twenty-two inches of snow
dumped in one day in Raleigh, North Carolina, is not to be believed.

Anyway suddenly people woke up to the shocking truth that in the past year the
price of oil had gone from $11 a barrel to $30.

Why didn't the city fathers and the Congress and Wall Street most of all set up
a hullabaloo long before now?

Because there is a school of thought, it is prevailing - nowhere more so than
in Wall Street - that oil has had its day and it's none of our business if the
great Arab sheikhs decline from their stupendous wealth and go, as the saying
has it, from shirtsleeves to shirtsleeves in three generations.

Listening to this paragraph from last Monday's New York Times:

"Technology which depends much less on coal, oil, the old forms of energy that
manufacturing does now drives our economic growth. Accordingly Opec - the once
fearsome cartel of oil-producing countries - has become impotent and oil, the
old king of commodities, seems to have no more power to sway the American
economy in the internet age than cotton or copper."

It's a very interesting expert belief that the Times quickly pointed out that
it was one opinion, even if held by many economists and a good many people
actually in the oil industry.

But the mass of people, including other experts and some Wall Street people
too, had a rude change of mind when their home heating oil doubled in price.
And most startlingly when, at the airports, the check-in agents would start to
punch up your ticket and say: "Oh by the way there's a surcharge of $35."

"For what ma'am?"

They smile languidly. They don't have to say - aviation fuel.

I took this up with an old friend of mine I've known since he was a baby - in
the interim he's been a crack airline pilot both in Vietnam and with a
commercial airline and is now retired.

He reminded me that jet planes are the great gobblers of aviation fuel, that
their consumption rate is a whirlwind 1,000 gallons an hour per engine - so the
big jets use 4,000 gallons an hour. Airfares on domestic flights have tripled
in the last six years.

Odd that there's been no general protest. Same with the preposterous rise in
real estate. A landlord I know had to communicate to a long time renter of,
admittedly a large apartment, that his rent was about to go up by seven times.

He threw up his hands and said: "I know it's a ludicrous rent but then the
stock market's ludicrous, but until the bubble bursts that's what I've got to
charge - that is the market price. All my costs have gone soaring."

Well I didn't ask him I asked an economist: "What is this minute inflation
theory about?"

Mr Alan Greenspan, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, has been watching
the market like a hawk, more than a chairman, ever on the guard against
inflation, and everybody agrees that with frequent tiny increases in interest
rates he has succeeded very well because inflation remains minute - around 2%.

So my question was: "How do you reconcile this steady boast about inflation
being at a 30-year low with the facts about airline tickets, the price of
apartments and the continuous rise in restaurant meals?"

He pointed out something I don't think many of us have taken the trouble to
notice or separate out.

The official definition of inflation applies to the price at retail of all the
necessities a householder buys - prices of meat, flour, bread, butter,
vegetables and labour hence production costs.

But, yes, he said, there has been continuous and now soaring property inflation
which means not only the cost of houses and apartments, other real estate, but
also the stratospheric rise of commercial rents and restaurants'. And of course
they pass it on in the price of meals which goes up and up.

You'll gather that most Americans don't go for the expert theory that oil
doesn't matter any more.

The experts point to the declining or "correcting" price of industrial stocks
and the fact that the high-tech stocks seem to run up a new record about every
other week - but this doesn't register what is actually happening to the world
of energy but it records the strong wish of high-tech buffs that that is what
will happen.

In the meantime the average ordinary American is saying: "So would you like to
pay my new home, eating, oil bill and please tell the gas station man there's
no longer any need to spend $60 filling up my sports utility vehicle. Come off
your high-tech horse, buster."

It all reminds me of a day in the long ago, one hot and sunny August morning,
lying on a beach with a friend - a lawyer, a patent or patent lawyer in
chemicals.

The New York Times had just published a huge piece about the trial of the first
atomic explosion. The piece appeared the day after Hiroshima and for the first
time we read about such mysteries as e=mc² and uranium 235 and nuclear fission.

My lawyer friend was the only human I knew who could talk knowledgeably about
all these things and at one point he said: "You know five years from now I
doubt we'll be driving our cars on gasoline."

"No?" I gaped, "what then?"

"Nuclear power," he said urbanely.

"Wow," I thought. That remark, that scene, took place 54 years ago. Nuclear
fuel for your car and mine, for anybody, is still ruinously expensive.

Meanwhile President Clinton has sent his secretary of energy off to the Middle
East to try and persuade - to beg, rather - Saudi Arabia and the others:
"Please increase your oil production, please."

It's a tricky call. In truth he's saying: "I know your people will become a
little poorer than they already are but after all you'll be helping America
stay great and prosperous and that's the great thing isn't it?"

In the meantime while the industrial stocks wobble and dip and Chairman
Greenspan says: "Yes, the rising price of oil is what can fuel inflation," the
opposing smart boys remind us that in California our energy comes more and more
from electrons that flow through computer chips made of sand.

I tell you what, I have an idea. Why don't the Arabs - with all the sand in the
world - start their own Silicon Valley in the Sahara? Then they too can forget
about oil and join the bandwagon.

Still, I'll let you know when you can tell the man to fill up your tank
digitally.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP