Mother Nature's Wild Fires - 18 August 200

A week ago, in between the conventions, I began by saying I had just telephoned
my son who lives way up in the Rockies to hear how things were going in
Wyoming.

Of course this was intended to explore his views on the Republicans' choice of
Mr Cheney, who was born in a Wyoming town.

But as the talk went along we never got around to politics.

The first thing he said was: "Well up here at 6-7,000 feet a day of 75-80
degrees is remarkable and it would be great - is great - until the west wind
comes in and if it's strong enough we could close to being suffocated."

From?

"From the smoke, from the wild fires in Idaho."

Ah! Idaho is, so to speak, his next door neighbour but not to minimise the
picture that comes to mind let me say that Wyoming is just the size of Italy,
Idaho a little less and that if you look up the rude facts of life in these
Western states you always see after "population" an item: "acres forested".

For Wyoming: 9,900,000. Idaho acres forested: 21,600,000 - a lot of timber in
them thar hills.

So the smoke that came from wild fires 10 miles away could have been raging a
hundred miles away from son John.

A south-west wind today could bring a strong whiff of fires from 500 miles away
and if a south-east wind were a possibility at this time of the year it could
carry the smoke into Wyoming from a thousand miles away.

What I'm trying to do most of all for people who live in a small country with a
temperate climate - England is exactly the size of New York state - is to try
and convey the colossal scale of the wild fires that are devastating vast areas
of the West, all the way down from the extreme North West from the Bitterroot
mountains in the state of Washington and then over into Montana and the Great
Plains - the grasslands - back west over the mountains again into Idaho,
Wyoming, down into Colorado, ravaging the dense forests of the foothills of the
highest peaks and down again into New Mexico and practically to the Mexican
border. A crow's flight of about 1500 miles.

Since May the fires have destroyed four and a half million acres of so-called
wild lands - mostly vast stretches of preserved national or state forests.
Thankfully mostly uninhabited.

You'll recall that one of the earliest fires destroyed most of the outlying
parts of Los Alamos, New Mexico, and came very close to singeing the
government's main nuclear research lab.

As I speak now there are 90 fires roaring away in 13 states and by now one
million acres have been consumed.

The state which has most fires is Montana and on Wednesday the despairing
governor begged the president to declare the whole state of Montana a disaster
area, which he did. Montana is just a little larger than Italy, Scotland and
Wales combined.

The governor did this so as to get a federal grant for the huge cost of fire
fighting and to enable him to have the National Guard called out and used.

When the fires started in the late spring 400 marines were sent out west - for
more than 200 years the marines have always been the first of the nation's
armed forces to go to the rescue of any threat to the life of the Republic.

And pretty soon they were followed by 400 soldiers and then 1500 and on
Thursday by a thousand more.

There are now 25,000 so-called fire-fighters which might sound comforting on
the evening news but on the ground, at first and for many days after the
arrival of the troops, it meant no more than another batch of bewildered
onlookers for fire-fighting of this kind and scale is a very special and expert
trade and there's no prior guarantee that a soldier or a marine will be any
better at it than the volunteer fire brigade of your own small town.

Early on the Forest Service of the United States, which is in charge of this
desperate and perilous occupation, pleaded around the world for trained forest
and grassland fire-fighters and they have responded from Australia, New
Zealand, Mexico and Canada.

Even so there are many of the 90 fires that cannot be controlled and will have
to run their course.

President Clinton dropped in last week at a place called Burgdorf Junction in
Idaho where a fire the width of a small city had been blazing away for three
weeks.

The president, who is probably the best we've ever had at saying the right
thing on impulse, unfortunately said a sentence that jumped right into the
Republicans' lap - and by Republicans I'm not thinking so much of the party at
large as of the governors of the Western states most greatly afflicted by the
fires.

California apart there are five states - Montana, Idaho, Utah, New Mexico,
Colorado - taking the blazing brunt of it.

All five have Republican governors. And at the start of an active presidential
campaign they'd have to show commendable restraint not to jump on a phrase Mr
Clinton used when he saw the scale of the inferno.

"I know," he said, "that Mother Nature will burn out forests one way or
another."

This was promptly taken as the text by a Republican national newspaper for a
sermon on the folly, the irresponsibility, of what it called "a let-it-happen
philosophy".

But Mr Clinton's phrase was only the beginning of a sentence. What he said was:
"Mother Nature will burn out forests one way or another but it matters how it
happens." And of course he knows the difference between an uncontrolled fire, a
controlled fire and a burn out.

However, this influential newspaper took its cue from the outrage of the
governor of Montana who bluntly told the New York Times: "The Clinton
administration's policies have left the Forest Service under-funded and
under-prepared for this crisis."

The other influential newspaper expanded on what it calls the administration's
philosophy in a pungent paragraph: "The governor's bitter complaint probably
won't resonate much in the cities of the East where the apartment dwellers get
a warm glow from sending money to tree-hugger lobbyists. Al Gore, the champion
of the enviro radicals, will not be inclined to offer the West much relief from
federal land mismanagement."

Well until last week and the arrival in the ravaged lands of President Clinton
I believe most Americans looked on the fires - glimpses of which they saw every
night on the tele - as a natural disaster, like an earthquake, a hurricane.

And most of the media comment has led people, quite fairly, into assuming that
the cause was the extreme drought which throughout the spring and summer has
afflicted half the land mass of the United States.

Before the fires this was a regular and troublesome item in the news because of
the huge ruination of crops across the Midwest and the West and the prospect of
much higher prices for food later on.

And then came the fires. And the media stir was all about the perils of
fire-fighting, the experts flown in from abroad and the vast territorial extent
of the blazes.

Then the president appeared in Idaho and only then with the reported bitterness
of the governor of Montana the whole thing has turned into a political partisan
issue.

It was probably bound to happen since the presidential campaign is just getting
underway and Vice President Gore's concern, not to say infatuation, with the
environment is one of the Republican's big gripes against him.

I ought to say, at once, that Mr Gore was one of the earliest men in Congress
to sound the alarm and to do something about the pollution of the Great Lakes,
the rivers, the weakening of the ozone layer and the perils of industrial waste
- that's the big sore point with many industrialists and big businesses.

Congressman Gore, Senator Gore, Vice-President Gore were unflagging in pushing
laws that restrict and punish industrial spill. So in a presidential election
year with Mr Gore, himself, as the Democrats' candidate the Western wild fires
are an irresistible issue to the Republicans.

"Who is to blame?" is the title of many sudden newspaper pieces and since
election campaigns notoriously simplify and coarsen all issues, reducing them
to caricature and catch words, Mr Gore is now being called "the president of
the tree huggers" and "the man who cherishes the spotted owl more than good
timber which makes houses for ordinary, decent Americans."

I ought to say there is a case to be made against the Democrats but the
Democrats of nearly 30 years ago who, the Western governors probably believe,
are the ideological fathers of such as Mr Gore.

In 1964, with the blessing of President Lyndon Johnson, a Democratic Congress
passed a Wilderness Act to "preserve and protect" 104 million acres of federal
public lands, to be left true wilderness.

One provision was that there should be no roads, no permanent human intrusion -
not even fire trucks.

The loggers and the Republicans now maintain that no roads meant no fire breaks
and no human intrusion meant no logging and necessary thinning out of forests
to nurture seedlings, and worst of all they say is total freedom being given to
the vast spread of underbrush that has been the tinder box of the present
inferno.

Well fundamentally they're right but for campaign purposes they're making all
Democrats out to be extreme greens who regard whatever is pristine in nature as
"nature undefiled." Like the natural medicine fans who ignore the fact that
many natural things are also poisonous.

However, this truly burning issue of the Western fires with their far floating
smoke is why my son and I didn't talk about the remote, comparatively unreal
events taking place in Philadelphia and Los Angeles.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP