Ringing the Changes! - 6 July 2001

"Let there be fireworks and bells rung on this day and universal rejoicing
throughout this new republic."

So wrote John Adams, first vice-president, second president of the United
States, after the 4th of July had been proclaimed as the official date
celebrating the independence of the 13 colonies.

They don't ring bells much anymore, though in Philadelphia, where the Founding
Fathers wrote the Constitution, they produce a ceremonial clang on the
so-called Liberty Bell - an old, cracked 18th Century bell - made in London, by
the way - that was rung at the first reading of the Declaration of
Independence.

Fireworks certainly blazed from sea to shining sea, under the official auspices
that is of state or city officials.

The 4th used to be, as late as the Second World War, a day on which just about
every city and small town in the country held a parade or an assembly in a
public park where the mayor or the local congressman made the fanciest speech
he could concoct about the blessings of liberty and of simply being an
American.

The president of the United States still makes a public speech to the same
effect and the newspapers dutifully print, or used to, a tribute to Thomas
Jefferson, who everybody knows wrote the Declaration of Independence, became
the third president of the United States, bought one third of the land area of
America from Napoleon - for four cents an acre - and saved the nation from
conquest by the French.

Down the years, the centuries, Jefferson has become specially identified with
the character of the republic because he had positive and very vocal ideas
about the things, the practices, that should distinguish it from the monarchy
that they'd shed.

During the debating and writing of the Constitution he was in London, but he
kept as closely in touch with Philadelphia as the shipping schedules would
allow and was always dashing off little notes about what a republic should not
have.

He was dead against the suggestion that the new chief executive should be
called "His Excellency". "Mr President" would do.

As for titles of nobility: "Not to be granted by this republic. A very great
vanity," he called them. And don't copy the English custom of having judges
wear wigs. Let us on our benches have no mice peeping out of oakum.

He was appalled when the Constitution was finished and had composed no bill of
rights and it was mainly at his insistence that this error was corrected.

However, this year, along with the general celebrations, there has appeared
across the country a rash of pieces demeaning Jefferson.

His memory has been under a cloud ever since a very old rumour appeared to be
confirmed that he'd fathered at least one child by one of his black slaves.

An early report on DNA evidence seemed to clinch the matter and suddenly he was
a famous hypocrite who had many slaves, never freed them, swore he would die to
ensure the liberty of man - provided he was not black.

A dozen famous scholars protested the haste with which the DNA testimony had
been published and they went over it with forensic lawyers.

And it comes out that what the DNA evidence shows is that that particular slave
child was fathered by an unidentifiable one of 24 Jeffersons living in Virginia
at the time of the conception. The 64-year-old Jefferson living in Washington
was the least likely suspect.

It will take time, as always, for the truth to overtake the luscious rumour.

Meanwhile here in Brooklyn a whole team of sculptors are busy preparing statues
of the 39 men who signed the Constitution and the three men who dissented.

The artists have almost nothing to go on by way of impersonating in bronze or
clay these worthies, most of the time only a name and his age. But they are
determined to finish the job and install all 42 images in Philadelphia by
Independence Day 2003.

Incidentally, a Californian congressman has presented to Congress a bizarre
bill, very unlikely to pass I should think, proposing that every state in the
Union should erect a statue of Ronald Reagan.

Oh and, oh yes. Another monarchical fol de rol Jefferson said a republic must
not have: "No public statues".

Well he won on the wigs and the titles but lost handsomely on the statues, as a
jaunt through any American city will tell you.

The first week in July I have to say always strikes a wistful note these days.
It's the last week of Wimbledon and for many years it meant for me being
present always on the Thursday for the women's semi-finals and again on the
Saturday for the women's finals.

As for the men, I chose to stay beside the tele and stay with it as long as it
was interesting, which was very rarely five sets.

Why this preoccupation with the women? Is it because in general I like women
better than men? Well yes that's true, but it's not the reason for my
indifference to men's tennis at Wimbledon.

I shall tell you a couple of stories and soon all will be made clear.

A few years ago an American friend who watches a good deal of tennis went, for
the first time, to England during the fortnight dedicated to the All England
Lawn Tennis Club. Every time he turned on the tube - tennis, tennis.

He came back his eyes gleaming, his head shaking with disbelief.

"By god," he said, "the British are crazy about tennis aren't they?"

"Well no," I said, "they're crazy about Wimbledon. It's a national festival.
Like the Derby, where everybody drops a bob or two whether they know one end of
a horse from another.

"Old ladies watch Wimbledon every year who've never seen a tennis racket
anywhere else."

Second story. About 10 days ago an old English friend of mine, who sees very
little tennis through the year but regards Wimbledon as an annual religious
requirement, as atheists attend the church funeral of a friend.

We talked about this and that and the coming excitement, from my point of view,
of seeing how Kuerten and young Lleyton Hewitt and the Belgian girls -
Claysters and Henin - would do at Wimbledon.

And my old friend said: "The women yes but I've given up on men's tennis."

As Max Wall used to say: "Pourquoi?"

"Because," he said, "it's so dull."

This is such an old story in England that I didn't go on and say, which is
true, that so far this year I've watched the quarter finals, semis and finals
of, I should say, 15 tournaments and the indelible memories are of royal
battles between the men - too many to particularise.

The pros - men and women - play about 40 tournaments in the year. Thirty nine
of them are played on hard courts. The four or five tournaments leading up to
the French Open on clay.

So? So Wimbledon is played on grass. And compared with all other surfaces which
arrest the landing of the ball and let it bounce, by comparison a man's very
fast serve on grass can be more like a bullet zipping through a marsh.

What this means is the men - and by now there are a dozen of them who can serve
at a 120 miles an hour or more - simply serve - bam - and half the time the
opponent can't possibly return it.

I recall a Wimbledon final - oh, it must be 10 years ago - between the two
Germans, Michael Stick and Boris Becker. I had the grim pleasure of seeing it
through in the flesh.

It was achingly dull because over the whole three and a half or whatever hours
the average rally was four strokes.

Serve - slam, bang - a sputtering or decent return - a withering slice - a
return into the net.

Because of this very plight there was then a tremendous to do in tennis circles
in Britain which coincided, not accidentally, with the arrival of the new
rackets and the thunderbolt serve.

What to do? All sorts of serious as well as wild suggestions were made. Reduce
the size of the service box.

The most daring and impossible suggestion was: Why not limit the game to one
serve?

In golf, we chasers of little white balls remarked: "You don't drive a ball out
of bounds and then say 'Oh too bad, I'll watch the next one'."

I believe the hullabaloo has died down because I'm told that Wimbledon has a
new type of grass which slows the ball.

And what with that and the hot, dry weather during the past two weeks it has
shown a marked improvement, though I'd say not yet enough.

So why do I recall so many marvellous men's matches along this year's tour - in
California, in Florida, Rome, Hamburg, and, my goodness, Kuerten coming from
two sets down and match point to a heroic victory in Paris, the clay capital of
the world?

Because the average rally between the men in the 15 or so tournaments I've
watched was 12 to 15 strokes - four or five at Wimbledon.

I remember one set-to between the young Roddick and the young Hewitt that went
to 32 strokes as thousands wept and cheered.

In simpler words: Men's tennis on any surface other than grass reveals the
whole game, not just the serve and return, of a man at full stretch.

Need I say that nowhere else in the world, I believe, has there been any debate
on what to do about men's tennis.

And this leads back, does it not, to the dreaded word: Grass.

And if you say, by the way, how about Kuerten and Corretja - the finalists in
the French Open - why weren't they at Wimbledon?

Well they withdraw, citing - I love the word "citing" - injuries. Let's not go
too clinically into the "injuries" of all the Hispanic players - the Spanish
especially - who did not appear at Wimbledon.

They were brought up on clay, they hate grass and, in effect, boycott
Wimbledon.

When the British hassle was at its most contentious Peter Sampras said: "It's
simple, if you want rallies abolish grass."

And just before this year's Wimbledon the recent number one in the world,
perhaps spoke too soon, but Marcelo Rios put it more succinctly: "Grass," he
said, "it's for cows."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (Â©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts Â©BBC. Letter from America
scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP