Giuliani Receives Knighthood - 22 February 2002

In the long ago, New York city had a monthly magazine of great elegance.

It was published by a man who hired the most famous writers, the best
photographers, reproduced the Impressionists - who were then coming into
fashion - in the finest colour reproductions, printed everything in touchably
beautiful paper.

The whole magazine was maintained with style and damn the expense - an attitude
that alas could not be sustained for long after the Great Depression really set
in.

And the magazine folded in the mid-30s.

One of its renowned features was a monthly, full-page colour cartoon by a fine
caricaturist, a Mexican named Covarrubias, whose cartoons brought two people
together for a social meeting, an interview - two famous people whose
appearance in life together anywhere, at any time, would have been
inconceivable, preposterously unlikely.

I won't give you any actual examples because I'm sure the stars of that series
are long gone and you would never have heard of them anyway.

But if Covarrubias were alive and practising his cunning art today you might
have Tony Blair taking tea with Saddam Hussein, or wilder still, Madonna
sharing a cocktail with the Pope.

I thought with affection back to Covarrubias, and not a little yearning,
because he drew at a time when there was an abundance of fine cartoonists on
both sides of the Atlantic.

The New Yorker and Punch then each had at least a dozen brilliant cartoonists
with a finished, individual style recognisable at a hundred feet.

Alas this yearning is sharpened by the recognition that we, in both countries
today, live in the dark age of comic craftsmanship.

What made me think of Covarrubias and his Vanity Fair series was a scene, a
shot on television and next day a photograph in the papers, which was indeed an
impossible interview.

A photograph of one Rudolph Giuliani bowing before the Queen of England.

The caption read: "Sir Rudolph?" And the underlying piece went on to tell us
why he might not properly or legally be addressed as Sir Rudolph because, well
because, the paper said, the Constitution forbids - a widespread delusion which
I'm sorry to say even the good, grey, authoritative New York Times appears to
share.

I've had it explained countless times, once even by the British Ambassador to
Washington in the act of hanging the cherished silver star around my neck:
"Because, you see, you became an American citizen, the Constitution forbids."

Ah so! Also not so. The Constitution is quite emphatic but also quite precise
about who may not accept a foreign title and who, by inference, may.

During the 17-week convention in Philadelphia which eventually produced the
written Constitution the chief authors had, over several days, recited the
great range of powers enjoyed by kings which would not be allowed a president.

One deprivation was most pungently expressed by the brilliant young Alexander
Hamilton.

"This plan" - the pending Constitution - "gives the express guarantee of a
republican form of government ... and the absolute and universal exclusion of
titles of nobility."

The Constitution laid down this guarantee without quite such a burst of
emotion.

It forbade the granting of titles by the United States and forbade federal
government officials to accept and use titles from a foreign state.

Here's the crucial clause in its original 18th Century language:

No title of nobility shall be granted by the United States and no person
holding any office of profit or trust under these United States shall accept
any present emolument, office or title of any kind whatever from any king,
prince or foreign state without the consent of Congress.

I don't know of any case in which an American about to be entitled went to
Congress and asked - Please may I use it? - but the point I'm making can be
simply stated: That no foreign title may be accepted by anyone holding any
office of trust in the federal government.

So Secretary of Defence Donald Rumsfeld could not accept a knighthood. But
Rudolph Giuliani is not an employee of the federal government and there is no
legal or constitutional reason why he shouldn't be called Sir Rudolph as PG
Wodehouse, an American citizen, was dubbed and called Sir Pelham Grenville
Wodehouse.

But in life there is one very powerful reason that down two centuries has
overwhelmed any legal right and it came from Thomas Jefferson who was in Paris
during the early debates on the Constitution and he kept an eagle eye on
everything in dispute.

He was full of suggestions and recommendations of what should and should not be
done.

If they'd had e-mail in their day the delegates wouldn't have been able to keep
up a continuous discussion without a blizzard of notes and urgings from
Jefferson.

First he was shocked to learn that there was no attached Bill of Rights and he
was mainly responsible for its creation.

He added all sorts of personal fusses. One day after a walk through the centre
of Paris he scribbled down "no public statues" and rushed the idea off to the
next packet. He lost out on that one.

But he did have his say about titles of nobility and it was so sharp and
memorable that the delegates quoted it long afterwards.

All Jefferson said was: "Titles of nobility - a very great vanity" which, he
went on to imply, no proud republican with any sense of self-esteem would dream
of accepting.

This sentiment became so firmly planted in the American consciousness that to
this day even distinguished Americans cannot believe the acceptance of a title
by democratic, especially socialist, Englishmen.

I remember an American secretary of state, a powerful intellect and a very
sophisticated diplomat, yet he marvelled when the most famous Labour leader of
his day moved to the House of Lords.

"Lord Atlee. Sound absurd does it not, why would he take it?"

The soft answer came from a waspish friend of the secretary. He said: "Well I
suppose even an occasional socialist has his quota of human vanity."

Since everyone present had great admiration for Clement Atlee we moved on to
other topics.

However, if Mr Giuliani finds himself in London again and he wanted to get the
feel of what it's like to enjoy his permissible title I recommend that he drop
in for lunch or dinner at any one of London's top hotels.

He will be greeted by a tribe of men who scorn the niceties of the uninformed,
the men in the profession of serving the citizenry. They know what is what and
who is who.

"Good evening Sir Rudolph. Would you care for an aperitif Sir Rudolph? And
after the flutes of sole Sir Rudolph? Thank you Sir Rudolph. Goodbye Sir
Rudolph."

On the other hand he has cause to be glad when he gets back home that he's not
a British citizen.

I recall the wearisome experience of the actor, the late Cedric Hardwicke, in
his day a very distinguished stage actor indeed - George Bernard Shaw's
favourite actor and the one for whom he wrote a special play, casting him as
King Magnus in the Applecart.

Long before Olivier or Richardson he was knighted, way back, I'm shocked to
realise, in 1934, and very soon took his career and his title to Hollywood. And
in the beginning there's no doubt that his title was not an obstacle to Sir
Cedric's acquisition of agreeable roles.

Years later when towards the end he was having a rough time, having to do with
the high cost of a second divorce, he told me that his title had become "a very
expensive albatross around my neck".

"Every American," he said, "who does any kind of service - a waiter, bootblack,
delivery boy - assumes that a knight is a very wealthy lord with 20,000 acres,
something they hadn't known before.

"So where I normally gave a quarter tip I had to give a dollar and at expensive
restaurants where the car parking attendant used to get a dollar, now unless I
gave him five he positively sneers and mutters 'cheapskate' to his cronies."

Which reminds me of a friend of mine who, I discovered fairly recently, shared
the universal delusion about knighthood and American citizens.

"I thought," he said, " 'holding any office of trust under these United States'
was a comic convention of Mencken."

No sir, right there, section one, clause nine of the Constitution.

He was referring to a memorable column by the most famous American journalist
of the last century - HL Mencken of Baltimore.

In the roaring 1920s the wonder boy, amateur golfer Bobby Jones, inspired a new
national fad - young and old, the famous, infamous and obscure took up golf.

One day a young reporter walked into the Baltimore Sun office wearing plus
fours and carrying a golf bag. Mencken was appalled at the costume.

"It makes its wearer look like a stud horse with his hair done up in frizzes ."

He sat down and wrote an indignant column which ended: "If I had my way any man
guilty of golf would be ineligible for any office of trust under these United
States."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP