There's No Place Like Home - 11 January 2002

Last Tuesday evening I switched on the tube and saw a scene, and heard a short
run of dialogue, which was so improbable that I first thought it was done with
masks by two clever actors in a satirical show that I've not kept up with. It's
called Politically Incorrect.

Perhaps this episode was called "The week that could never be".

The two performers were the President of the United States, George W Bush that
is, standing at a lectern in front of a great sign which read: Boston Latin
School.

It is the oldest, most famous and academically the best public school - in the
American sense, for the public - in the United States.

The president was pointing down to a man in the front row of the large audience
- an old man with white hair, a ruddy face, several chins - and the president
was saying: "This man is a fabulous senator and a good man.

"When he's against you you're dead. When he's with you it's a great experience.

"I could not have signed this Education Bill in Ohio this morning if he hadn't
been with me all the way."

To help you register the proper shock the best I can do is to transfer this
scene to the British House of Commons today but suppose with me that Mrs
Thatcher had not been translated or ennobled and was now the head of the loyal
opposition.

And what you see and hear is Mr Tony Blair standing there and pointing to her
and saying, almost proclaiming: "She is, was, not only a great prime minister
but a fine woman and without her help on this new tax bill I could never have
had it passed."

The point is the senator described as fabulous by George W, the owner of the
ruddy cheeks and several chins, was none other than the idol of the liberal
left, the senior senator from Massachusetts, through several decades the
Republicans' black beast - Senator Ted Kennedy.

The fantastic scene continued with the senator rising to say that the Bill
would have been impossible without the leadership of President Bush.

President Bush had the final speech of this dizzy little play by saying: "You
know what? Two Republican senators and two Democrat senators worked together
day after day for months to do something not for the good of their political
parties but for the good of the children of America."

The curtain came down to a storm of applause.

The Bill is revolutionary in this country to the extent that, for the first
time, the federal government greatly enlarges its role in public education,
which till now has been left to the states and to local communities, even to
mayors of cities.

The Bill demands annual testing by a national standard of children between the
ages of nine and 14.

The president called these "the fatal years" before high school when failing
children get, as he put it, shuffled through the system, a process out of which
there emerges a national disgrace.

One child in seven going into high school doesn't read well, writes badly,
can't add or subtract very well.

One child in seven is functionally illiterate. Imagine, one in seven.

Anyway I go into this not because of the substance of the bill but because the
reporting of it was the first occasion in four months that the front pages of
the papers have headlined what they call "the president's domestic agenda" -
Washington's main business of passing bills that have nothing to do with the
war.

Even the New York Times which devoted its first 15 pages to the war - to
Kashmir, to Pakistan, to the Middle East, to mischief in Iran, to airport
security and other related matters - threw the whole of page 16 over to the
president and the Education Bill.

And whereas a conservative paper had a sub-head "President's triumph", the
Times, which is editorially judicial and neutral in all matters, carried a
sub-head, "President has praise for Senator Kennedy".

I pause to say how odd it feels to be talking about Washington and party
politics again just as in the old time, which is any time before 11 September.

I have only one friend, one pen pal anyway, who has written to me since then to
ask: "What happened to the regular business of Congress?"

And frankly I had to say well, as a fact they've been too busy passing bills,
offering billions and billions of dollars to the crippled airlines, the
mourning insurance companies, loans to businesses big and small, most of all
for the many aspects of security - more emergency legislation than anyone can
ever remember even in time of war.

The truth is I simply couldn't remember the issues we called burning before the
blaze that overwhelmed every other issue.

But now let's see one or two I recall.

"Lawmakers fight over Florida recount", "Giuliani divorce squabble", "United
Nations devastating report on AIDS in Africa", "Senate nears vote on free
prescription drugs for aged", "Microsoft invades the internet".

And many more stories about Rwanda, Haiti, Kosovo and reams still in the New
York Times about the approaching three separate trials of Milosevic. Remember
him?

Except for the Times which still puts out a daily encyclopaedia on every aspect
- military, political, Asian, Arabian, economic - of the war, there's been a
noticeable pause in war reporting, a treading of water after the unbelievably
swift conquest of most of Afghanistan.

Even the Democrats, including Senator Kennedy, praised the president for his
performance as a war leader - 90% of the country agrees.

I do believe even Ralph Nader, the Green candidate, who got 3% of the last
presidential vote, I do believe even Mr Nader grudgingly admires Secretary of
Defence Rumsfeld.

And an old, left-leaning Democrat who himself was close to the Pentagon, said
of Rumsfeld: "Twenty five or whatever years ago he was a very good secretary of
defence, but I have to say he's one heck of a secretary of war."

In short I expect, with the help of Bin Laden, I expect we shall read more and
you will hear more of domestic politics because time marches on and candidates
for election or re-election in November - which means one third of the Senate
and the whole of the House of Representatives - are already lining up, going
out with cap in hand to their favourite special interest - a Republican to an
oil company, a Democrat to the union funds.

In the last presidential election, incidentally, the trade unions just edged
ahead of big business in campaign contributions.

By the way some of you may have wondered about Milosevic and his new permanent
residence at the Hague.

His defence lawyers want the allegations of ethnic cleansing and the entailed
massacres to be treated as three separate wars. This in the hope that he might
be found not guilty in one case and that that verdict would override or
pre-empt a guilty verdict in the other two.

At any rate the path through to a decisive verdict is going to have to traverse
the enormous, murky labyrinth of international law.

It occurs to me that of the 314,000 foreign-born persons now at large in the
United States who have committed a crime or overstayed their visas - 160,000
students - many thousands just walked out of a court prescribing their
deportation and just got lost on this continent.

Suppose the one in five students who were from the Middle East and are listed
as terrorist suspects, let's suppose, say, 20,000 are ever tracked down and
charged. Will they go before an international tribunal or an American criminal
court?

In either case it would probably take three generations of judges to try them,
so I predict that via that legal route, President Bush's ideal of rooting out
of this country alone everyone with a suspected link to terrorism, that ideal I
predict will be achieved in 3001.

To end up this cheerful journal I must return to President Bush and his
unlikely ally Senator Kennedy for anyone, including me, who suspect I dealt
with the Education Bill a little too glibly, too lightly.

What is rare, admirable and the way to go about it is not the subject of the
Bill but the process of its passage through the House and Senate to the
president's desk.

It promotes a wish in and out of Washington after the September trauma, a
heartfelt wish that the two parties would look on the Education Bill as a role
model.

What I'm talking about is any bill that is dually sponsored, dually, by members
of the opposing parties.

I was asked by a European friend to say bluntly three great things that came
out of the Clinton presidency.

And after deep thought I discovered three bills:

- Food stamps, first proposed by Senator Aiken of Vermont, a Republican.

- A parental leave bill for both sexes sponsored by flaming liberal Senator
Kennedy and his friend Senator Orin Hatch, rigid, right-winged Republican.

- Best feat of all was the Welfare to Workfare Bill, widely regarded as
Clinton's masterpiece, which transferred 12 million Americans from Welfare to a
paying job. This was the invention and successful prototype of one Tommy
Thompson, Republican governor of Wisconsin.

These by now four vital bills exemplify what James Madison, the father of the
Constitution, hoped would be the three guiding principles of the new American
Republic: Compromise, compromise, compromise, except in matters of conscience.

By reflecting on Madison we can come, in time, I think, to see what John Milton
meant when he begged repentance for his strong revolutionary, what we would
call today, leftist, cause.

"All the wars and revolutions in history," he wrote, "are caused by the
ferocity of both ends."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP