Doves, Hawks, Owls and the People - 26 March 1999

At one of the worst stages of the Vietnam War, when this country was rent apart
by bloodshot hawks and screaming doves, one of my favourite senators, a
marvellous, tooth-sucking Yankee and a man of a few well chosen words, said:
"This country has too many hawks and too many doves. What we need are a few
owls."

I thought of him the other day here in San Francisco when an audience of
several thousand middle-aged and ageing men mostly, in suits or blazers and
slacks, stood to attention in the most monumental convention centre here as a
military colour guard escorted, to the thumping glory of a Sousa march, the
all-American owl or big chief owl.

The great reverent audience bowed its heads and was summoned to a mass pray in
honour of "a man of undisputed greatness who has led us to the promised land."

When the prayer ended a long, murmuring, "Amen" swept over the stadium like a
great receding tide and the audience broke into a returning tidal wave of
applause, which sang in the ears until the man had arrived at the dais and
bowed his smiling, owlish face. No president I can remember since Reagan's
inauguration has received such an ovation.

If the man had looked tougher or had a square moustache, the whole scene would
have recalled one of those breathtaking rallies, staged and filmed by Leni
Riefenstahl for the arrival in any stadium throughout Germany of her
once-adored big chief, Adolf Hitler. The colour guard, the band, the lights,
the ecstasy of the audience.

Now who was this man, the benevolent recipient of all this adoration? As modest
an American as exists. He was Mr Alan Greenspan, the Chairman of the Federal
Reserve Board. His job is to cut interest rates, to raise interest rates, to
pump cash into the economy or siphon the cash back.

It's an awesome power, for it can well decide what you, whoever you are,
wherever you are, pay next month for your coffee, your beef, your bicycle or
your rent.

His audience was a convention of bankers and majestic tycoons who can face
prime ministers, presidents and boards of directors with nonchalance, but they
lean forward and listen to Mr Greenspan with breathless attention.

One hasty or misspoken word of his may ruin your product, your business. When
the Dow Industrial Average, which is our barometer, touched the impossible
10,000, Mr Greenspan was asked if he'd like to comment, and he said the
simplest word he's ever been known to utter: "No."

Why don't they pay such breathless attention to Mr Clinton when he talks about
the splendour of the economy? Because, if you're going to divide Americans into
hawks and doves on the economy, Mr Clinton is the number one hawk. Mr John
Kenneth Galbraith and the old New Deal deficit finance economists are the
doves. But Mr Greenspan is the owl - the man who will discover the kernel of
wisdom in a big showy growth of boasting and wishful thinking.

The owl symbol has remained with us, probably because Senator Aikin of Vermont,
who coined it, also coined the simplest, bitterest, truth about the Vietnam
War. In the furore of hawks bombing everything and saying the war was winnable,
and the moaning of the doves who said it was barbaric and wrong, Senator Aiken
- the owl - said: "Why doesn't the president just say we won, and fetch the men
home?" Which eventually is exactly what we did.

So it was quite a moment last week when the stock market flirted with this
dizzy mark of 10,000 points. Only two years ago Mr Greenspan warned us of
"irrational exuberance" when the Dow was well alone in the 6,000s and
threatening to soar into the unknown 7,000s. Now 10, what did it mean?

Was it going on forever or was it, as an increasing chorus of doves were
moaning, an ever-tightening, thinning bubble? Not unlike the notorious South
Sea Bubble - the tulip bubble of other centuries. Mr Greenspan, Sir, My Lord,
Our Father which are in control, will you tell us what 10,000 means? "No."

So what happens afterwards is what happened before. The hawks and the doves
make their case all over again but more shrilly. This time you might say rather
both of them have discovered two new extremes, each expressed in two opposing
pieces on the so-called op-ed page of a single newspaper.

I don't know, incidentally, if the op-ed page is by now a normal journalistic
convention of British, French, German, Australian, whichever papers but it's
one of the healthiest democratic usages to settle in since the Second War.

It started here before that war when a famous New York evening paper regularly
printed one on top of the other, two columnists of violently opposing views.
The conservative calling his liberal mate, down below, a bleeding heart, and
the liberal retorting that his successful pal up above had been bitten by an
income tax.

The practice, which is now at least 30 years old, is that of having the full
page opposite the paper's editorial page given over to four or five articles,
at least two of which declare exactly opposing views of a burning issue of the
day. And this often includes the paper's own columnists writing that the
paper's official view on the opposite page is a lot of rubbish.

I don't know about you but I was not allowed in my time even to suggest that
the editor of my revered paper was nuts.

So on the meaning of the stock market's 10,000 - if it makes it and holds it -
here were two pieces published on the same day. One was entitled The Arrogant
Ascent to 10,000, and the other simply, blatantly, Stock Prices are Still Far
Too Low, with a tantalising sub heading: "Our calculations show that a
perfectly reasonable level for the Dow would be" - hold your breath - "36,000
tomorrow, not 10 or 20 years from now."

Well first the dove. The dove says the rush to 10,000 and beyond is due to the
arrival in large numbers on the market of amateurs, on the Internet - day
traders - who buy in and out of many stocks in one day and earn themselves
fortunes for themselves.

If they perform the same technique for you without your knowing it, you may
find you're paying out commissions far in excess of the interest - the gains -
that you're picking up. In which case your account is being 'churned' by a
scoundrel, a practice unethical everywhere and criminal in some states.

The editor of a money magazine says this type of smart Alec is mainly
responsible for the biggest bull market in history, and will ruin it. Mainly
because Internet stocks don't have earnings, and what the man is doing is
jettisoning the fundamentals of stock trading. It won't last.

The other piece says yesterday's fundamentals no longer apply, but the model of
price-earnings ratio is not only old fashioned it's wrong. Their new model
looks at how much money a stock will put in your pockets through the profits
generated through the company that issued it.

Using those returns, they put a price on the stock that's in line with the
price of another asset that carries the same minimum risk - namely, believe it
or not, a government bond. The market will rise, they predict, until stock
returns equal bond returns.

So that 36 or 40,000 will be what they call the "comfort zone" - the happy
sticking place for long-term investors.

There's a fourth party of onlookers I haven't mentioned. Not the mourning
doves, not the exulting hawks, not the wise but non-communicative owl - the
people of the United States. And, as the magicians say, history shows that the
people believe, rightly or wrongly, that the man responsible for prosperity or
depression is - the President of the United States. No question, they had
always thought so, no matter whether otherwise he seemed a great president or a
weak one.

Just think: Warren Harding a simple-minded good time newspaper man from Ohio.
Not fit, he said himself, to be president. Times were prosperous, he was
immensely popular and credited with the prosperity.

Coolidge, the little crab apple of a public servant, who said almost nothing in
the fewest possible words, was thought of as a magician and had the current
prosperity named after him - the Coolidge Prosperity. Clinton, whatever his
flaws and virtues, is believed by most to be responsible for the roaring
prosperity of his time.

But if the present plunge of the market and the economy goes on down and down,
watch for his great popularity to go down with it.

There was a president who unfortunately had a depression named after him - the
Hoover Depression - because the great Wall Street crash happened, as they say,
on his watch.

And yet he was the man about whom John Maynard Keynes, writing of the 1919
peace conference, said: "Of all the men gathered in the councils of Paris, he
alone, if he could have been brought in, had the wisdom, the knowledge and the
magnanimity to have guaranteed us the good peace." He was Herbert Hoover.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.