Aftermath of War - 1 February 2002

A close friend of mine at Cambridge was a downright, forthright, no-nonsense
Tory, even at the age of 18.

He came up to Cambridge to become a lawyer but I regret to say scholarship was
not his thing.

However, he finished his first big exam and when the results were known he
burst into my rooms and announced with pride that his tutor said he'd done the
worst qualifying paper for a law degree ever heard of.

Accordingly he dropped out of the pursuit of the law and the next term he
appeared with an alarming moustache, already bushy, and started throwing the
windows open in any room he entered.

He'd done what many failing scholars do - he'd decided to take Military
Subjects A. He was going to be a soldier.

So throughout his last year I would find him in mid-morning actually buried in
a book, just one book, but a strange one.

The first time I glanced at it I saw very odd names which turned out to be the
names of battles long ago - Bull Run and Vikesburg and Chancellorsville and
Shiloh. Yes, he was reading about the American civil war.

How come, I wondered.

"Compulsory," he said, "the damned Americans changed war."

So they did, fighting what was called the first industrial war.

Transport and tactics transformed by the revolutionary invention of the
railroad, naval strategy by the steamship and the ironclad and the torpedo,
infantry warfare by the repeating rifle and - a point I'm sure was stressed in
this compulsory textbook - the device or invention of entrenching.

The Southern armies, on the defensive from the start, made possible the
lengthening of war by resting between battles in the trenches.

It was an invention greatly expanded in the First World War, after the first
great battle, when both sides dug themselves a more or less permanent
underground halting place - from Switzerland to the Belgian coast on the North
Sea.

Thus, as one blunt historian put it, guaranteeing another two or three years of
war and the deaths of several million more men.

So the young officers of the 1939 British and French forces had learned their
lessons well - from Shiloh and Bull Run to the conduct of trench warfare 20
years before.

Unfortunately these lessons did not work as a buffer against Hitler's invention
of the Blitzkrieg - the new mechanised war of bombing planes and tanks did to
the French, in three weeks, what could not quite be done in four years by
cavalry, infantry and entrenched reserves.

Now if there's truth to the cliché that generals always prepare to fight the
last war and cannot foresee the future, what special prophetic powers were
given to the international lawyers, who with noble intentions, sat down in
Geneva in 1864 and set out the first rules for the conduct of a war?

They had no special magic, they too were human, as I hope the following sketch
history of the Geneva Conventions (plural) will show.

After Napoleon's defeat and exile Europe enjoyed almost 40 years of peace, or
at least the absence of any big disastrous war.

And then came the Crimean War which we don't need to go into except to say its
notable mark or stain on history was the revelation of its appalling
indifference to the suffering of the wounded which led, even while the war was
on, to the arrival of a 34-year-old English woman with a terrifying gift for
running hospitals, imposing hugely improved standards of care for the wounded
and, in fact, pioneering a new profession for women called nursing.

The scandal of the Crimean suffering spread far and wide and within three years
brought a much smaller war under scrutiny. It was known as the little Italian
war with France and Sardinia fighting Austria.

There was one memorable battle, not for any tactical novelty but for its
outrageous casualties and, again, for the careless treatment of the wounded.

We might never have heard anymore about it if a Swiss journalist, one Henri
Dunant, had not been present at the battle of Solferino and put out a shocking
book about it.

His complaint, echoing the correspondents in the Crimea, was about the unheeded
suffering and indifferent medical care of the wounded.

Dunant was more than a reporter, he was a missionary. He urged somebody
-prominent philanthropists, welfare agencies - to do something to establish an
international central body which might become accepted as a roving free agent
in setting universal standards for the care of the wounded.

Within two years a committee calling itself The International Red Cross met in
Geneva, Switzerland and two years later organised the Geneva Convention of 1864
for "the amelioration of the condition of the wounded and the sick of armies in
the field".

Now right away, you see, without meaning to give an exclusive definition of war
they confined their concern to the most ill-treated victims of war as they knew
it, which every succeeding convention has done, naturally.

It took 40 years, after the Russians had taken the most surprising beating from
the Japanese navy, for a second Geneva Convention to adapt its concern for the
wounded to the men who go down to the sea in ships.

And then came the First World War, when the main participants found themselves
landed with hundreds of thousands of a new victim of war, so-called "prisoners
of war" who might be perfectly well but mistreated in various ways, including
torture.

So between the Great Wars international lawyers became preoccupied with
prisoners of war and with the problem of what to do with them when a war was
over.

It was not until 1949 with both Great Wars over that the third Convention
dictated the repatriation of millions of prisoners of war on all sides.

There was a dreadful day towards the end of the Second War when Stalin required
the allies to repatriate Soviet prisoners, as the latest Geneva agreement
demanded.

Roosevelt and Churchill had to agree, knowing that about two million of these
prisoners - who'd either fled from Soviet Russia or done forced labour for the
Nazis or had willingly surrendered - two million would go home, most of them to
be shot, starved or sentenced to slave labour for life, which indeed they were.

A private secretary of Churchill chalked up the day of the allies' obedience to
the Geneva Convention as only the third sleepless night Churchill had ever
confessed to.

Indeed the fourth Geneva Convention, also in 1949, met in an atmosphere of fear
and misgiving about the possible shape of war to come. After all it had been
only four years since the Hiroshima bomb.

It hastily added one or two rough rules for victims of technological warfare
otherwise undefined.

In fact Geneva now had to act on the unpleasant new discovery that whereas
formerly civilians went off to war now the war came to them.

The last piece I read on this fourth Convention made a general criticism that
it was - is - outdated in that "the ideological aspect of modern warfare is
hardly accounted for.

The international protection of human rights is rather wished for than provided
for. And the drawback of agreements of the Geneva type is that they responded
only to past stimuli instead of looking forward to the future."

Well of course, we've never yet in the 137 years since the first Convention,
never yet found in Geneva or anywhere else a committee of seers and wizards
with the God-given gift of prophesy and foresight.

I hope I've made clear why there have been four Geneva Conventions instead of
one, "the Convention" to which politicians and some soldiers and most newspaper
pundits alike have been casually, vaguely referring to in the past few weeks.

Over that nearly century and a half, the four conventions reflect rather the
appalling and unanticipated growth of the weapons and the conditions of
warfare.

Yet in the past week or two British - especially - editorial writers have
referred to The Convention, unnamed, as a sort fixed wholly writ, a sacred
book, which the Americans have barbarously flouted.

There's really no question of flouting any of the Geneva Conventions because
none of them anticipates even a new kind of warrior.

For example, the prisoner of war status applies to captured soldiers and all
that's required of them - no vital interrogation but name, rank, serial number.

How do you so classify a gang of trained civilian murderers - that is to say
murderers of civilians - who have no rank, no serial number and as many names
as they have or had passports?

It's surely time for a fifth Convention that will recognise the existence of
terrorists, suicide bombers, chemical warfare, weapons of mass destruction and
guess at other new breeds of warriors and weapons that compose the engine of
modern war.

And as for the gusher of pious rage that sprang up from the dumb release of
that wretched photograph of detainees shackled for a hazardous moment or two, I
can only offer the first-hand testimony of a serious and respected British
correspondent who's just been done there.

He says, frankly, that what he saw for years in the prisons of Northern Ireland
made Guantanamo look like a Holiday Inn.

He found the men well-fed, with hot Muslim meals apart from various snacks and
candy bars. They enjoy hot showers, they write home, they have room to jump
around in.

Perhaps the Pentagon would make up for its dumb blunder by releasing a new,
true photograph of the whole 158 detainees standing alongside the 161 surgeons,
doctors, paramedics and nurses assigned to them - 161 for 158 patients, a
ration of personal medical care unknown I should think to prisoners anywhere or
even I daresay to the English newspaper editors who are so outraged by the
barbarity of American treatment.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP