This Great Festival of Consumerism - 23 June 2000

One hot morning during the prohibition era of the 1920s in the steaming, swampy
state of Louisiana, a veteran, southern politician was consulted by a solid
citizen who was new to politics but was about to run for a state office.

He said to the veteran: "There's so many issues disturbing our beloved state
that I don't know what I shall pick out to run on."

And the veteran barely paused to re-light his cigar and said: "You can't go
wrong if you come out against taxes and for mother."

The newcomer was grateful. He went away, campaigned and he won.

And shortly after he took his seat in the state legislature he voted for a
certain measure which involved a small additional tax on the sale of what the
old law books called "spirituous liquors" which, remember, were forbidden.

In this case a tax was on the illegal distilling of rye whisky. No sooner had
the measure passed, then the man went home well pleased with himself for his
constituency was made up of pious, abstemious Baptists.

But next morning he had to receive in his office a delegation of outraged
citizens. He put them off while he said he would take counsel with his mentor.

He went off to the old senator and said: "I did like you said, I came out for
mother and against taxes and now they're mad at me because I voted that itty
bitty tax on the whisky - and they're all Baptists."

The old man drawled: "They may all be God-fearing Baptists and strong for
prohibition but they're also human beings."

"What," asked the helpless man, "do I do now? They said: 'You promised no new
taxes and you just passed one.' "

"What you do brother is what I did in similar circumstances, you say: 'Well
then, I just lied didn't I?' "

No politician ever had to lie in promising to honour his mother or swearing on
oath that she made the best apple pie in the nation.

Mother's Day was never like Thanksgiving or Independence Day declared a
national holiday by solemn proclamation of the president. Its origins lie deep
in the mists of sentimentality.

But, at the moment, I think there's no doubt that Mother's Day was, in reality,
an invention of the florists and telegraph companies.

But, by now, there is not a living politician in this country who would dare
oppose the inventors' bright suggestion that the second Sunday in May be
henceforth celebrated as Mother's Day.

And there it is in the calendar Sunday 14 May is marked as Mother's Day as
certainly as Sunday 23 April is inscribed Easter Sunday.

And I was going to say "more recently" but I thought I'd better to check and I
was amazed to discover that since 1935 a nationally organised society has
sacredly dedicated the third Sunday in June to Father's Day.

So last Sunday throughout millions of American homes I'm sure there was a
ripple of sighs and ooh and ahs for good old pop, accompanied, I'm sure, in
more places than I'd care to count by a rumble of soft groans from sons who
realised too late they ought to have sent a card at least.

One brave young man was seen last Sunday in the huge crowd at Pebble Beach in
California. He was, of course, behind the ropes and wearing round his neck a
big scrawled sign. It said: "Sorry Dad, I had to watch Tiger."

I don't know how long the ordinary American family's been paying attention to
Father's Day but I can only say that people who regard themselves as upper
middle class families, especially progressively-educated families, have
consistently spurned Father's Day.

They used to ignore Mother's Day, but as progressivism along with the hula hoop
and psychoanalysis began to fade from fashion and the silent conservative
majority found its voice and gave thumping majorities to Ronald Reagan and
George Bush, the sales figures of flowers, telegrams and other celebratory
baubles soared enormously.

I, myself, was excused from making a decision on both days since my parents
were long gone.

But I discovered that today "oh you shouldn't have" comes as easily to my lips
as to any flag-waving, tub-thumping American. My son sent me the video tape of
a favourite old movie that's long been missing from the huge list of films
available at retail.

My reverend daughter sent me a box of folded personal notepaper, brightened on
the cover by her elegant sketch of the old elegant colonial church up in the
mountains of Vermont of which she is the pasteur.

I can only say this: when you're on the receiving end I believe the most
progressive curmudgeon would find it an agreeable occasion.

Well, last Sunday morning before these goodies had arrived I was brought up
short, astonished and sent into a head-shaking mode when I turned a page of the
New York Times and there was a half-page advertisement with some such line as
"Help Dad putter around."

The illustration was a photograph of a putter, such as many dads would have
been using or about to use that Sunday, or rather I should say not this putter.

It was a silver putter, flat-bladed, simple - and it was priced at $785.

Now apart from its being a meaningless present for any golfer - as distinct
from someone who, yes, plays golf - the designing and choosing of a putter is
as delicate a business as choosing a wife - but apart from the pointlessness of
a silver putter and the staggering vulgarity of it, what brought me up sharp
out of my improving view of my son and daughter was the silver putter as a
frightening symbol of the current rollicking American economy.

What that silver putter reminded me of at once was the late 1920s, the heyday
of the great Coolidge prosperity, the headlong pleasure cruise of the
characters in F Scott Fitgerald, and in life.

I was very much alive to all that and during that dizzy summer of 1929,
marvelling at the wild forms of spending in America and at the prophetic powers
of the American president, one Herbert Hoover, and his impressive announcement
that the United States had once for all achieved a plateau of permanent
prosperity.

Of course I didn't know then, nor did anybody, that he spoke one month before
Wall Street crashed and that murky cloud way off on the horizon and coming our
way was a worldwide slump, to be known as the Great Depression. A slump cured
only 10 years later by the making of the weapons of war and by war itself.

I remember being shocked then to read that, and this is still the summer of
1929, that a famous American department store was offering for sale at a
stupendous price twin model Rolls Royces with the promise that the licence
plates, whatever numbers they contained, would also have on one car the word
"his" and on the other "hers".

A venerable American institution is lapsing. A national survey says that the
old custom of college boys getting a summer job is "falling out of favour" -
they'd rather have fun.

Well this week I read too about a new American pursuit, a pursuit of hotel
managers, called "elite napping". Let me elaborate.

A youngish businessman, an accountant, discovered that he'd spent 195 nights in
hotels, always at the hotels of a single chain.

I should have said that this staggering statistic was also discovered by the
manager of another chain and this manager immediately called the accountant and
offered him, from then on, always his own suite with lots of wines and the most
unctuous service that his hotels could supply.

His old hotel chain begged him to return to the fold, a fold that would now be
equally luxurious.

But the second chain jumped in to add that, of course they would give him at
all times, from now on, his own, what we used to call, head porter and
everybody now calls concierge.

When the 20s prosperity came to its abrupt, brutal end and we all began to read
a philosopher economist who explained and deplored the passing period of what
he called "conspicuous consumption" - we're back in it again.

So what is the chief or rather the most conspicuous concern of this happy
prosperous American people?

A huge howl out of the Midwest, half the size of Europe, at gasoline, petrol's,
going up from a dollar 65 - which is the equivalent of a British pound - going
up to almost 40% more.

An outrage, and it disturbs every kind of person and all the Congress because
when you look for the cause, the culprit, every source from Opec to a local tax
man give different answers. I have counted up more than a dozen culprits.

What riles everybody about the rising cost of gasoline is they don't know for
sure who to blame.

And is there in this spending spree, this great festival of consumerism that
we're going through, is there a discernible note of fear, apprehension, recall
of 1929 and beyond?

Not that you'd notice. Maybe it's because I was there throughout the long, dark
30s. Maybe because I was born a Methodist.

But my spontaneous response to that question is the recollection of the first
time I went out alone to play St Andrews.

It was a rare, dazzling Scottish day, a clear day, sparkling sea, balmy air.

"Goodness," I said to my old caddy as we swung off down the first fairway,
"it's a most beautiful day."

He sniffed and said: "Aye, but there'll certainly be a price to pay for it."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS
COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP