Encounters with Intelligence - 6 February 2004

Intelligence, intelligence. There must be four or five inquiries underway.

The president has ordered a special commission, Mr Blair wants an inquiry, all
to know if the intelligence that justified the March invasion was well-meant,
accurate, faked or all wrong.

Until, I'd say, the Second World War, the dictionary definition would cover
most people's understanding: "intellect, understanding, sagacity".

There is in my dictionary a final sub-definition of intelligence and it meets
our case: "the gathering of information secretly, usually on behalf of some
government agency".

Ahah - a very ancient word revived. I recall, in Shakespeare "intelligence,
sirs".

Look that up and you get the short English definition of the CIA and the FBI:
"a secret agent, a spy".

Secret agent is not quite right for the FBI men who regularly announce
themselves as agents in an investigation, but exactly right about the CIA -
Central Intelligence Agency.

Nobody goes around in the CIA with an identification card and indeed they're
almost always known to society, even to the wife, as a businessman, an
insurance agent, some respectable profession actually worked at or assumed as a
cover.

The CIA was not invented until 1947. It was a vague sort of service and was
infested, in Washington especially, by amateur cloak-and-dagger people and
gossipy socialites who could barely wait to hint that they were working quietly
for - well, you know who.

In 1947 one Allan Dulles, the brother of a coming secretary of state, organised
a really professional spy organisation - the Central Intelligence Agency - to
co-ordinate foreign intelligence dangerous to United States' security.

The public knew who was the appointed head of it but that was about the end of
public knowledge.

I don't know how it is with the equivalent outfits in European countries, but
the CIA to most folks has always carried a sinister air about it - inevitably
when you reflect that the only time it comes into the news is when some
project, some operation, like the Bay of Pigs invasion, has gone sour or a CIA
man has been caught as a Russian agent.

This sinister reputation is popularly redeemed mainly by the nick-of-time
rescue of James Bond. And 007 is saved again for yet another lethal encounter
with Charles Gray and his pussy cat.

The FBI, on the other hand, has maintained a worthy reputation from the
beginning.

Perhaps I shouldn't say from the beginning because in 1908, when it was formed,
it was probably unknown to the average citizen.

It was organised as the investigating arm of the Department of Justice with
practically no police powers.

I ought to say at once that the United States, unlike many countries, has no
national police force - that rests entirely with each state which, remember,
has its own education system, banking laws, each has its own criminal code.

In the making of the Constitution in the late 18th Century James Madison
succeeded in convincing the founding fathers that the best way to prevent a
dictator or the national government taking over the country was to give the
states great governmental powers.

Not until the 1920s did a famous attorney general persuade Congress to give the
FBI powers of investigation that would in time make it a clearing house and
central consulting agency for crime all over the country.

The provocation for giving the FBI unprecedented authority was the crime wave
that flowed alongside the oceans of illegal liquor and the bootleggers that
bought and sold them.

There was a time in the mid-20s when, as an example, the notorious Al Capone
practically owned the government of Chicago.

After every murder of a rival gangster he would stage an elaborate funeral
procession for his "friend" and appear at it without shame or fear since he'd
already paid off witnesses, law makers, police, prosecutors, even judges at the
coming trial.

When Roosevelt repealed prohibition and the big gangsters turned to other
rackets many of their hacks turned to bank robberies, and that's when the FBI
was given for the first time the right to investigate any crime that involved
crossing a state line.

It had been the custom for two or three men to rob a bank and then quickly
drive across the state border and have a relaxed supper at a hideaway in a
state near or far.

But now the FBI, once let loose, for the first time armed and licensed to kill,
went off on a national chase.

They became national heroes, known as the G-Men, the gang busters, and in no
time spawned radio serials and made the gangster film as classic a film as the
Western.

The headquarters of the FBI in Washington expanded into an unmatched exhibition
hall and forensic laboratory of crime.

Until very recently it was one of Washington's compulsory tourist attractions,
showing innumerable methods of detection, inviting visitors to add their own
fingerprints to the original stock of six million, and take a tour of the
forensic laboratory to goggle at physicists and biologists and chemists
scraping soil from boots, threads of hair, bits of grass, and spectro-chemists
examining life-threatening letters to the president. The usual catch is over a
thousand a month.

Today the FBI have become the first government agency to recruit agents for any
crime that might have been plotted in, or initiated in anyway outside the state
it was committed in. For over 20 years it's had a working anti-terrorist squad.

I think few people remarked on the speed with which the bureau came to identify
and learn the life stories of 16 of the 19 suicides who shattered the Twin
Towers and the Pentagon.

There was a time when the FBI acquired an unpleasant, predatory reputation,
during Senator McCarthy's manhunt for Communists in the government.

That ended when McCarthy went too far in humiliating the army by implying that
it was riddled with Communists.

The Senate censured him - a very rare punishment - and he relapsed into his
alcoholism and died.

My own contacts with the FBI have been few and far between. In the late summer
of 1968 a young man who looked like Jimmy Stewart knocked on the door of the
Long Island retreat and wanted me to recite my version of the scene in the Los
Angeles hotel pantry where I'd seen Bobby Kennedy assassinated.

I had one, I suppose you'd call it, "encounter" - the right word, one that I
cherished as a delightful encounter.

In 1943 when America was well in war I went off on a one-man tour of the
country to report on what the war had done to every sort of trade and
specialty, from concentrating orange juice for British children, making
parachutes out of long-staple cotton in Arizona, to the secrecy of the Navy's
sudden marine net in San Francisco to tattooing parlours in San Diego.

For this tour, need I say, I had to be provided with a pack of credentials, a
State Department, Department of Agriculture ... on and on - including an FBI
clearance for many wartime agencies, especially the army, navy, marines, so on.

It was spring and I was on a day-long train ride across Texas on my way to look
at an airforce base at the western edge of the state.

I found myself seated next to a buxom, middle-aged matron, well dressed.

After a little small talk I told her what I was up to and opened up a map and
pointed to assignments just done with - Fort Riley, Kansas - the last cavalry
base, now down to Miami to watch the airforce take over the big Miami hotels
and now coming west to an airforce base.

She listened to all this with a deeply understanding smile, as if she'd just
been introduced to some obscure mathematical problem.

I told her the name of the tiny town where I was getting off, one of those
western names like Low Hills or Odessa.

We had lunch together and afterwards the lady went off for a long stretch, I
assumed to the bathroom.

I later discovered I was wrong - she'd gone to the conductor to urge him to use
whatever means he had to get in touch with the police, the FBI maybe, in Low
Hills.

Well eventually we slowed down and stopped at Low Hills - there was no station,
just a telegraph shack and the town name.

I got off and there to stop my exit and greet me, as arranged, was the base
commander - a colonel, his aide - a major, and the FBI man.

We stood and waited for the chauffeur and the train swiftly pulled away.

And there on the train's observation platform, a tiny figure now, but still the
smiling buxom matron.

And the train slid into the horizon bearing one proud American who had just
performed a patriotic act: she had spotted and turned in a spy!

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP