The Moral Pillar and the Moral Contortionist - 29 January 1999

When the Pope visits the United States it is a political event unlike any other
- and, except in time of crisis, more consequential to American society at
large than that of any foreign statesman.

When he visits France, Spain or any of the Hispanic countries of South and
Central America - including the former Portuguese colony of Brazil - the effect
is foregone. The vast crowds that greet him may need encouragement or
inspiration but they don't need conversion. Ninety per cent of the population
is already of the faith.

So you'll have noticed that rarely, if ever, in these overwhelmingly Catholic
countries are there bands of protestors. They would have to be the rich - the
people who live on a thin crust of wealth that covers an ocean of want, the
very people the Pope never fails to denounce for their neglect of the millions
who greet him, who are the poor.

The politicians too hasten to greet him and, true or false, pretend to a
fervent belief in the Holy Father and the dictates of Rome until he's gone. But
whenever he visits the United States he's visiting the oldest democracy and the
largest and most powerful country with a weighty - that's to say politically
influential - middle class population of Catholics.

In a population of 260 million, 60-odd million Catholics. Almost one in four
Americans is a Catholic.

It's something northern Europeans make a habit of forgetting when they go on
about the weirdness of the contradiction between America's pioneering liberal
democratic tradition and its continuing civil war about abortion and the odd
determination of so many, otherwise liberal, politicians to seek to reverse the
famous Supreme Court ruling of 1974 that made abortion legal under certain
conditions which are subject to amendment by each of the 50 states and are
always changing.

Ask those strangely liberal politicians about the religious composition of
their constituencies. Same point in wondering why the American government has
such a tough time and sometimes fails to vote for any United Nations foreign
assistance bill that contains money which might be used for family planning.

What makes the prospect of a Papal visit more threatening is the knowledge that
policies that are an embarrassment to a democratic administration are going to
be the very ones the Pope will praise. And sure enough, this time, the Pope
went further than ever.

"Illegalise abortion," he cried. "Illegalise abortion everywhere in America."

Now notice "America" - this visit first to Mexico and then to Missouri was
intended to be a symbolic announcement of a new Vatican policy, indeed an
immense change or leap in Papal policy toward the United States, which is
nothing less than regarding the United States not as the famous northern
neighbour of the Central and Southern American countries but one of them.

This doctrine has brought the Pope a long way from his original mission which
was to make the Roman Catholic Church of Eastern Europe the leader of a new
world Catholic order.

He realised some time ago that, as one Catholic theologian put it: "European
unity is now based on the euro rather than the spirit."

But last year, at this time, when the Pope was in Havana he became fired by
this notion - this mission, belief - in what he now calls "a human and
geographical unity that goes from the North to the South Pole". That's why the
document he signed in Mexico urged creation of "hemisphere unity between Latin
and North America".

American politicians in both parties are, by now, quite used to flexing their
jaw muscles and biting the lip, if not the bullet, when John Paul II is about
to appear. They're used to being scolded one way or the other either for
enacting laws which insult the Catholic population of their states or proposing
new laws that would insult everyone else.

The notion of an American unity from Pole to Pole stated just that way is very
attractive to any American - any North American - who has a taste for rhetoric.
A just society from Pole to Pole - it's worthy of Kipling if not of Ted
Sorrensen, who wrote Kennedy's soaring and rhetorical inaugural address.

Unfortunately for the United States the Pope was not being rhetorical. He had a
quite specific, and for the United States, painful prescription in mind. The
United States, as the only superpower, now has a separate obligation not
required by the rest - the obligation to be the leader and exemplar for all the
others.

In other times he's soothed the ears of prosperous America by condemning the
human degradation of Communism. This time he attacked capitalism itself for
relying wholly, as the Marxists did, on an economic conception of man. Which
country did he have in mind? All of them that now merged in the error of
globalisation, which - he didn't believe, he asserted - had caused
environmental disaster everywhere.

Here, having told the United States to illegalise abortion and abolish capital
punishment, he also pointed with that trembling hand to the United States as
the model, not of a just society yet, but a prosperous society that equates
materialism with human success and ignores the gap, which in prosperous
countries is widening, between the rich and the poor.

In the end he came back to Aristotle's principle that the first aim of
government must be the condition of the poor.

A last line that, more than anything else in his visit I think, will offend
Americans as much as anybody - the hundreds of thousands of charitable agencies
and millions of individuals who help the neighbours and hundreds of companies
that do what the Pope scolded them for not doing: maintaining, funding health
clinics, research units, good television, libraries, the slums, in addition to
the pension plans, health plans, disability, maternity and other plans that
long ago supplemented the benevolence of the Social Security Act 1937 and have
reduced the population of the poor - it's been calculated by an independent
agency - to about a fifth of what it would be without them. They are a larger
segment of the ordinary people than in any other country.

By the way, when I came into this country to stay, my father-in-law took me
aside one day - a gaunt, austere New Englander, think of the forbidding
features of Mr Justice Holmes - and explained to me the system or principle by
which "we" lived.

"A third of your income should go for rent" he said, "a third for food and 10%
to your charities." This was news to me. No such rules had applied in England.
To be truthful and shameful I don't remember ever subscribing to a charity
except to buy a poppy on Armistice Day and other such anniversary trifles.

However, I assumed that the 10% theory must be in the Constitution and
thereafter tried in a very wobbly fashion to live up to it. If this is new to
you it's known as tithing - it's compulsory on all Mormons and obligatory among
very many Americans, religious or not.

Which reminds me: there's a country in Europe - I dearly hope it isn't England
- committed, what to me, is the worst act of social legislation since the
Second War. Namely to disallow as income exempt all charitable contributions.
What seems to me a rather smug and thoughtless intrusion of government which
stifles the necessary urge to help other people and makes a charitable gift
almost a saintly act of self sacrifice. Enough.

I understand that the Pope was on the verge of announcing this united
hemisphere policy this time last year in Havana when Miss Monica Lewinsky
intervened in world affairs and swept the media, including all the flown-in
television anchor people, off to the hub of world affairs which they should
never have left - namely, Washington DC.

The mention of which may have revived a question that surely must have snuck up
on you the second I started to talk about the Pope and his arrival in St Louis
where he was to be greeted by - guess whom - the President of the United
States.

The question: "How?" as Maureen Dowd put it - one of our sharpest Washington
commentators - "How?" she asked, "after ignoring so many 'thou shalt nots', how
can Mr Clinton snuggle up to John Paul II and wrap himself in the beatific glow
of his Holiness's holyness?"

"Well," as the children say, "no problem."

Miss Dowd goes on: "There they were in a dark stuffy airplane hangar an
astonishing odd couple: the infallible and the incessantly fallible, the moral
pillar and the moral contortionist, the Holy Father and the very prodigal son."

Not only did Mr Clinton take the Pope's arm and help him to walk, adopting -
without affectation - the role of the good Samaritan. He then put on a very
solemn face and told the Pope - the Pope, mind you: "People still need to hear
your message that all are God's children and have fallen short of glory."

Had he anyone in particular in mind? It was a line that gave the Republican
senators, watching the television replay, conniption fits.

And any hope that somehow the president would be intimidated was blasted by a
final television shot that gave the Republicans a second bout of conniption
fits. It was a sign just behind the curtain on the improvised stage in the
hangar where they met. The sign on the men's room door. It read simply:
"President or Holy Father only".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP