Running Mates and Carpet Baggers - 11 August 2000

I telephoned my son the other day, way up in the Rockies, just to hear how
things were doing in Wyoming since Mr Dick Cheney - Governor Bush's choice for
vice- president - had rushed from his Texas home back to Casper, Wyoming - his
birthplace - to register there as a voter so that on 7 November the people who
choose could legitimately vote for Bush and Cheney.

The Constitution specifically forbids the president and the vice-president to
be residents of the same state.

I think there's a comic aspect to the choosing of Mr Cheney that could have
come from the Pickwick Papers.

Mr Cheney, the former secretary of defence, is a man very little known to the
public. We saw him and heard him occasionally during the Gulf War when he was
President Bush's secretary of defence.

He retired from public life after a couple of heart attacks.

He came into the news again, just, about a month ago when Governor Bush chose
him to head a small team, first to suggest names to be Governor Bush's running
mate, then to pick several and do thorough background checks on them - a
process that is all the more ruthless these days since about a dozen years ago
the media started digging out small sins - what the victims called mistakes or
inappropriate behaviour - on the part of the unlikeliest people including three
senators and one man who was made Speaker of the House and lasted one day - 24
hours being all it took for the media shovelers to dig the dirt.

So finally Mr Cheney, head of the team to choose a Republican vice president,
reduced the list to two or three when somebody - and they say it was Governor
Bush himself - had a brainwave.

Governor Bush has confessed that he is not a great reader but he's been to the
movies often enough to be suddenly struck with recall of one of the oldest
plots in the business.

Why this far-flung search for the girl of your dreams when she turns out to
live next door? In shorter words: why not pick Mr Cheney himself?

So to Mr Cheney's happy embarrassment: "Oh Governor, you really shouldn't
have," Mr Cheney, in a Pickwickian sense, chose himself. And now is when it
sounds more than ever like the election at Eatanswill.

I gather that the Bush team, not only the search and destroy team but the
campaign advisors, were sitting around thumping each other on the back, in a
manner of speaking, when somebody - a reader of the Constitution perhaps -
suddenly remembered that while the Founding Fathers said nothing about having a
president and a vice-president who were both big oil men it did say that in
picking a presidential candidate and a vice-presidential candidate - I quote
the 12th Amendment: "One of whom shall not be an inhabitant of the same state."

I'd love to know who recalled this provision and how Mr Cheney upped and said
something like: "I have it: I was born in Wyoming, I can whip up there,
transfer my Texas vote to my beloved home town, Casper, and become a legal
inhabitant just in time."

"Right on." "Bully for you Dick." And off he went.

It was a close call. The public, which does not read the Constitution, had not
had time to wake up and cry: "I say there, hold on old man, I mean ..." or
"Take it easy, fella."

But the public in and around New York City has never stopped muttering "carpet
bagger" at Hillary Clinton, the little girl from Little Rock, who came to New
York City an age ago, made a big thing of mortgaging a house in a New York
suburb and telling us she was a mad Yankee fan, so that she could run for the
Senate in New York State. There is a residency requirement too in anybody's
running for the US Senate or the House.

So it was an historic and a very necessary moment when Mr Cheney arrived
breathless in Casper to embrace his old town, re-establish himself as an
inhabitant and then fly off to meet Governor Bush and begin the long, punishing
trail of a campaign tour.

And within the week the opposition couple did the same. After Vice-President
Gore broke the last remaining thread of suspense by naming his
vice-presidential partner, his running mate.

By the way that's a phrase I'm afraid I take too much for granted. A listener
wondered not only what it meant but how it came about. Quite right.

Well, it's a horse racing term and derived from the practice of one owner, one
stable, running two horses in a race - the slower one being put in there to
pace the star. The pace setter was known, is known, as its running mate.

The phrase is just one century old but its use to define a vice-president was
coined by, of all non-practitioners of slang - the most scholarly, the most
ecclesiastical of presidents - Woodrow Wilson.

At the Democratic Convention in 1912 the presidential nomination went to
Wilson. He got it after a terrific brawl on the 46th ballot.

Governor Woodrow Wilson of New Jersey and he announced that his
vice-presidential choice would be another governor, Thomas Marshall.

"And I feel honoured by having him as my running mate" - brought the house
down, the only squeak of humour they'd ever had out of Woodrow Wilson.

If Wilson's mother had been alive she would have undoubtedly scolded him:
"Thomas, is it possible that you've been attending one of those vulgar horse
race meetings?"

Thomas Marshall, incidentally, is, like all vice-presidents, totally forgotten
except today by students of American politics.

He is immortal for two slogans he cranked out wherever he appeared in public,
which was seldom, during the election campaign. I doubt that either slogan
would do him much good today.

He was a droll man and sophisticated enough to know well the ringing patriotic
phrases, the hackneyed rhetoric, the boiler plate that would be expected of
him.

So he parodied even the most obvious phrase like: "What this country needs
...". The Marshall version: "What this country needs is a good five cent
cigar."

The other one, swiped from Kipling: "A woman is only a woman but a good cigar
is a smoke."

Mr Gore's choice of a Connecticut senator - Senator Joseph Lieberman - gives
us, at last, something substantial, even intriguing, to talk about.

Senator Lieberman is a moderate liberal democrat, well liked by Democrats and
Republicans alike.

He was the first Democrat to stand up in the Senate, after President Clinton's
famous or infamous lie, and say the president's behaviour was not
inappropriate, it was immoral.

Lieberman is known to be, himself, without fault or flaw in matters of personal
honesty and marital fidelity.

All these qualities were no doubt considered useful to set off against the
constant sideswipes at Mr Clinton by Governor Bush and Mr Cheney as they urge
the voters to help restore dignity and decency to the presidency.

But the main point about Senator Lieberman is that he is a Jew, the first ever
to be put on a presidential ticket.

The vice-presidency for much of the past 200 years has been a post to which the
party wished to honour a non-entity who'd done the party some service. It has
sometimes been a useful place of exile to shunt off a man whose ideas were too
radical or threatening to the party regulars.

Theodore Roosevelt did such a job as police commissioner of New York City in
reforming a corrupt immigration office - and, as governor of the state, of
taxing corporations and going after the sweatshop owners - that he violently
rocked the boat of the smooth-sailing Republicans.

They had the brilliant idea of tossing him into decorative oblivion by getting
him appointed as McKinley's vice-president. Till then the vice-president had
been almost a ceremonial post whose holder, it had been said, sat in the outer
office of the White House hoping to hear the president sneeze.

Well McKinley was soon assassinated and Roosevelt became president and the
reforming terror of the republic.

And however much demeaned the office has been since the public today is well
aware of the alarming fact that eight vice-presidents have become accidental
presidents, as we say, because of the sudden death of the president, five of
them after the president's assassination. Facts which remind every voter that
the vice-president is, as they say, one heart beat away from the presidency.

Now it could be possible to have a secular Jew whose race or religion played
little part in his public life but Senator Lieberman is a deeply religious man
- a practising orthodox Jew.

He will do nothing forbidden on Saturdays. He's said that for serious matters
affecting the peoples' welfare he would go to preside over the Senate - his
only official job - but he would walk not ride there.

Somebody said Jews may not be welcome in many country clubs but they have been
received, even venerated, as justices of the Supreme Court. It's been almost a
century since the appointment of Brandeis and Cardozo. Today there are two Jews
among the nine justices.

But the prospect is there of a vice-president, like eight others, suddenly
translated to the presidency.

So there is, at the moment, very lively and knotty discussion about the wisdom
or folly of Mr Gore's decision.

The leaders of both parties applaud it as an act of courage. Here in the city
of New York there is great elation and, among some prominent Jews,
apprehension.

But New Yorkers are probably the worst judges in America of how the rest of the
United States thinks and feels about the nomination.

For years I've played a parlour game with visiting Europeans - British men and
women in this city on business - by saying to them: there are 265m Americans in
the United States, how many of them are Jews?

"Ooh I don't know," they'd say. "Twenty, 30, even 40m."

The answer is 6m. Of them, 2m live in this city - in other words one American
Jew in three lives in the city of New York.

A national poll, taken two years ago, found that, theoretically, about 90% of
Americans wouldn't mind having a Jewish president.

If true it's an astonishing figure and shows a heartening decline in what you
might call polite, unspoken anti-Semitism that in my time had tiptoed
throughout the land.

Jews settled mostly in New York, Chicago and Los Angeles. How they feel in
Omaha, Nebraska, in Salt Lake City, in Cleveland, Ohio, in Michigan, in the
other 49 states, we shall simply have to wait and see.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP