First and Foremost Bureaucrats - 12 January 2001

When I was a small boy, nine years old to be exact, my parents exchanged the
muddied pavements of Manchester for the long, eight-mile stretch of sand that
runs along the Irish Sea from Lytham St Anne's to Fleetwood.

And there for the only time in my life I enjoyed the companionship of a very
old man - a great uncle, one of those big, shaggy Scotsmen who seemed
constructed larger than life - huge head and face, huge hands and feet, but
everything in balance.

He was essentially a kindly man and he moved with a boson's roll but gently,
like a giant who can't help his size but hopes not to intimidate anybody.

He took me fishing in a novel way that was a delight at the time, a delight I
have never repeated.

We went out at the very low tide when the sands reached out half a mile, and
where the beach was still damp we laid down a large net with hooks, staked it
at four corners, dug close by for juicy worms, baited the hooks and went home.

Sometimes if the full tide was at midday we strolled along the sea wall and
looked at the churning water and imagined the fish being taken in by our waving
dangling hooks.

Hours later, just before the tide had retreated all the way, we went out to our
stake net and hurried to be there before the receding tide had exposed our
catch for I am grieved to tell you that I learned at an early age even
Lancashire people are not above being sneak thieves.

When finally we could wade to our ankles we'd look down and see one or two - on
good days five or six or seven - flapping, thrashing fish. Always fluke or
plaice, plaice mostly.

The plaice is a flat fish, probably the flattest fish in creation, with pink
spots that give it the appearance of measles. It has a thin skin and a very
thin layer of flesh of a watery texture.

I once knew a man who actually liked plaice but he was a born Cockney who'd set
up business in Manchester and prospered exceedingly.

He made a point of enthusing about all things Lancastrian, rather like those
Midwestern young men who move to California and from then on become
professional Californians.

Well the tender memory of great uncle Timms was roused by an item the other
morning reporting that the North Sea was falling a victim to pollution and that
the Irish Sea might go the same way.

This sorry story was by coincidence or destiny bang up against a piece on
Governor Christine Whitman of New Jersey, who's just been picked by Mr Bush to
be in charge of the government's environmental protection agency.

The association here is that I know enough about Governor Whitman to believe
that she could turn out to be a fine choice, not because of any demonstrated
brilliance in the field of environmental protection but because she's handled
both sides in the environmental battles.

She's moderate, level headed and patient - three qualities that are going to be
tested to the hilt in her job.

Because if there's one political subject, one area of policy, which arouses
instant partisanship it is the mere pronouncement of the word environment.

No other issue sparks in people such paranoia about the motives of the other
side.

To the Democrats, the Republicans are well on the way to destroying the air we
breathe and poisoning the human race.

To the Republicans, the Democrats are crazy people who care more for protecting
the spotted owl than the jobs of men who work in a factory or at a petrol pump
or in the tobacco fields.

The first obstacle Mrs Whitman will face is the obvious prejudice that she's a
Republican and it has to be admitted that the Republicans as a party have a
wretched record on the environment.

Which is understandable if you first appreciate that most industrialists,
manufacturers - the men who make things and need coal, oil, natural gas to do
it - are Republicans.

It's been only 40 years since every factory on earth spilled its wastes into
rivers and lakes and city dumps as a natural process.

Since the late 18th Century and the birth of the Industrial Revolution (at
Bradford, Yorkshire wasn't it?) nobody protested about the dangers to human
life of industry's useless gases and liquids, it was as natural and unremarked
as a flushing toilet.

But there came a date that is now a milestone in human history - a date quite
unremarked at the time, 1962 - when an obscure American woman biologist put out
a book which within months gave her both a famous and a notorious name and made
her an object of political controversy. Her name was Rachel Carson and the book
was called The Silent Spring.

It was a sort of alarm signal about the probably harmful effect of the recent
spraying of insecticides and pesticides on the crops grown for human
consumption.

Mrs Carson is long gone but her Silent Spring is to the modern environmental
movement what Tom Payne's pamphlet Common Sense was to the American revolution
of 1776.

In the beginning the protest movement was exclusively on the hazards to human
life of those pesticides, especially the dreaded DDT, which had been innocently
invented by a German in the 19th Century, and years later, in 1939, used with
great success in Switzerland against the Colorado Beetle which was ruining the
potato crop.

By the late 50s DDT was hailed as the eighth wonder of the world. The United
Nations sent out teams through Indonesia, spraying from house to house and
virtually wiping out malaria throughout much of the country.

Just when everyone was marvelling at the wonders of modern science there
appeared that little book, The Silent Spring.

Her warnings about the hazards of DDT to animal wildlife turned DDT into a
villain and a threat to human health.

A controversy which now seems ludicrously overblown, developed between
fishermen and eaters of fish. The fishermen wanted more DDT sprayed on fish and
the people who came to be known as greens demanded none at all.

The Food and Drug Administration stepped in and after severe testing announced
that fish sold in the United States contained less than one part per million of
DDT and was no conceivable threat to human life.

By that time the progressives - the animal rights advocates and the greens -
were allied into a regiment which began to suspect almost any chemical that
came near food.

We were still, incidentally, about 40 years away from the day today when anyone
would be fearful of eating wheat, which is after all manipulated grass.

Well most listeners will have lived through the dreadful years when our rivers
and lakes - not little lakes but the Great Lakes here, which together are half
the size of Europe - were becoming unfishable.

That was when then the Democrats set up and embraced the better informed of the
environmentalists.

I remember a great old friend of mine in Southern California, a citrus farmer,
cursing this new government agency - the EPA - and an astonishingly long list
of rules it had got out about the conditions under which he could grow and
protect his lemons and limes.

There was, I remember, an order condemning the type of smudge pots that he used
- they were little pots containing a material which spewed much smoke to drive
away insects but was a necessary emergency protection against frost.

I shouldn't say he was particularly partisan in those days - he'd been an
active soldier in both wars and took a weary view of politicians - but I'm sure
as the new agency was bolstered with more laws, more businesses and industries
and farmers and tobacco growers came under the sharp eye of the Environmental
Protection Agency - companies that had for centuries gone their own way and
never heard phrases like "toxic waste", "the ozone layer", "the greenhouse
effect", "the cleaning of the Amazon Valley", "saving the rainforest" and so
on.

Well by 1997 the whole world had learned of a situation in which human and
animal life could be threatened by the emissions of two centuries of noxious
carbons and other gases and liquids.

In December of that year 150 nations met in Kyoto to study the possible effects
of all this stuff on the approach - the reality, if you were a sceptic - of
global warming.

Well it will be no surprise if I tell you that the United States employs 80,000
people in the independent Environmental Protection Agency.

It would be a fantasy to believe that these are 80,000 environmental experts or
plant and fish biologists or even just passionately ideological greens - they
are first and foremost bureaucrats.

And the most dependable feature of a bureau once it's created is to go on
reproducing itself. Parkinson's law is gloriously extended and all
bureaucracies are great breeders of more bureaucrats.

The greens have seldom studied the practical results of their paperwork, their
proliferation of rules and regulations.

On the other hand the factory owners, big and small, have grown increasingly
incensed at the prodigious length and finicky detail of the latest book of EPA
regulations.

The Republicans didn't really wake up until it could be disclosed that two of
the Great Lakes were literally unfishable and when we on Long Island were
warned that so long as the noble Hudson spawned poisoned fish we would not be
able to eat the most splendid of our eating fishes, the striped bass.

Now Mrs Governor Whitman of New Jersey is in person an alert and concerned
environmentalist but as the chief executive of a state with a mixed industrial
and farming economy she has heard a thousand times the complaints of people
whose businesses are at hazard from the strangulation of too many rules.

My citrus farmer friend, by the way, in California couldn't take it, way back
there, and went out of business.

This world problem which henceforth Governor Whitman must oversee for the
United States comes down to the ideological purity of the greens against the
solvency of small factories everywhere.

Or better we might recall the comment that the late President Nixon made in a
private aside to a friend: "If it comes down to a flat choice between smoke and
jobs, tilt towards jobs."

Mrs Whitman will attempt to realise the impossible dream of jobs with no smoke.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP