Conventional Wisdom - 4 February 2000

Tuesday 1 February 2000 is a date that will live either in glory or in infamy.

It was the day on which we entered the 107th month of continuous prosperity -
the longest boom anyway, if not the strongest, in American history.

And it has been greeted with innumerable sermons, declarations of pride on the
event with only a few expressions of anxiety from chronic anxiety practitioners
who've been anxious ever since the first day of the present boom in March 1991.

Of course until this past Thursday morning I had every intention of talking
about it and putting it inside the large framework of a little history of booms
and busts.

But I've changed my mind and I'm going back on my promise made months ago not
to talk about the presidential election until midsummer when the conventions
are over and we'll know which two heavyweights or lightweights are going to
step into the ring.

In that single sentence I've already revealed a dumb oversight.

That promise, I realised rather late in the day, was due to a slip of the mind.
Due to long practice in covering presidential nominating conventions - my first
was in 1940 - I and nobody else ever dreamed then the convention system was
doomed to sink into history. We'll say how and why in a minute or two.

In a word the convention system in which the delegates proposed - two or three
or four or five men - to lead their party and then chose through several
ballots the one - once in Madison Square Garden in 1924 through 10 days and
nights they had 103 ballots. Well the convention system has been replaced by
the primaries system.

Long before the coming conventions this year teams of delegates from each state
and both parties were chosen by a primary or by caucuses or by little state
conventions and those delegates then go off to that party's national
convention, already sworn to the primary winner in their state.

So New Hampshire's four Republican delegates will vote at their convention for
Senator McCain, who won a thumping victory last Tuesday.

To gauge the relative importance of two states just consider that at the
Republican convention New Hampshire will have four votes, California 54.

In 1960, seven states chose their delegates and hence their candidate through
primaries. Today every state has a primary or caucuses or a state convention at
which the party's choice of its candidate will be decided.

They all then, in the summer, a thousand or more delegates, troop off to their
convention centre in Philadelphia, Los Angeles, Chicago, wherever and on the
balloting day they say "Aye" to the man who has already been overwhelmingly
voted through all the primaries.

What I'm saying is that a month from now, by March 7, the race between Bush and
McCain, Bradley and Vice President Gore will be all over. We'll know by then
which two are going to fight it out in November.

The conventions, in other words, have turned - they turned long ago - into
coronations.

Even so foreign broadcasting companies will no doubt, following my dumb
mistake, keep sending huge teams of so-called reporters to cover the "choice of
presidential candidates". They could effectively cover the conventions with one
reporter and one recording engineer.

How did this come about? Well it might be fun, enlightening anyway, to sketch
the different ways the president was chosen since the beginning.

First, George Washington. The men, mostly lawyers, who in 1787 met in
Philadelphia to write the Constitution simply agreed that Washington was the
man.

It's hard now to imagine but you see there were no political parties. In fact a
system, such a system, the delegates to the Constitution were most anxious to
avoid.

That decision came early. When they started out discussing what form of
government they should have, remember they were literally inventing a nation,
what sort of government - a monarchy, a republic, a syndicalist form, Swiss
cantons whatever - they agreed, without any debate, that one form of government
they weren't going to touch with a barge pole was democracy, which, as George
Washington reminded them: "...among civilised nations is regarded as most
disreputable and leading to factions" - factions meant quibbling political
parties.

And Washington underlined the menace of political parties by stressing that:
"They provoke the mischief of associations and combinations." Which indeed they
do.

By the same distasteful scruple George Washington, having been handed a piece
of paper that had dropped on the floor with notes about their meetings, scolded
the assembled delegates, told them to be more careful "lest our transactions
get into the newspapers and disturb the public repose."

Did you know that? The whole Constitution meetings were a secret meeting,
pledged not to deteriorate into political parties.

So one party wished to see all the men present having decided on a republic,
naturally decided that the chairman - General Washington - should be the first
president. Right? Right. So ordered, by acclamation.

It was the one and only acclamation. The citizens of this new republic who
called themselves Americans discovered next time that they too were human, even
as the detested British and they developed political parties. Which in the
beginning divided roughly into men who wanted a strong central government and
the men who wanted to give the states plenty of powers so as to check a too
powerful-executive. They'd been there, done that.

So at first they had federalists versus republicans and the way they chose the
presidential candidate was through caucuses of the congressmen who represented
their states.

Well pretty soon there was a lot of popular protest against congressmen in
effect choosing the president and that led to the convention system. Which
started in Baltimore in 1832 with a small protest party recruited from all the
states voting on a set balloting day and the system flourished throughout the
19th and early 20th centuries and I'm happy to say I was not too late to come
in on it.

At the ones I attended as a reporter from 1940 to 1972 I had a ball. You
arrived at a huge auditorium and after three days of parties and often
preposterously demagogic Dickensian speeches and a lot of hoopla and actual
entertainment then came the balloting and usually there were two candidates and
you took bets - was it going to be Governor Dewey of New York or Senator Taft
of Ohio?

Well in that thrilling year of 1940 it was neither. It turned out to be a
lawyer from Indiana - a maverick - not even registered as a Republican. A big
shambling, charming bear of a Midwesterner who was against the Republican
establishment and backed the hated President Roosevelt for his efforts to help
the British in the war, while the establishment Republicans were petrified with
fright that Roosevelt might beguile America into it. When he did they loathed
him more than ever.

Well at the 1940 convention suddenly the frontrunners - the inevitable Dewey
and Taft - wobbled a little on the fourth and fifth ballots and on the sixth,
up came roaring out of nowhere this maverick bear, Wendell Willkie. He won.

It was the last exciting convention, the last time there were more than two
ballots.

This first week in March, exactly a month from now, 16 states hold their
primaries, 13 involving both parties including California which alone has a
quarter of all the delegate votes spread between 50 states.

California has the last and decisive word, so I'm saying you're going to be
spared a spring and summer of political talks. I imagine that from time to time
I'll paint in the detailed features of the two men who, on the evening of 7
March, will be the chosen warriors in the November battle - that's the way the
politicians describe it, though both parties, as usual, are suggesting there
won't be any battle in November, just a simple walk over for the present Vice
President Gore or, pardon me, for Governor Bush of Texas.

Governor Bush has done a fine job in Texas we keep hearing and for his part his
statement of the issues is that he represents the only true conservative
Republicans and proposes to practice what he calls "compassionate
conservatism".

He has not gone so far into the details of what this means, just as his father,
when he was president, decided to produce "a gentler, kinder nation". He didn't
have the opportunity because Mr Clinton pushed him aside to "build a bridge to
the 21st century."

In the meantime Mr Clinton, it has to be said, disgraced himself but abolished
the dreaded deficit.

Governor Bush's opponent - assuming today that Governor Bush's $35m will have
done the trick of persuading all those primary delegates - Mr Bush's opponent
will most likely be Vice-President Gore who, in the past month, has turned from
being a squeaky clean environmentalist and hearty do-gooder into, first, a bad
actor - he tried being Hugh Grant and then John Wayne and failed miserably but
then he said, in effect: "Aw fellas, let's lay off these impersonations - why
don't I be myself?"

And so he became a tough debater, teeming with information and nasty mean jabs
at the over-delicate and maybe for the party too-liberal former Senator
Bradley. Mr Gore is now a formidable candidate.

Meanwhile, we're told by old Texans, that there's more to Governor Bush than
meets the ear.

So I've gone on the assumption, which is conventional wisdom, that Governor
Bush for the Republicans, Al Gore for the Democrats, will be the set-up after 7
March.

The question of whether the Navy war hero - Senator McCain - the spunky,
anti-establishment Republican, will repeat his whopping New Hampshire massacre
of Governor Bush in South Carolina will soon be settled.

Two weeks on Monday in fact. Stay tuned.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (Â©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts Â©BBC. Letter from America
scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP