Ghostly Applause for a News Blackout - 21 July 2000

"The 18th of July," said an Israeli diplomat, "could be one of the historic
dates of the new century.

"Both parties," he said, "must seize not only the moment but literally the day
as a once-in-a-lifetime chance."

Well, Wednesday came, and Thursday, and on into an exhausted Friday, and still
nothing historic.

"Once in a lifetime" was an odd phrase to use about an Israeli/Palestinian
grievance, for a catalogue of grievances as old - well if not as old as Judea,
at least goes back, at the latest, to 1917 when General Allenby - a British
general - ended the 400-year rule of the Turks by conquering Palestine and
turning it into a British mandated territory, which, we now see, was when the
mischief began.

A short history of Palestine says it all in one sentence: The British
administration was hampered from the start by the claims of the Arabs and of
the obligations of the Jews implicit in the Balfour Declaration.

"The Balfour Declaration? What was that?" I hear.

And I hear to my astonishment: for two generations of Englishmen the Balfour
Declaration was as familiar as the first sentence of the Lord's Prayer. It's
almost as short.

Its author - Arthur James Balfour - was the British foreign secretary when
Allenby forced the Turkish surrender.

Balfour? Today an inconceivable type for a British prime minister which he
became, was a tall, wispy aristocrat, a philosopher with a soft voice and a
gentle touch of malice.

When Winston Churchill published his two-volume history of the First World War,
Balfour said: "I see that Winston has written his autobiography, he calls it
The World Crisis."

Beneath this languid surface was an acute politician and a realist. And when
the British conquest of Palestine was complete Balfour foresaw inevitable
friction between the two main claimants to the land of Palestine.

He made a declaration about future policy which was approved by the allies and
by the League of Nations in handing over Palestine to British rule.

The declaration said simply that Britain would support the establishment of a
Jewish national home in Palestine provided that safeguards could be guaranteed
for the rights of non-Jewish communities in Palestine.

Need I say that that sentence has been subjected to as many varied and tortured
interpretations as the freedom of speech clause in the American Constitution.

Essentially the meeting at Camp David was yet another attempt in an
interminable series to define what are the rights of the Arabs and what
safeguards will permanently guarantee the security of both populations.

Mr Arafat has said, and said again this time, that nothing less than a
Palestinian state would suffice. And he would announce the setting up of that
independent state on 13 September.

So when the two leaders joined the president at his country retreat in Maryland
the press officers of each party agreed to announce that there were three main
issues: How much territory should Israel cede, what is to be done with the 4m
Palestinian refugees and the question of the control of different parts of
Jerusalem. Really those have been the issues all along.

And then the moment the gates closed on Camp David an extraordinary, some
diplomats thought a wonderful thing, happened, which would stay wonderful
whatever the results of the summit.

The White House announced with the enthusiastic consent of Mr Barak and Mr
Arafat that there would be no news releases, no press conferences - an absolute
news blackout.

This was a new and absolutely unique ban and in a gusty wind that stirred a
leaf or two outside those closed gates I thought I heard the faint applause of
a ghost - the ghost of Dag Hammarsjold, the second secretary general of the
United Nations, a serious, brave Swede who really believed that the United
Nations could override the self interest of the big powers and that he could
rein in the belligerence of the Soviet Union - a delusion which so enraged the
Soviet dictator Kruschev that he initiated a long debate on the functions of
the secretary general, the effect of which on Hammarsjold's successor was in
fact to diminish his powers.

But this sudden association of mine with Hammarsjold was sparked by the Camp
David deliberate news blackout.

From the start of his first term as secretary general Hammarsjold had begged,
without success, for such a ban to become traditional.

He was saddened and then appalled at the enormous and constant presence of the
press whenever there was a meeting of two or three national leaders on a
delicate issue.

He believed there were occasions - and a summit was certainly one of them - at
which there should be a total blackout till the matter was decided and
announced.

He ascribed the trouble of an ever-present and intrusive press to Woodrow
Wilson - the American president during the First World War - who was
practically the author of the peace treaty.

Among the many beautiful ideals which Wilson announced would run the world from
then on was the great democratic announcement that "henceforth diplomacy would
not, should not, be conducted behind closed doors where big men cooked up
decisions which you and I might one day have to live up to, even fight for,
without ever having had a word to say."

Which sounds fair doesn't it, just, democratic?

What it came to mean in actual practice when the press corps of, say, a dozen
correspondents had ballooned into an attendant mob of several hundred, it meant
that we the people were proclaiming our right to know everything, to get
slivers of news every day, to judge them, to condemn them and the men behind
the closed doors, and generally to disturb and confuse and depress the
diplomats doing the diplomacy.

President Wilson's slogan for this new policy was: "Open covenants openly
arrived at."

"Diplomacy," he added, "shall proceed always frankly and in the public view."

Both the British leader, Lloyd George, and the French, Clemenceau, were
appalled.

And Dag Hammarsjold, much later, maintained till his dying day that frank and
creative diplomacy was crippled by that motto. What he wanted was "open
covenants secretly arrived at."

But Wilson's rousing slogan was quoted by every apprentice reporter and acted
on and to penetrate and expose what the big boys were talking about in private
became the main ambition of what were first called "keyhole" and then
"investigative" reporters even though along the way, pundits - even writers
especially - lamented the Wilson prescription.

In 1932 Walter Lipman, for many years the most distinguished of American
political commentators, wrote: "Great masses of people cannot negotiate. They
can no more negotiate than they can together make love or write books or
invent.

"They can approve or disapprove of the results but if they participate in the
negotiation itself they merely shout themselves hoarse and fall into a hopeless
deadlock." And so it has been.

All these weeks I've said nothing about the United Nations numbing report on
the appalling spread of Aids in the huge stretch below the Sahara, of what has
lately been called "the hopeless continent" - Africa.

I've not talked about it because, as with any other catastrophe, I don't
believe you should comment unless, in some way, you can help.

But this week the Senate of the United States voted an annual billion dollars
in loans. The international drug companies have agreed to cut their prices for
African nations.

The following discussion in the Senate went beyond the selling of the Aids
drugs, which even for the most intelligent patient requires a tricky and
careful series of routines.

There was also much general talk of the need for education, prevention and
"developing the medical infrastructure" - quite an undertaking when you
consider you're talking about 50m victims who are mostly very poor and barely
literate.

What this news prompts in me is a memory - a very poignant memory - of being in
India 37 years ago on a small mission for the United Nations.

The year was 1963, a year that the secretary general - the gentle U Thant -
called the "year of poverty" and he'd asked us, this film crew, in India
particularly to film scenes of not dire but routine poverty. A very touchy
assignment.

In New Delhi I had a long talk with the wife of India's ambassador to the
United Nations, Sir Benegal Rau.

Lady Rau was in charge of the government's campaign to teach birth control to
the sub continent's then 1,700,000,000 - a daunting task.

We discussed the aid that the Western nations were giving and, while
acknowledging the promptness and generosity of it, she said: "But they offer us
money for all the Western preventatives - money for contraceptives, each of
which costs a villager a month's wages."

In the end Lady Rau said they needed much, much more money, not for condoms and
the like but to build roads, just navigable tracks through to 80,000 villages
so as to be able to send doctors and helpers to teach and convince the
villagers, to begin with, a basic truth that they were unaware of - that there
is a connection between sexual intercourse and the birth of a baby.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP