Who Shall Police the Policemen? - 06 June 2003

This week a problem of government came up which I suppose has existed since
time immemorial.

When some wrongdoing is suspected in an institution who should do the
investigating and who should hand out the punishment?

The ancient Romans put the problem in a nutshell: Quis custodiet ipsos
custodes? - Who shall police the policemen?

Too often, in this country anyway, the suspects immediately choose to
investigate themselves till a public outcry - as for instance over the
investment and accounting scandals - forces some independent body to take over,
which of course ought always to be the procedure.

When the Titanic sank nobody would have believed an investigation by the White
Star Company even if it had been impeccable. It quite rightly went at once to a
commission.

The equivalent in this country for a matter equally grave - the assassination
of President Kennedy for instance - was conducted by a commission of public men
of all stripes, parties, non parties, appointed by the president.

So we had good cause to fear that nothing much better than a whitewash would
come out of the news that the Department of Justice was going to examine the
methods and the legality of the hundreds of immigrants who were rounded up by
the FBI after the fateful 11th September, were thrown into jail - in some
places treated harshly - but mostly therefore imprisoned without cause or
prospect of a trial.

Why should we fear the worst from this investigation? Because the suspects
being investigated are employed by the investigator. The FBI is the policeman,
the enforcing arm of the Department of Justice.

Last Tuesday the Department of Justice issued a report and it's a stinging one.

It blames the FBI, in New York city especially - where remember the original
outrage was committed - for failing to distinguish between immigrants who might
be connected with terrorist groups and people, mostly Arab immigrants, who were
just picked up at random.

I must say it seems to me a very remarkable and acute distinction the FBI was
suddenly required to make in the roaring smoke of the Twin Towers.

The report cites as automatic victims of the FBI's arresting procedure 762
people detained around the United States but concedes that all but a handful
were, at first questioning, seen to have broken the immigration laws by having
stayed on beyond their visa limit and got lost or have come into the United
States illegally.

The report says even so they should not have been immediately put in jail
without a hearing for an indefinite stay.

What ought to have been followed, it says, is the normal procedure of releasing
them on bond and then giving them a hearing and then deciding either to let
them go or to deport them.

Of course that's normal but these, what the report calls "haphazard arrests",
took place in an extremely abnormal crisis of national security.

For all any of us knew on the 11th, 12th, 13th September the White House and
the House of Representatives might have been blown up.

Only three days after the dread 11th the government began warning the mayors in
hundreds of cities across the land to start guarding every office or building
connected with city, state, American or British government.

Even two months later, in November 2001, I think I mentioned before how a guest
of mine was an English scientist, a world expert on building and maintaining
tunnels.

In the late afternoon we were indulging ourselves with the cup that cheers and
only gently inebriates when he strolled over to the window from which, at this
moment, I'm looking out on the lush spring foliage of Central Park and the
clear waters of the reservoir.

There was, as there always is, a jogger panting his lungs out round the
encircling path.

"Just to think," mused my friend, as he turned away, "if he were carrying a
simple envelope with an ounce or less of powder and tossed it over the fence
into the reservoir."

In the first few days, weeks of understandable alarm maybe the FBI did, as the
report says, overact.

They were also the first public servants to recognise what millions of good
Americans and possibly most Europeans still don't see, that since the 11th we
have all been the victims of the Third World War and it's a war unique in being
a war against an invisible enemy.

The report made me remember the first time I flew, took a flight, after the
suicide bombers hit the Twin Towers and the Pentagon.

It was the first week in December and I was off to San Francisco.

Once we'd settled in our seats and the stewardess had flashed her smile I
leaned back and watched the incoming passengers pass up the aisle - marvelling,
as usual, at the variety of people's shapes and sizes and wildly different
ideas of what is just right to wear on a long distance journey.

I imagine the passenger types were no more various than usual but my perception
of them was, by which I mean that having glanced without a second thought at
the alternation of whites and then at a black or two then a family of
Hispanics, I became unusually aware of dark-skinned people and in particular of
two, I believed, Arabs - one a tall, swarthy man with a towel of a head-dress,
a beard and a long loping stride.

And a voice within me said: "If you'd been an inspector at the security
check-in gate, would you have paid special attention to this swarthy man?" And
I heard my own voice say quietly: "Yes, I would."

I knew that in the previous two months a whole raft of new, tight laws had been
passed and that 99% of the time they were being scrupulously followed. I'm
talking about airport security measures.

But sitting there looking over the incoming troop of passengers I could see how
in the real situation instinct might overleap legal niceties.

At any rate I believe that most of my breed - white, Anglo- or Euro-Americans -
would, to put it crudely, be more wary of people who looked like Arabs than
people who didn't.

After all by December 2001 the FBI had done a lot of work on the crew and
passengers of the four suicide planes and it would not be long before they
revealed the Arab identities of was it 16 out of the 18 involved in the suicide
bombings.

But as I sat on that plane my morning newspaper reported a far-reaching outcry
among dark-skinned people about what they call racial profiling at airports and
the police all the country were being accused of it too.

I said, at the time, that I saw no solution to this, that it was more of a
human situation than a problem and after the known performers of the September
11th atrocity it would likely go on and on.

We did not know then that there would be a rush of investigations and the
report of the Department of Justice is only the first to be published.

And now Congress is engaged in a positively medieval legal struggle to find a
law or laws of restraint that can quickly distinguish the guilty from the
innocent in time of war.

I think we should notice that in every American war, since the war of 1812, the
President, through Lincoln to Roosevelt, suspended habeas corpus - which is the
right not to be put under restraint until you've had a court hearing.

If they decided then, as they did, that it was too perilous a procedure to
maintain in the days of cannon and rifles and assassins with daggers, how much
more risky and dangerously prolonged would the normal procedure be when the
suspects are not a soldier in uniform or a spy on the loose but 80,000 who have
skipped their legal stay or otherwise decided to meld in with the population
for purposes unknown?

What the Congress has been doing, to the confusion of some citizens and the
outrage of libertarians, is to pass a series of acts to create new bureaux to
make and preserve computer records, not only of suspect citizens but why not of
all citizens?

A patriot act, a total inside information act which would give the government a
complete character analysis and history of you and your bank account and your
relations and your credit standing, your medical records, your travels and on
and on.

Obviously from the hullabaloo these new acts have caused they will be defeated
or vetoed.

The whole problem is rooted in the difference between the criminal laws in time
of peace and the rules of war.

As for the popular appeals to the Constitution of the United States, there's
very little there about war except who may declare it - the Congress - who is
authorised to raise the money for it - the House of Representatives - and a
clause forbidding the billeting of soldiers in private houses.

The Founding Fathers thought of war as men marching across land to shoot each
other and sailors in ships loosing cannon at each other.

But their remarkable foresight did not reach to precautions during undeclared
wars in which a combatant not in uniform is capable of bombing or poisoning, as
Saddam did.

How is he to be spotted, identified and arrested before he does it?

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS
COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP