Peace For Our Time - 31 January 2003

I suppose the day that changed my life was the day I had a letter from the
foundation of one Edward S Harkness, an American tycoon who had given his
fortune over to good works, mostly medical research.

Shortly after the First World War he noticed that a whole generation of young
Americans were going off to study at European universities.

Now Mr Harkness knew, as perhaps few of his kind did, that America too had
universities that were leaders in particular fields.

He therefore invented a reverse fellowship - 25 fellowships - to be awarded to
graduate students of British and Empire universities to study in America.

In the spring of 1932 I found myself one of the lucky 25 and I was launched, I
must say, on the most generous fellowship for two years' study in the United
States.

The letter I received contained a booklet with some such title as Living and
Travelling in the United States.

It contained three items of advice which I thought, at the time, slightly
comical but came to see were a godsend to any newcomer to the New World.

First, it told us gently but firmly something that you still have to tell
visiting Englishmen of any age and education - buy lightweight suits and shirts
for indoor wear in winter, as well as summer and buy one heavy outer winter top
coat if you're going to a Northern or a Midwestern state.

I ignored this in my first weeks at Yale, till I found myself, like the
visitors I'd just mocked, Englishmen in horsehair tweeds cursing the steam heat
- what they called after the French "central heating" - and trying to force
obstinate windows - an irritable gesture that, by the way, gave Winston
Churchill his first heart attack on American soil - on any soil, come to think
of it.

The second caution was more comical still.

You were obliged by the terms of accepting this fellowship to buy a second-hand
car, which I did, for $45, and drive round the United States on your summer
holiday.

The booklet warned you to be sure before you put any clothes away for the
summer to see that they were encased in plastic bags full of menthol balls or
spray. This seemed an unnecessary nicety.

But it said that failure to do so would expose your clothes to the ravages of
the Buffalo moth - a predator unknown in England.

I paid no attention. But back in Connecticut at the end of September I found my
hung clothes in shreds - thanks to the visits of the said Buffalo moth.

The third item was a startler. When you're driving across country don't give a
lift to any female trying to hitch a ride just before you cross a state border.

There was something called the Mann Act, passed by Congress in 1910, which
prohibited "the transportation of females across state borders for immoral
purposes".

Were they kidding? They were not. We'll go into that a little later.

I promised to lay off topic A - Iraq - until the Security Council makes a
judgement on the inspectors' report and I shall keep that promise.

But I must tell you that throughout the past fortnight I've listened to
everybody involved in or looking on to a monotonous din of words, like a tide
crashing and receding on a beach - making a great noise and saying the same
thing over and over.

And this ordeal triggered a nightmare - a day-mare, if you like.

Through the ceaseless tide I heard a voice, a very English voice of an old man
- Prime Minister Chamberlain saying: "I believe it is peace for our time" - a
sentence that prompted a huge cheer, first from a listening street crowd and
then from the House of Commons and next day from every newspaper in the land.

There was a move to urge that Mr Chamberlain should receive the Nobel Peace
Prize.

In Parliament there was one unfamiliar old grumbler to growl out: "I believe we
have suffered a total and unmitigated defeat."

He was, in view of the general sentiment, very properly booed down.

This scene concluded in the autumn of 1938 the British prime minister's
effectual signing away of most of Czechoslovakia to Hitler.

The rest of it, within months, Hitler walked in and conquered.

"Oh dear," said Mr Chamberlain, thunderstruck. "He has betrayed my trust."

During the last fortnight a simple but startling thought occurred to me - every
single official, diplomat, president, prime minister involved in the Iraq
debate was in 1938 a toddler, most of them unborn. So the dreadful scene I've
just drawn will not have been remembered by most listeners.

Hitler had started betraying our trust not 12 years but only two years before,
when he broke the First World War peace treaty by occupying the demilitarised
zone of the Rhineland.

Only half his troops carried one reload of ammunition because Hitler knew that
French morale was too low to confront any war just then and 10 million of 11
million British voters had signed a so-called peace ballot.

It stated no conditions, elaborated no terms, it simply counted the numbers of
Britons who were "for peace".

The slogan of this movement was "Against war and fascism" - chanted at the time
by every Labour man and Liberal and many moderate Conservatives - a slogan that
now sounds as imbecilic as "against hospitals and disease".

In blunter words a majority of Britons would do anything, absolutely anything,
to get rid of Hitler except fight him.

At that time the word pre-emptive had not been invented, though today it's a
catchword.

After all the Rhineland was what it said it was - part of Germany. So to march
in and throw Hitler out would have been pre-emptive - wouldn't it?

Nobody did anything and Hitler looked forward with confidence to gobbling up
the rest of Western Europe country by country - "course by course", as growler
Churchill put it.

I bring up Munich and the mid-30s because I was fully grown, on the verge of
30, and knew we were indeed living in the age of anxiety.

And so many of the arguments mounted against each other today, in the last
fortnight, are exactly what we heard in the House of Commons debates and read
in the French press.

The French especially urged, after every Hitler invasion, "negotiation,
negotiation".

They negotiated so successfully as to have their whole country defeated and
occupied.

But as one famous French leftist said: "We did anyway manage to make them
declare Paris an open city - no bombs on us!"

In Britain the general response to every Hitler advance was disarmament and
collective security.

Collective security meant to leave every crisis to the League of Nations. It
would put down aggressors, even though, like the United Nations, it had no
army, navy or air force.

The League of Nations had its chance to prove itself when Mussolini invaded and
conquered Ethiopia (Abyssinia).

The League didn't have any shot to fire. But still the cry was chanted in the
House of Commons - the League and collective security is the only true
guarantee of peace.

But after the Rhineland the maverick Churchill decided there was no
collectivity in collective security and started a highly unpopular campaign for
rearmament by Britain, warning against the general belief that Hitler had
already built an enormous mechanised army and superior air force.

But he's not used them, he's not used them - people protested.

Still for two years before the outbreak of the Second War you could read the
debates in the House of Commons and now shiver at the famous Labour men - Major
Attlee was one of them - who voted against rearmament and still went on
pointing to the League of Nations as the saviour.

Now, this memory of mine may be totally irrelevant to the present crisis. It
haunts me.

I have to say I have written elsewhere with much conviction that most
historical analogies are false because, however strikingly similar a new
situation may be to an old one, there's usually one element that is different
and it turns out to be the crucial one.

It may well be so here. All I know is that all the voices of the 30s are
echoing through 2003.

About that third caution to innocent arriving students - Do not pick up females
hitching a ride close by a state border! If you drive them into a new state you
could be arrested under the Mann Act for "Interstate transportation of the
female for immoral purposes".

No fellow I heard of ever reached the state of prosecution and whenever I saw a
sign announcing, say, "State of Kansas two miles ahead", I made a point of
stepping on the gas.

I thought, until a couple of days ago, that the ludicrous Mann Act had been
long repealed, apparently not so. A young, very pretty woman in Louisiana, only
half a dozen years ago, got caught by it.

She was a prostitute with a shrewd business sense and in no time turned into a
successful and then very prosperous, upper crust madam, and in boisterous
Louisiana, much admired madam.

She had 80 girls in her service when she made the mistake of extending her
business to neighbouring states - Alabama, Mississippi - eventually a telephone
service in Washington.

Now there is, as you know, no national police force in America but for any
crime that involves crossing a state border that's when the FBI is allowed to
step in.

They stepped into the lush life of Sylvia Landry and sentenced her to six years
in jail.

An old restaurant owner in Baton Rouge, the state capital - where she'd
serviced so many politicians, lawyers, doctors, businessmen, judges - he said:
"It's outrageous. What a scandal. Six years for something that's been going on
since Adam and Eve and the beginning of time!"

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP