Middle East: Mind Your Language - 12 April 2002

In the past 10 days/two weeks I've listened to 80, 90 maybe a hundred speakers,
statesmen, from many countries, foreign correspondents, anchor men and women,
television commentators by the plane load.

One day on the face of an Englishman being interviewed the mention of the
phrase "American commentator" raised an eyebrow and there came to mind evenings
in London, both a long and short time ago, when there seemed always to be
present a friend, the nicest man, and the moment always came when he would tap
the air with his pipe, raise his eyebrows and say quietly and confidentially:
"Ah yes, the Jewish vote."

This was always said by way of showing forgiveness for some American policy
that was unpopular in Europe and I, holding myself in, would say: "No, tell me
about the Jewish vote."

There are many competing Jewish votes throughout the United States, so varied
as to party and local concerns and so scattered, as to demolish any such
reality as a block Jewish vote, any more than you could label "the American
college vote".

But in New York city surely there are two millions Jews are there not? One
third of the entire Jewish population of the United States.

That is so. Six million Jews in 280 million Americans. Even if they all voted
the same ticket it would not be a decisive factor.

But surely on policy towards Israel? Well I've seen no survey but I'm pretty
sure that the weight of sympathy for Israel is very heavy.

Anyway 80 years ago the Republicans conceded the New York city Jewish vote to
the Democrats.

However, what I wanted to say after 10 days of this clamour of commentators was
that I heard nothing new, and I don't say this with any intended tone of
condescension which is a favourite attitude of native Englishmen, but as a
simple despairing matter of fact.

There is far and wide agreement on the desirability of the crown prince of
Saudi Arabia's proposal - in the United States, Britain, a great majority of
the United Nations - namely:

- the Israelis to pull back all their forces and settle to the 1967 treaty line

- Israel to recognise a Palestinian state

- the Palestinians to recognise publicly and for all time the sovereign state
of Israel.

Now surely this is a sensible, even-handed and ultimately inevitable goal.

Well, to Western Europe and the United States, South and Central America maybe
- but not, after Mr Sharon's incursion, to the states of the Arab Muslim world.
All seemed to have lurched over in outrage to the Palestinian side.

And Mr Sharon is left saying that Israel's enemy is America's enemy -
terrorism, but here represented by Mr Arafat.

Now between European and American reporting I should say there is one great and
unfortunate divergence.

The American picture of Mr Arafat seems to be that of a bare-faced scoundrel
who runs three or four terrorist groups that he publicly deplores or sponsors
others with links to Iran and especially to Iraq, from whom he receives
handsome dollar - some say $25,000 - packages, as graveyard gifts to the
families of the martyred suicide bombers.

The European view seems more than this to be of a stubborn scoundrel maybe, who
is however the elected leader of the Palestinian people and whose present
status is more to be pitied than condemned.

This view has been reinforced every evening by that picture of Mr Arafat by
candlelight.

To the Arab Muslim world he is now a besieged martyr. Suddenly to a whole
civilisation a lonely hero, rather like George Washington at Valley Forge.

Why was Mr Bush so slow to condemn Mr Sharon?

The long, also the short answer, is the firm tradition of every president since
the end of the Second World War, to support and sustain the establishment of
the state of Israel.

In 1945 President Truman proposed a partition plan which would define a clear
border between two states and would put Jerusalem under control of the United
Nations.

The time of dissension and conflict really started when President Truman, after
the British mandate over Palestine ended, when President Truman insisted that
100,000 of Europe's homeless Jews be allowed into Palestine at once.

The British, to put it mildly, demurred: Yes, they said, if the Arabs approved.

The Arabs positively did not approve.

Britain's attitude was at the least understandable - Arabia had been of
invaluable help to Britain as an ally in the First World War and Britain, like
all of Western Europe, was greatly dependent, as the United States is not, on
Arabian oil.

Every president since Truman has learned the story of how Israel proclaimed on
its own a sovereign state and how within half an hour President Truman, to the
shock of his own state department, put out a statement telling the world that
the United States recognised Israel de facto - as a fact of life. Two years
later de jure, in law.

And ever since Israel has been, for better or worse, America's chief ally in
the Middle East and this tradition has meant that any American president's
condemnation of any act of Israel would be taken by neighbouring Arab states as
a cue to go ahead and achieve their hearts' desire - the abolition of the state
of Israel.

That is why Mr Bush was not lounging at his ranch in Texas. He was in a
day-long, sometimes night-long, ordeal of discussion with his top men,
especially with Secretary of State Powell - and with Mr Sharon and with Arab
leaders and Western leaders and with the leaders of regimes you wouldn't guess
had any impact or influence on the plight of Palestine and Israel.

After reading and hearing a thousand pictures and a hundred comments I was
prepared one day to hear nothing at all and prepare for a quiet social evening,
talk maybe about nothing but golf with two old friends who were going to stop
by.

They arrived, nestled in, all the tonsils were pleasantly bathed and the
visiting lady turned to me and asked a question - the sort of question only the
best reporters ask, the simple, penetrating question of a child.

"Where," she said, "did this all begin?"

Well let us see now.

To most of the grey beards I listen to the answer seemed to be the war of 1967.

To the beardless youth it was at least 18 months old. So let's consider.

How about 135AD when the Romans, then in charge, proclaimed that the land
called Judea should henceforth be known as Palestine in honour of the coastal
inhabitants, the Jews' long-time enemy, the Philistines?

How about 636AD when the Arabs conquered Palestine but a Jewish minority
insisted on staying?

For four centuries the Ottoman Turks were the rulers and now, leaping to the
20th Century, we find that after a series of failed liberal revolutions in
Germany and brutal pogroms throughout Russia a movement started called Zionism
- to give, at long last, to the wandering Jews a permanent homeland in
Palestine.

This ideal was originally cradled in Germany and Turkey but during the First
World War when both countries were fighting Great Britain the Zionist movement
moved to Britain which had been most sympathetic to it.

The First War ended and Britain ran Palestine under this mandate from the
League of Nations.

The British foreign secretary declared, in a single sentence, that his
government favoured "a national home for the Jews in Palestine, it being
clearly understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and
religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities."

Jewish immigration continued more or less peacefully but after the Second World
War the Germans and Austrians and Hungarians and other homeless Jews who had
escaped Hitler's slaughterhouses came in on a tidal wave.

There were fierce Arab uprisings and the Jews countered with their own reign of
what they called defensive terror.

Then came the strong support of Mr Truman, the arrival of those hundred
thousand more Jews, which alarmed the neighbouring Arab states, which
inevitably led to Israel's decision to fight now as a nation for its survival.

After two wars the United Nations wrote what was meant to be the controlling
document - partition was approved.

It required, however, the Israelis to "withdraw from occupied territories" to
the 1967 border.

Did you notice something that Lord Balfour's declaration and the famous United
Nations resolution have in common?

A fatal omission of one word.

Balfour said Britain favoured "a national home in Palestine". The Jews took
this to mean Palestine would be it - the national home.

The Arabs said - No, no the declaration says only "a national home" meaning in
part of Palestine.

A quarter century later the UN resolution said Israel must withdraw from
occupied territories, which to the Israelis meant some territories. To the
Arabs it meant the, all the occupied territories.

Each of them through decades of bloodshed and unstinting hate have held to
these opposing interpretations. All because of a missing "the".

Next time you draft a treaty pay attention to the simplest English words that
can say so much like "by" and "with" and "from" and "for" - and pay special
attention to the definite article, the harmless word of three letters: T H E.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP