A Brief Joust and Tumble with Sir Galahad - 10 March 2000

About six months ago I decided if there was one American topic more than
another that would not interest listeners from Glasgow to Sri Lanka to Tristan
da Cunha it was the start of the campaigning for the presidential election 14
months ahead of the event. And judging from the mail I was right.

But there came a day, a few weeks ago, when a gentleman in Tristan da Cunha
professed to be excited about it.

Tristan da Cunha? I hesitate to tell you what it is and where it is because
you'll probably think me patronising.

I've never forgotten the day when a visiting Englishman hearing that, on
American television, I'd been regularly introducing, for years, a whole series
of English dramas about life in England from Henry VIII to the abdication of
Edward VIII - I used to set the social and historical background before each
episode - "Interesting," he thought, "I suppose it's necessary for an American
audience."

I gather that in Britain the plays had gone on, as we say in the television
business, cold - that's to say no host, no introductions.

My visitor implied that every English shopkeeper knows about the Agadir war
scare of 1911, every truck driver can recite the short sharp speech of a poor
Welsh boy, born in a two room cottage, who stood up one morning in Versailles,
before a glitter of ambassadors and soldiers from every country engaged in the
First World War, and announced: "Gentlemen, the Romanovs, the Hohenzollerns and
the Austro-Hungarian Empire are finished - let us proceed to business."

Well I'll take the risk, even with listeners in Scotland or the Americas, of
guessing that offhand they can't pinpoint Tristan da Cunha on a map.

In fact many map makers failed to pinpoint it because they didn't have a
printing typeface the size of a pinpoint.

Tristan da Cunha is a tiny island - one of three - the second of which is named
Inaccessible - and it is and nobody lives on it. Tristan is about half way
between the tip of South America and South Africa - 3,000 miles from either
coast.

Anyway it has, I gather, about 2 - 250 British inhabitants. The English swiped
it from the Portuguese. And the reason I mention it is because that islander
wrote to me in great joy: because of his laptop and my website, he wrote, he
was no longer compelled to get up at dawn in order to indulge, what he called:
"the old habit of listening to you on the radio."

Now he can sleep as long as he likes. Any time he feels like it he manoeuvres
the mouse, he gets my site, taps a few keys and sits back and listens to last
week's talk or if he's morbidly disposed he can hear a dozen more from the
recent past.

Well lately he's taken an avid interest in the news of Governor Bush and
especially of Sir Galahad McCain.

Well now something happened last Tuesday that could make it unnecessary to talk
much about American politics - the presidential campaign anyway - until the
fall.

So let us recount what happened, not so much as a matter interesting in itself
for the actual two characters involved, but as an example of a melodrama that
has happened several times in American history and more often than not led to
the oddity of putting in the White House what they call a minority president -
that's to say a man who won with a minority of the total votes cast.

In this - whoops - in the last century, there were three famous minority
presidents. Woodrow Wilson was one, Harry Truman was another and, surprising
nobody's talked about this so far, Bill Clinton is the most striking case.

In 1992, 44 millions voted for Clinton, 58 millions voted against him. But
there he is.

But let's come to this year, this campaign and last Tuesday. It was known -
it's a new name for a new occasion - Super Tuesday: for the first time 16
states held primary elections on the same day and, what was equally
revolutionary, in March.

First, though, before the ears start to twitch I think I ought to begin by
saying what a primary is and how it has spoiled the great fun we used to have
going to the two party conventions in the summer, not knowing who the nominees
would be and then watching the incomparable drama of the balloting to choose
the party's candidate.

Once, it took the Democrats 10 days and nights and 103 ballots to pick their
men.

Well all that is long gone because of the adoption by all the states - 49
anyway - of this wretched primary system which the late great Adlai Stevenson
called "a useless institution, that burns you up, that doesn't actually select
presidential candidates, all it does is destroy some."

Well, for most of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th delegates to
a party convention were chosen by the party machine in each state - that's by
the active working politicians.

At the beginning of the 20th century a Midwestern state, under the influence of
a populist rebel candidate, he thought delegates should be chosen by popular
vote in a preliminary state election called a primary.

One or two states adopted it but it didn't catch on.

And as late as the 1960s only seven states had primaries and only one of them
mattered, as what they called "a beauty contest" reflecting the amount of
national sentiment for one candidate or another, that was in New Hampshire -
even though New Hampshire is a small state with a small population.

What made all the states adopt the primary system in the 70s was the increasing
accuracy of public opinion polls in gauging the national popularity of any
given politician and this brought on the argument that it was more democratic
than leaving it to the professional politicians in the states.

But what the primary system has done which we never anticipated, is to make
each state decide long before the convention whom the convention is going to
pick for president. As now.

Governor Bush doesn't even have to wait for Texas's upcoming 32 votes to know
that he has an overwhelming number of delegates pledged to him at Philadelphia
in the summer.

Even more certain, if that's possible, is the present standing of Vice
President Gore on the Democratic side. He won every Democratic primary.

So Senator Bill Bradley, his only opponent, lost every one pitifully. Senator
Bradley is a long, lean, thoughtful, gentle, professorial type - which proved
not to be the role model for a man campaigning for president. He must have -
and Senator Bradley has not - a slice of ham in his make-up.

Now at the turn of the year knowing the, by now, well-established system of the
primaries all the reporters saw Governor Bush as an overwhelming choice of the
Republican Party, the polls said so, and Vice President Gore for the Democrats.

So it was to be a very dull time until the fall when the two chosen haul off
and start socking each other.

But then a month or two ago Governor Bush had a challenger, not a gentle,
questioning professor but a small, bouncing, compact man known suddenly as a
national war hero.

A navy flyer who took five and a half years of torture in a North Vietnamese
jail, came out broke in body, his spirit high, a United States senator for the
past 18 years - but coming into the public eye by his withering denunciation in
and out of the Senate of the way political campaigns are financed, especially
with something called "soft money".

Now by law you can give only a $1,000 per person to contribute directly to a
candidate but an unlimited amount - known as soft money - for the general help
of the party. Need I say that the passing over of vast sums of soft money - sub
rosa, under the counter, between the sheets - to a particular candidacy has
become routine.

Senator McCain called it "routine corruption". And both parties are guilty.

He was a pungent, downright, angry speaker and all sorts of people were drawn
to what he called his crusade.

A month ago he astonished everybody, most of all Governor Bush and the
Republican establishment, by winning the New Hampshire primary and then in
Michigan, but both were open primaries - open to everybody, not just to one
party.

But then also, it has to be said, Senator McCain did not maintain his inspiring
role as God's angry man.

He felt hurt by Governor Bush's television advertisements. He complained about
Governor Bush's meanness.

"Who me?" pleaded the innocent choirboy George W Bush.

Senator McCain became irritable, explosive, flying off the handle and many camp
followers began to wonder if, in a crisis, this was what we needed in the White
House.

In any case what happened was foregone and we ought to have recognised it a
fortnight ago.

California and Ohio and New York, with a huge number of delegates, were
strictly closed primaries - only Republicans could vote. And throughout, the
regular Republicans have been down the line for Governor Bush.

And so it was. And so it is.

Senator McCain will not run, he says, as an independent so he won't take votes
away from Governor Bush and let Gore squeeze in along the trail blazed by
Woodrow Wilson, Truman and Clinton.

Senator McCain says he has withdrawn from the presidential race but his
campaign is not abandoned, it is "suspended" - this is a carefully chosen word,
it means that if he changes his mind and he goes on raising money the
government will give him the usual candidate's matching funds.

He will, he says, maintain his crusade in the Senate, where he is, even in his
own party, mighty unpopular.

It looks very much as if, after the brief joust and tumble with Sir Galahad,
that we're right back where we started.

So you may relax and ponder, if you're of a mind, whether the country will go
for Vice President Gore or George W Bush in the autumn. Wake me up when you've
decided.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP