Laws Doomed from the Start - 4 June 1999

You don't have to be Sherlock Holmes to notice that in the past few years most
of the corners on the sidewalks in New York City are shaved as they slope into
the pavement.

But what if you're crippled or otherwise need a wheelchair? Somebody has to
tilt the chair up and try not to bump it down.

Now you'll say that in big cities the end or corner of a sidewalk tends to be
worn down, which is true - but in New York and other American cities what I'm
saying is that many more now are a smooth slope, not because of wear but
because lots of them have been shaved or planed down by the city government
with wheelchairs in mind.

This is only one of the more obvious signs that in the past 20, 30 years or so
we've been thinking more than we did of how to help disabled people do what the
rest of us can do with ease. For most of my life, if it ever crossed our mind,
we thought it was too bad that paraplegics, for example, simply couldn't go to
the movies, find ramps at the entrance to public buildings, nor would invalids
expect a special parking place at supermarkets, at church.

This brings us to one of the most remarkable Acts ever passed by Congress - a
Disabled Americans Act passed during the Bush administration as a federal law,
applying that is to all the states. What could be more admirable, more humane?
But we have to look at a menacing "however".

However, this being an American law you may be sure that once the text of the
Bill is published whole platoons of lawyers have law school students who will
examine it with a microscope and begin to ask what constitutes a disabled
person and, next question, disabled from doing what? In no time fairly healthy
people who see themselves as disabled will want to know how the law can be made
to apply to them.

I don't know why I keep saying will examine, will want to know, they've been
doing it briskly all over the place for the past year or two. And most of them
were inspired to say why not me by the now celebrated example of Casey Martin -
a name totally unknown to fame until two years ago he asked permission to use
an electric cart - it's like a mini Mini Moke - to ply his trade, to pursue his
livelihood.

And what might that be? Golf. Golf? He's a professional golfer, not good enough
to be on tour with the big boys but on what, in baseball, would be called a
minor league.

Now Casey Martin suffers from a painful and debilitating disease of the legs.
And in the minor tournaments he's played, he's been allowed to use an electric
cart. I think I ought to say for non golfers that these electric carts are, in
this country, as much standard equipment at golf clubs and public golf courses
as tees, golf balls or gloves for the left hand only.

Though in England, at any rate, there was great resistance. Thirty years ago
the only one in the country was owned by the Earl of Leicester. He'd had it
made in Germany, it was about as neat as a Mac truck and it looked like
something left over from the Battle of El Alamein.

Well, back to Mr Casey Martin. Two years ago he qualified to play in a
tournament in the big league and requested permission to use an electric cart.
From whom? The ruling body of the game which, in the United States, is the USGA
- the United States Golf Association, which passes on what kind of clubs and
balls are legal and illegal. It also has very firm rules against any help you
may get from an outside agency like advice from your opponent or holding back
the branch of a tree or touching the ball.

Well the USGA said "No" to Mr Martin: golf is a competitive, physical and
mental test between players who cannot use artificial or mechanical aids. In
top professional golf, walking 18 holes on four consecutive days is part of the
competitive test.

Mr Martin appealed to the courts which finally overturned the USGA and at once
opened up the question of whether the ruling body of any game is the final
authority.

Golfers tend to argue this electric cart point as if it were exclusively bound
by the laws of golf. But Mr Martin's appeal is an appeal as much as any other
freakish plea in work or play to the Constitution of the United States, and its
command that all citizens shall enjoy the equal protection of the laws.

So once Mr Martin was allowed to be the only player in a cart in a big,
official, professional tournament, all sorts of people began to wonder if they
couldn't be declared disabled and do something they'd been denied.

For instance, why shouldn't a young orchestra conductor of much talent - why
should he be turned down because he was deaf? Couldn't he show his stuff with a
hearing aid?

And people with minor afflictions - a touch of arthritis, chronic headaches,
mental troubles, children with ADS - attention deficit syndrome, what we used
to call laziness - have suddenly thought of themselves as disabled within the
meaning of the Act and are thinking or are already suing somebody.

Every ingenuity that's arguable will be used to expand the definition of
disabled. Mr Casey Martin could go down a legendary hero as memorable as Casey
Jones the railroad icon.

The arrival of spring 1999 reminds me it's the 90th anniversary of the
introduction of another famous law which was very simple and straightforward
and a boon and a blessing, but into which people read all kinds of
objectionable features, enough anyway to prevent the passage of the Bill for
six years in the House of Commons and in all another 10 years before it became
a permanent Act of Parliament.

I'm thinking of Mr William Willett and the simple, brilliant idea he had one
day during an early morning ride on a London common - daylight saving. The Bill
was introduced in the House spring of 1909. Still peacetime you'll notice, five
years away from Armageddon.

It was plain at once it was going to have rough riding. The first objection
from churches and others was on moral grounds - it was an interference with
God's plan of night and day, really a form of lying.

It took time before enough people reflected that our clocks, just like our
counties and our national borders, were not invented by God. One mischievous
young MP pointed out that God had been mocked long ago when varying local times
had been adopted throughout the country.

"The evil," he said, "is already done."

Then there was the objection that commerce would be badly affected in all the
countries that hadn't adopted the new time and - goodness - how about all the
business men whose daily lives were arranged according to the opening and
closing of the foreign stock exchanges?

One big protest which delayed the second reading of the Bill came from wealthy
people who dined late in the evening. The claim here was that ladies looked
much better in artificial light. Add the howls of the farmers and, they said,
their cows, and it's incredible that in order to down these objections it took
six years.

Six years and the suddenly glaring thought that after a Zeppelin had dropped a
dud bomb on an old gentleman's egg cup, perhaps an extra hour of daylight would
protect citizens who were round and about in the evening. So it was not until a
year after the Great War began that Mr Willett's Bill was passed - 1915.

Even then, once the war was over, it expired and we all returned to God's dark
purpose. Another 10 years of argument and debate, finally in 1925 the permanent
blessing of daylight saving passed into law.

I think, on the other hand, the grossest example of a law that was doomed from
the start which would cause simple havoc that absolutely nobody foresaw is the
dreadful 18th Amendment to the United States Constitution which prohibited the
making and selling and marketing of alcoholic liquors anywhere in the United
States.

Its purpose was to keep the people of the United States pure and free from the
demon rum - not to mention the demons of whisky, gin and beer - so as to
abolish drunkenness. Wine could be made for religions that required it.

Within one year of its going into effect - 1920 - not only was there a striking
increase in drunkenness but there arose an underworld empire of crime with
different gangs of bootleggers competing to satisfy the increasing appetite for
liquor that everybody seemed to have acquired, everybody from bishops to new
brides. All that law-abiding citizens could drink was 'near beer' which could
not contain more than one half percent of alcohol.

In 1929, incidentally, that young MP who made the mischievous remark about God
and daylight was making a tour of California and he had a few typical remarks
to make about near beer, and wine-making, which I trust the Library of Imperial
History will allow me to quote. By the way the touring Member of Parliament was
now a 55-year-old Winston Churchill:

"The giant redwoods fade away, oak and other English-looking trees succeed
them, we flash across trout streams and we come into the land of grapes and
pause for luncheon at an immense wine factory.

"I forget how many millions of gallons of California wines are stored in the
mighty vats of its warehouses. Fermented? Certainly, do not be alarmed it is
'for sacramental purposes only.' The Constitution of the United States, the God
of Israel and the Pope - an august combination - protect with the triple
sanctions of Washington, Jerusalem and Rome this inspiring scene.

"Nevertheless there is a fragrance in the air of which even the 18th Amendment
cannot deprive us. Old World Beer is also brewed and therefore all the alcohol
in excess of one half of one per cent is eliminated and cast to the dogs. The
residue, when iced, affords a pleasant drink, indistinguishable in appearance
from the naughty article but very similar in flavour.

"I was told that sometimes distressing accidents occur in the manufacture.
Sometimes mistakes are made about the exact percentage and on one melancholy
occasion an entire brew was inadvertently released at the penultimate stage of
manufacture to spread its maddening poison through countless happy homes. But,
but needless to say, every precaution is taken."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP