In the Hot Seat - 2 April 1999

Some of you may recall that from time to time, on the heels of some catastrophe
in the news, I've remarked that all a commentator can say, after a natural
disaster especially, is: "Isn't it awful?" But after that, commentary is
useless unless it can help.

I think it's true also of, not all, but many protest marches which may make the
protestors feel good, but the question remains: Did your public protest help
solve or relieve the problem, the injustice, the crime you were protesting
against?

I imagine everyone's instinct over the systematic massacres in Kosovo is to
cover our faces at the pitiful ordeal of the endless droves of children and
women and staggering old men, and then to wonder why passionate people in
Macedonia and Montenegro and Athens - and in Sydney - don't feel the same way.
And instead burn the American flag and wave posters carrying the grizzly sign
"Adolf Clinton".

Perhaps, a not-so-innocent companion suggested, they didn't see the pictures.
Well I'm quite sure that Yugoslav television did not interrupt its endless
shots of wounded innocents in hospital beds to dwell on the new orgy of ethnic
cleansing. And just as I'm sure that Yugoslav television slapped the pictures
of bandaged children up against shots of Mr Clinton playing golf - a blunder,
in the age of television.

As for the huge protests in Western cities and in far away Australia, I'm as
puzzled as the Clinton administration was at the ferocity and range of the
protest marches. In the cities of countries we'd come to count on as our
allies. Sometimes even assumed that they're the same people who cried out time
and again: "Why doesn't Nato come in with a large force?" By the way this is
the first Nato war and Nato doesn't have a large force.

Well I think for once we have a disaster that has to be talked about if only
because the reaction to the president's and the Nato decision was so
unexpectedly questioned or opposed within a day or two of the first attacks.
The most disturbing news from here is that the White House was bewildered by
the early failure of the aerial bombing. I think we have to look at a deep
background.

It's the oldest cliché of military history that the instinct of professional
soldiers is to begin a new war by fighting the old one. I'm sure this has been
true since firearms replaced the bow and arrow and the machine gun anachronised
the rifle.

When Britain declared war on Nazi Germany in September 1939 those of us who'd
been alive, and alive to the endless horrors of our fathers and uncles, in the
trench war of 1914-18 - that 400-mile broken line of mud-paved, rat-ridden
trenches from the North Sea all the way through France and straggling deep to
the Swiss border - we, most of us including the British and French high
command, had expected an invading wave of infantry across Belgium into France
which would then be held until we dug in and dug a defensive trench line all
over again.

But in, I think, 1934 - four or five years anyway before Hitler's invasion of
Poland - an obscure French officer - a major - wrote an obscure little book
which had even among the military a pitiful sale. It was called The Army of the
Future.

It advocated an end to trenches and fortifications indepth, like the Maginot
Line of which the French were greatly proud. It said the next war would be a
war of movement by mechanised forces - mainly by invading tanks and murderous
accompanying aircraft.

Well, the book was either ignored or belittled by the British and the French.
Nobody asked the opinion of the Americans, who were experts in the tactics of
the American Civil War, 1860-65. And at that moment, in the mid '30s, were
training an army no bigger than the army of Sweden with wooden rifles and mock
tanks.

This neglected book was written by one Major Charles de Gaulle. There was one
man who was greatly impressed by it. His name was Adolf Hitler. He read it and
acted on it - developed its thesis and invented the frighteningly successful
blitzkrieg.

So the Second World War brought in the war of technology on the move but it was
never enough, as the Russians, more than anybody, proved by beating Hitler in
Russia with millions of men on the ground.

After World War Two the nature of war changed very little through the United
Nations war in Korea.

And then came Vietnam, and it was as much of a shock to the armour-plated
Americans as the blitzkrieg had been to the surviving professionals of the
battles of the Somme and Passchendaele.

In Vietnam, once the Americans had admitted that the United States was sending
in, not thousands of helpful technicians but 500,000 fighting men, it
discovered that the latest bombing airplanes and the most up-to-date tanks
weren't enough to cow and crush a million or more well-scattered guerrillas and
thousands of little men each owning a rifle and a bicycle.

To the outrage and then the despair of the Americans they relived the dreadful
discovery of the ancient Romans when they brought all their heavy armour and
iron weapons to bear on the German barbarians in the north.

Edward Gibbon wrote a sentence he could just as well have written as a dispatch
to President Lyndon Johnson: "All things became adverse to the Romans. Their
armour heavy, the waters deep, nor could they wield, in the uneasy situation,
their weighty javelins. The barbarians on the contrary were inured to
encounters in the bogs."

Vietnam was a dreadful price to pay for the discovery that in a large,
primitive, rural country, scattered guerrillas can withstand the very latest in
bombing planes, that an elephant has a terrible time stamping out a million
ants.

Then came 1991 and the Gulf War. Throwing Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait and
chasing his crack Revolutionary Guard all the way to, well not quite to
Baghdad, that was no part of the United Nations order and it was a war
sanctioned by the UN.

It was done, you'll recall, with the advent - making wonderful night pictures
on television - of the cruise missile. Everybody was all for this new war that
used these bombers without men.

Since President Reagan, every president had picked up the odd phrase that if he
had to go to war he would try to avoid, as much as possible, putting soldiers
"in harm's way" or "putting our men at risk".

These new slogans must have brought great comfort to dictators who didn't ask
their armies if they cared to be put in harm's way. And even more pleasure to
religious dictators, whose young men were not only ready to die for their
people but whose mothers were proud to have them go off and do so.

But before very long even the Gulf War, it appeared, could be won only with
massive forces on the ground.

So now we have a new war and most, literally over 50%, of the country was not
disposed to protest it because we knew, Washington knew, the White House
practically guaranteed, that it could be won quickly by the new technology -
cruise missiles, smart bombs.

The vice president on the first day said almost angrily: "We have no intention
of sending in ground troops, of putting Americans in harm's way."

Well it took about 48 hours for us to discover that cruise missiles and the
smartest stealth jets bombing installations and depots and barracks and dumps
are not managing to touch the hundreds of small camps or random stations
Milosevic used as launch pads.

No stealth jet ever made or conceived can stop two tough men with rifles going
from door to door in a trembling village and shooting the families.

Milosevic is not only not giving in, but the measures we've taken to stop him
seem actually to have helped him to expand his atrocities and go far to
accomplish his prime aim - to force from their homes as many ethnic Albanians
as possible. As I talk over a third of the Kosovo population of two millions
have fled or staggered out, or are trying to do so rather than stay and be
executed.

Here in America and throughout the alliance I think, more and more people are
faced with the one big unanswered question: whether or not to send in ground
forces. And, at the same time, more and more recall the disastrous consequences
of the most recent attempts to save or protect an ethnic minority.

Saddam Hussein walked into the haven we declared would be safe for the Kurds in
the north.

And the most painful memory of all: remember the United Nations bravely setting
up safe zones inside Bosnia? Those zones turned into traps for civilians who
could then be massacred by the Serbs.

As one old observer sadly put it: "Safe havens have been little more than an
excuse for closing borders to truly desperate people."

I don't know if all these things were thought about in the White House and the
Pentagon before the decision to go to war against Milosevic.

In the beginning the president said - had to say - that the war would be
confined to, and would be won by, aerial attacks of one sort or another.

Now, over this weekend anyway, the latest tactic - bombing Belgrade - seems no
more likely to shorten the war than bombing the Pentagon would touch the
American high command wherever it had scattered to.

Mr Clinton in the seat of power is truly on a hot seat I doubt he ever saw or
anticipated.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP