Buying Judges and Acquiring a Patron Saint - 17 March 2000

I once knew a Russian. I take that back - maybe it can be done today but in my
day you didn't know any Russians unless you were a spy.

In the delegates' lounge of the United Nations they kept to themselves but from
time to time they would permit a "howdy do" and respond according to a short
polite catechism dictated, no doubt, by the Kremlin.

One man however, a jolly looking man, loosened up a little by his vodka, told
me two discoveries he'd made about America and I'd better say now that I never
saw him again, maybe he was recalled and liquidated for daring to share a
couple of secrets with a member of the imperialist fascist press.

He told me, this was probably a fatal slip, that the Russian delegation
actually preferred the vodka made in Connecticut to their own famous brand.

"It is cheaper," he said, "and it does not carry a perfume."

The other secret was more engaging. He said the day he first arrived in New
York City was on a mild March day in the morning.

He unpacked and he went out and he walked into a corner steak house for lunch.

Even though he was not a member of the KGB - I guess - he learned and noticed
at once two revealing things about America and Americans. Like all first
visitors of all nations, even the most educated, what he first noticed about a
particular place or time or experience was immediately transformed in his brain
into a generalisation about the whole nation.

We live and breathe by the one case induction method. I've just been re-reading
the diaries of the late diplomat/journalist/linguist Harold Nicholson, a
cultivated man if ever there was one.

He sails into New York, is picked up by a chauffeur and whisked off to a rich
man's estate in New Jersey. Within two days he is lamenting the American
inclination to turn wild country into a suburban look.

After a talk with one politician he writes: "The odd thing about Americans is
they never listen."

And from then on he sets down, confidently, a little regretfully: "The trouble
with Americans, poor dears, is ..." anything he'd noticed about one person, one
place.

Well, the Russian - and the second of his discoveries.

He sat down and looked over the menu and looked over the clientele and from
observing the plates at the nearby tables: "Americans eat nothing for lunch but
corn beef and cabbage. Odder still they mostly wear bright green ties."

Every waiter he could see wore one and half the diners. He did not attach these
oddities to the date which would have told him everything: 17 March - St
Patrick's Day of course.

But another thing he'd not been briefed on when he left Moscow was that St
Patrick, not Lenin, had saved civilisation. He would, however, soon learn all
this.

Once outside he heard to the west a strange hubbub - a sort of surge in the sky
like the frequent breaking of a wave.

It was the most conspicuous and joyous of all New York's annual parades: a
tramp of the Irish up Fifth Avenue including lots of men, especially public
figures - the mayor, senators, congressmen, councilmen and women, judges -
everybody who needs or craves Irish votes.

Even more representative of men and women in public office or people who want
to be is the parade up in Boston which, you may remember, was the American
terminus of the Cunard line out of Cobh.

Consequently Boston became the city that landed more Irish in one place in the
1850s in the wake of the famine than any other city in the land.

I hear one young legal friend across the water crying: "Judges! Buying judges?"

Well yes, one way or another, buying judges is one of the liveliest exercises
of political bosses. And remember, city and county and state judges, below the
courts of appeal - and, of course, the supreme courts of the states - are
elected. For this practice you have to thank Benjamin Franklin.

Among the myriad problems of government that came up during the making of the
Constitution was the question of the integrity of judges. There was a lively
debate.

Franklin, the 17th child of a poor Boston soap boiler, and an astonishingly
learned man, remarked on the English belief that the best qualified judges
would be men appointed by the top lawyers. But he saw in this simply an old
boys' network where promotion came from favours and intrigue and taking care of
your own.

Franklin thought that throwing judgeships open to the voters would at least
healthily publicise their motives and help people keep a closer watch on the
courts.

The first trial I ever covered was of a charming old Irishman who was the head
of a Tammany - the Democrats' political machine in New York City.

In a seething, bewildering city of packed slums and crumbling tenements, his
type would help people settle in - meet the boats, help their teenagers out of
trouble before "friendly judges", get the family before an immigration
inspector and after a little under the counter exchange the inspector would
declare the family ready for citizenship and in no time the family would be
whisked off to Democratic headquarters and registered as voting Democrats.

This particular Tammany chiefdom was accused of buying congressmen, city
officials, not least - most of all - judges.

But he had not bought the judge who tried him in 1938 on charges of knowing and
protecting one or two of the most notorious gangsters who were shaking down the
city with rackets that protected your laundry, your vegetables, your butcher...

Protected from what? From some unnamed villain who might set fire to the
laundry, poison the vegetables, steal the meat - awful.

If you want to see in one flashing hour how it worked don't fail to catch the
old Preston Sturges movie 'The Great McGinty'.

Well James J Hines went to jail and he was only one example of the
determination of the cocky and courageous little mayor, the immortal Fiorello
La Guardia, to smash the rackets and in the process smash the power of Tammany.

La Guardia ran both as a Republican and an independent "fusion" candidate, and
he was elected twice as mayor and did a prodigious house-cleaning job for a
very amiably corrupt city in my first days here.

Now you ought not, from this brief account of the Democrats' hold on the city,
infer that the Irish were the core or fire brigade of Tammany, of the bad side
of Tammany.

Most members of Tammany were native born. An amalgam of men of Irish or Italian
or Central European Jewish background.

But the Irish always bulked large in Tammany and often in their humdrum daily
way they did much good - they helped new immigrants get jobs, they eased their
sicknesses, they dispensed shoes and other necessities to the poor. Indeed the
Irish were the leaders in this sort of practical politics for which the
resident Anglos and other theoreticians of political science were privately
very grateful.

Tammany - I should have said how the society came about.

Very shortly after the Revolution - the War of Independence - the people who'd
been openly, then secretly, on the English side - the people who deeply
resented turning into American citizens - started a society - it's maintained
to this day - called the Order or Society of Saint George.

And only a year or two later some spirited Irish - they'd been coming in since
the early 1800s and proud to be American citizens - they thought they had
better acquire a patron saint.

They'd heard of the chief of an Indian tribe in Delaware to the South. A
benevolent, greatly admired chief. A man named Tammanen or Tammany. He'd do
fine.

So they set up the first Democrats' political machine and called it,
originally, the Sacred Order of St Tammany. It ruled New York City politics for
150 years. La Guardia, they say, broke it.

But then we keep hearing that the Mafia has been broken or even as a former
governor of New York - a bold, good man of Italian roots - said: "The Mafia
doesn't exist."

These are some of the thoughts that drifted through one mind watching the
colourful and boisterous and wildly good-natured St Patrick's Day parade.

This year there was a problem, an embarrassment, for the faithful.

We're in Lent and the injunction is for Catholics to forego meat on Fridays. St
Patrick's Day fell on a Friday and all the restaurant and no doubt legions of
Catholics homes were already stacked with mountains of the sainted dish of
choice on that day - corned beef and cabbage.

What to do?

Well, the solution depended on whose archdiocese you lived under and where. The
Cardinal of New York issued a dispensation for Manhattan, the Bronx and Staten
Island - let beef be eaten and fast another day.

But the Bishop who's the shepherd of the flock in Queens and Brooklyn and on
Long Island did not grant the same permission.

Two hundred miles away up in Boston the archdiocese has a tradition dating
back, it says, to the 18th century - a tradition of bending the rules.

Speaking with the Irish community in the North East, the owner of a pub, with
the glorious name of Seamus O'Toole, said for his part he would offer lots of
corn beef but also what he calls "salmon". He recognises a higher court.

"The man above us," he says, "will look down at us, and at St Patrick himself,
and say: 'Go ahead fellas, it's a great day to get it.' "

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP