The Marshall Plan - 6 December 2002

A telephone call from my oldest living friend in England, in great distress -
he was very angry and frustrated at the same time by the intensity in his
adopted country of anti-Americanism.

Perhaps his emotional outburst can be better understood if I tell you at the
start that he is - was - a Viennese refugee, an escapee by a hair's breadth
from Hitler at the tender age of 18.

I think I should expand his story because, though it was woefully common to my
generation and the next, it must sound to even middle-aged people a history
book relic of human cruelty like the exercises of the Spanish Inquisition.

Imagine then being a university student in Vienna in 1938 and living with your
parents in an apartment in the city.

One spring day my friend goes home from his studies and is beckoned to by the
concierge of the apartment house.

In retrospect the old man did a courageous thing - he simply told the 18 year
old in a stage whisper that "the SS has been here and gone through the names of
the tenants."

The next day came what is now called the Anschluss, Hitler was going to take
over Austria, not in any brutal invading fashion.

The long newsreel film shots of endless rows of smiling Viennese, women and
children pouring a stream of petals along his route, were absolutely true. The
Viennese were just as anti-Semitic as the Germans had been made to be.

So throw your mind back again to what must be, for my old friend, a moment
frozen in time.

You're young, a student, surely living for some time in secret apprehension
anyway because you are a Jew and have awful good cause to fear that if Hitler
ever decided to move into Austria you and your family could be on the
humiliating road to the sort of oppression you'd read and fretted about in
Germany, a society in which no matter what your class or station - lawyer,
doctor, plumber, waiter, clerk - you would be forced into the most lowly
degrading jobs.

And for any protest or infringement of the rules - on to a concentration camp.

So the 18 year old thanked the concierge, goes up to his apartment, packs a
bag, makes a phone call, leaves a note for his mother and father and adds he
was fleeing to an uncle in Switzerland.

The parents in time arrived, saw the note, packed their bags but did not flee
at once. They warned their close relatives - brothers, sisters, cousins, so on
- "No, no, no," most of them cried, "it won't be the same here."

Well they landed and ended in the slaughter houses of Buchenwald, Mauthausen,
wherever.

My friend got to England, he worked on a farm, he was taking a horticultural
course when England went to war in September 1939.

He was put behind wire in, we must admit, a humane centre for the detention of
enemy aliens, where a little later on he swore loyalty to the King of England,
joined the British army, served in the Italian campaign, came through and
established a position of great prestige and gentle authority in British
broadcasting.

There was a time maybe 30, 40 years ago when he spent a year or more on a
fellowship in the United States.

So why is this admirable and extremely unmalicious man so angry and frustrated?

Because he has seen a massive, spewing outburst of anti-Americanism such as
he'd not known in his lifetime among the British people he greatly respects -
such as I have not witnessed since I was a teenager in the 1920s when the First
World War reparations demanded by the American government were outrageous and
eventually deemed to be not only excessive but unpayable. Uncle Sam became
known as Uncle Shylock.

But for the most part in the 1920s mockery was the weapon, at the expense of
American mass produced clothes, at their grotesque new fashionable dances - the
Charleston - at horn-rimmed glasses, bobbed hair, jazz itself and - for the
upper crust - cocktails, for the young - dreadful fizzy sweet drinks.

All these fashions - from awful soft shirts with collars attached, to paper
napkins, parking meters, refrigerators, on and on up to supermarkets - they
were at first despised, then adopted, enjoyed, finally thought to be English
inventions.

But al-Qaeda and Iraq are grimmer stuff.

I believe the general European assumption a year ago that the navy wounded
ships and the bombed nightclubs were the work of fanatical loners.

I believe this has now been reluctantly abandoned in the face of the hard facts
we've discovered - that the enemy, al-Qaeda, is worldwide and invisible,
something new in the history of warfare.

That it has been preparing for these atrocious events for 20 years.

That its agents, ready for action, are now in 80 countries. It has substantial
bank accounts in more than 200 countries.

The only conclusion I can draw is that for two decades - through Reagan, Bush,
Clinton - the Western world, so-called, has been living in a fool's paradise.

Now, on top of this daily dread, President Bush seems impatient to call
Saddam's bluff.

Very few other countries want to join him, though he talks of the recruiting of
a coalition of allies to fight a necessary preventive war.

But even in this country 40% of the people are against a war, even before it's
started. It is a perilous obstacle.

Now my ex-Viennese friend is not pro-American or anti-American, he is - at all
times in his 80-odd years has been - absorbed by foreign relations and I should
say most by British and American foreign policy.

But now over the telephone he told me about the viciousness of some friends,
British friends, complaining about the arrogance, the war mongering, the
bullying of the United States and the president's unnecessary obsession with
Saddam Hussein.

My friend cried to me: "I took up your point that we've been softened by 50
years of peace and come to accept it as normal but I asked them who kept the
peace? 'Their power, their bomb is our umbrella,' Churchill said at a time of
the ban the bomb crusade."

"But why don't you tell them what made all this scorn and this prosperity, the
ability to stand on their feet and bite the hand that saved them, why don't you
tell them about the Marshall Plan?"

"I've done that."

"Well tell them again."

Very well then. It's 54 years old and not likely to be taught now in European
schools.

George Catlett Marshall, a soldier all his life, served in France in the First
World War then went very slowly up the ladder of promotion because he had not a
twinge of self-promotion in his being.

Indeed he acted all his life on one principle which he thought the essence of a
soldier's code: the subordination of self to team work.

By the time of the second war he was not known much to the public - or ever. He
was the army's chief of staff.

But along with refusing an ADC and a chauffeur he gave no press conferences and
the public was never to know that the grand allied strategy - conquering
Germany through France first and then conquering Japan - was Marshall's doing.

The time came for President Roosevelt to choose a supreme commander for the
invasion of Europe.

Churchill - who called Marshall "the best soldier and the finest character I
met during the war" - assumed, as did Stalin and Roosevelt's cabinet, that
there was only one choice.

An old upright Yankee patrician, a very gentle man in the office of secretary
of war, one Henry Stimson, told the president of his good fortune in having for
the job a soldier of such towering eminence.

Alone at lunch one day Roosevelt formally offered the general the supreme
command.

Marshall never demurred.

"Thank you, Mr President - no."

FDR was staggered. Twice more on later days he made the offer again.

Marshall suggested instead an old junior once, one Major Dwight D Eisenhower.

"Somebody," Marshall said, "has to be in Washington at the helm."

At the helm?

"To run and master the war of supply - of men, arms, material, food, planes,
tankers, everything for a two-ocean war."

Marshall's achievement was, to army, navy, flying men, superb but it could not
be translated into popular heroics.

When Stimson heard about Marshall's decision he wrote: "The European command
was Marshall's secret desire above all things."

He also wrote: "In Marshall's presence ambition folds its tent."

After the war Marshall read the report of a mild-mannered southern businessman
names Will Clayton who'd gone to look over Europe's needs for the president.

He found not wounded economies but a continent of shattered cities and
spreading poverty and "a lack of the ordinary staples of life - bread, butter,
fruit, meat - and of the essential elements of reconstruction - coal, steel,
mining, construction."

And so thus in a speech at Harvard General Marshall came to plead for the
rescue of Europe from hunger, poverty, desperation and chaos.

An unwilling Congress - scared of the huge, conquering Soviet army and its
threat to western Europe - was barely convinced by passionate testimony from
Dean Acheson.

General Marshall followed. He was a dull, monotonous speaker - an unheroic,
middle-sized, stolid, plain soldier.

But what won them over to vote a staggering $13bn investment was simply his
presence. It was the presence of character.

I don't believe there's a statue of General Marshall in Europe.

There ought to be as a reminder of the American aim to restore the fabric of
European life, of its giving Europe 50 years of peace in which to go it along,
to become prosperous, to forge a common economy and in other ways to be free to
challenge and even despise its old benefactor across the ocean.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS
COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP