A Precautionary Bit of Advice - 26 January 2001

A short, despairing note from a friend in London, asking simply: "How are you
bearing up under the strain of having Bush for President? We watch appalled
from this side."

Well you don't have to be Hercule Poirot or Sherlock Holmes to deduce two
certainties from this note.

One: The writer is a liberal.

Two: He/she doesn't listen much to my talks - certainly was not paying
attention to the last talk of the old year, which was a kind of salute I give
once every four years to the new man - whoever he is - and a precautionary bit
of advice, offered chiefly this time, to liberals: Don't groan, don't predict,
wait and see.

I then reminded the "appalled" of how they would have felt, along with the
liberal press, the morning after they heard of the nomination at the Democratic
Convention in 1932 of the governor of New York.

Edmund Wilson: "A boy scout."

Walter Lipman, the most revered commentator of his day: "He is an amiable man
who would like very much to be president but has no discoverable qualifications
for the office."

He was Franklin Roosevelt.

I mentioned also the groans which were delivered by many more types than
liberals in 1980 when a B film actor became president.

That was the European label for him among the intelligentsia and shows only how
unintelligent the intelligentsia can be.

Let me read you a bit I wrote about this B film actor years - 13 years - before
he ran for president. I was in California.

"In this the first state of the union in more than numbers all the chronic
social, industrial and rural problems of America today are here in acute and
aggressive form.

"He has handled them against howling opposition with such imagination and good
order that he good fairly claim powerful credentials for presiding over the
United States."

This was the man who, quite apart from turning into an A film actor, more than
any other single human being - according to the Soviets' Mr Gorbachev - set
off, at Berlin and Reykjavik, the charge that blew up the Soviet Union.

The name was Reagan.

He sits today in the hills of California in the dark night of dementia, never
having heard of Berlin or the Soviets or indeed of the people who live and care
for him.

There was one other most dramatic example I couldn't get in last time of an
undiscovered great president who appalled, or at best bewildered, most
Americans on the day he raised the hand and, with the widow of Franklin
Roosevelt looking on, became president.

"A day," he later wrote, "when I thought the sun and the stars had fallen in on
me."

No wonder, it was the second week in April in 1945, on the brink of victory in
Europe.

The crippled giant who for almost four years had run the war, with the
transatlantic giant Churchill, dropped dead in Georgia and in his enormous
shadow tottered in this small, wiry, unknown man with thick Dr Strangelove
glasses.

All we knew about him was that he was a Missouri farmer who'd gone into
haberdashery and failed, and been wangled into the Senate by a malodorous
Kansas city boss who later went to jail.

True, the man was chairman of a Senate committee, but since its job was to
investigate fraud in defence or war contracts its meetings were closed and not
allowed to be reported - one of the last things Roosevelt wanted was the
identities of war profiteers and criminals to be publicised while the war was
on.

I was at the new man's first press conference that April and on the way into
the Oval Office I joined the disparaging murmur of other correspondents.

"What a disaster for the country - a failed haberdasher - after the awesome,
the majestic, Roosevelt."

A man from Time magazine, as I recall, snapped at me, quite rightly: "This is
no time to knock the guy. Lord knows he needs to be built up - right now."

Well three quarters of an hour later it was we, the press corps, who needed to
be built up and injected with a little adrenaline.

We were bowed and bent and drenched from a hailstorm of sallies, rebukes,
taunts, mockeries and forthright corrections in a very boisterous press
conference.

There was for instance some scandal brewing which might require the president's
testimony and a reporter wondered if the president would accept a subpoena.

The President snorted: "You'd better go and read up what Mr Jefferson had to
say when they offered him a subpoena. Next!"

He gave quick, direct, snappy answers to everything, never hesitated to say "No
comment" or "None of your business".

By the time we swooned out, we left not a little, failed haberdasher but a
rather terrifying sergeant major.

It took us a year or more to recall or learn that he'd been a strict captain in
the First World War and survived the nightmare slaughter of Passchendale.

Many years later, when he'd left the White House to another soldier, his
secretary of state told me that before the outbreak of the Korean War the
president recited a long history to prove to his cabinet, from the earliest
Chinese warlords to the League of Nations' failure in Ethiopia, why the United
States must take the United Nations into war.

"He had forgotten," said the secretary, "more history from the Mediterranean
basin to the peninsulas of Asia than all of us together had ever known."

I hope it's unnecessary by now to tell you his name was Harry S Truman.

On the other hand I'm happy to think I was not alive during the presidency of
the first of my American heroes.

George Washington may have earned the title of father of his country but James
Madison was the true father of the American system of government of the
Constitution.

His vast scholarship about forms of government - their merits and their flaws -
his unique gift for guessing how far human nature could yield to how much
discipline, his insight into the nature of government:

"Government begins," he declared, "with the recognition that men are born to
disagree."

Therefore it's no tragedy, it's a challenge, to see the conflict of different
factions, all pressing to have their way, but yielding to a liveable
compromise.

Government, he said, is "ambition countering ambition."

"Is Mr Madison saying," asked one delegate to the constitutional convention,
"that the basis of good government is human frailty?"

Mr Madison replied: "I know no other."

The Constitution of the United States laid out the separate powers of the
states, of the judiciary, of the president and of the federal government, and
it can be made - with a lot of wrenching - to apply to all the problems of
today because of the foresight and commonsensical genius of James Madison.

He was a pathetically bad president.

And how about the departing president, Mr Clinton?

The first thing to notice about him is that he refuses to depart.

There is a tradition, reaching down to the beginning of the republic - a
tradition, you might say, of manners simply - that having seen the new man
sworn in the ex-president quietly leaves by a side door, takes a flight, or is
driven - he still has a bodyguard - usually to his home town, goes into decent
and silent retirement.

Mr Clinton broke the tradition by making a public speech in Washington after
the inauguration of President Bush.

He then held a two-hour rally of friends at the airport and then flew to New
York, having invited 10,000 Democrats - cronies, backers - to gather at Kennedy
airport. Because of atrocious weather only a thousand showed up.

Mr Clinton introduced them to his wife - the new junior senator from New York -
and while the inauguration parade was going on in Washington and was being
televised all over the country, she stood before a microphone and made a
political, almost a campaigning speech.

This whole performance was called by some people "feisty", by others
"tasteless" and by restless Democrats, a necessary sign that Mr Gore's failed
campaign had led him, unwillingly, to forfeit his title as titular head of the
Democratic Party.

Another tradition of failed candidates but made necessary for Mr Clinton as
soon as possible, even during the inaugural parade, to give a public sign that
he was going to be around the enliven and lead the Democrats.

And after all he'll be living in Washington with the senator in the Georgetown
mansion he - or a friend - has just bought and so he will always be on hand to
bring advice and good cheer to the Democratic Party in Congress.

His last official act was to sign over 170 pardons for various miscreants, who
had either served their time in jail or otherwise deserved to be lifted out
from under the threat of further legal action.

The most conspicuous of these lucky ones was a Mr Mark Rich - the victim of 40
counts of fraud, tax evasion and dealing in oil with the Iranians during the
hostage seizure which could constitute a violation of the Trading with the
Enemy Act.

He was indicted here and summoned for trial but he's had the prudence to stay
in Switzerland for the last 17 years.

Both political parties and the entire press were boggled by this particular
pardon and searched for a possible justification until the fact was recalled
that Mr Rich's ex-wife gave over a million dollars to the Democratic Party and
Mr Rich's lawyer is a former White House Clinton lawyer.

It's said that Mr Clinton stayed up night and day during his last week
exercising this legal power, which very few presidents do.

It's a power that's allowed in between administrations to issue executive
orders having the temporary power of law.

Most of them will fall on the shoulders of President Bush to overturn, with the
help of his party, in the new Congress.

It will be a very tedious job, taking away valuable time from new crises that
have arrived, like California's electricity shortage.

The decline in the economy, which under Mr Greenspan's prodding, has made the
Democrats decide on the tax cut they scorned throughout the past year.

Once President Bush can lift this new and previously unknown burden he can then
give full time to the burden of his own presidency and then we can truly report
how we're "bearing up".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP