Doing What Comes Naturally - 8 September 2000

This weekend we've come to the end of a two month orgy of sport starting with
Wimbledon, a week's pause and then the British Open, and then we'd barely
caught our breath and now out on New York City's Flushing Meadows the last
major tennis tournament, the US Open, was played night and day for two weeks in
a main stadium that makes Rome's Coliseum appear as cosy as the House of
Commons.

And while in retrospect the human scene at Wimbledon warmly recalls the vicar's
garden party, the huge crowd at New York's centre court vividly reminded me of
nothing so much as the seething Roman plebs howling their pleasure at the
devouring of Christians.

But no sooner do we sift through the memories of these festivals than the next
stop is Sydney and the Olympics.

We were harshly reminded of the coming Olympics by a feature in the evening
news about German athletes undergoing a new treatment for developing, of
course, muscle which in the past few years has become a fetish of athletes in
almost any sport you care to mention except, I suppose, chess.

But this German treatment is pretty rigorous. First, four men we saw - already
strapping enough, I should say, to toss any heavyweight into the river - they
went into a chamber whose atmosphere was heated to 78 degrees and after five
minutes or so in there they emerged and obediently padded off into another
chamber which is a cold chamber - at, the man said, minus 166 degrees.

They stayed there for three minutes exactly. Any longer, it says, the treatment
is unnecessary since it would be done on a corpse.

This rather gruesome item came on top of a report that the Olympic committee is
working on a new and more rigorous drug testing system since a warning bit of
news this spring about the development of new muscle-building drugs that are
very difficult to detect by present methods.

This urge to improve on God's work by speeding up the human process of growth
springs from the desire to make or beat a record.

Well surely that urge has always been the driving force of most athletes? Yes,
but until the past 20 years or so it was taken for granted that athletes
performed more or less strenuous exercises by way of practice and then trusted
to their bodies' natural endowment.

But there came a day when with bewildering suddenness records were being broken
not by one man but by several.

When this topic has come up lately I find that most of us recall the famous
scandal in, I think it was, the 1970s when during one Olympics a couple of
women on the East German team were - not exactly strip-searched - they were
asked to take off their clothes so the judges could see simply, well, if they
were females.

There had to be a simple explanation of why they seemed to be winning
everything.

That was when most of us, I think, first heard about steroids - anabolic
steroids I hasten to say not the corticosteroids that are prescribed for
various forms of arthritis.

The Greek word "anabolic" means building up growth. The anabolic steroids are
in action, what you might call, quick fix metabolism which are intended rapidly
to increase the growth of muscle.

Like most severe drugs they can have severe and damaging effects - not side
effects but the main effect.

Do you remember butazolodine, the miracle painkiller of the 1960s? We'd see a
footballer receive a brutal injury and 10 minutes later was back in combat. A
crippling muscle spasm would vanish in an hour instead of a year. Marvellous.

"No wonder," a surgeon friend of mine remarked, "it's like killing a gnat with
an atom bomb."

Well several years ago the International Olympic Committee declared anabolic
steroids to be illegal.

Now they're busy looking into the ingenious ways sports doctors and
pharmacologists have found of bypassing anabolics but still building muscle.

So what does more muscle contribute to the performance of any athlete? The
simple answer is power.

And that has been the most conspicuous effect on most individual games -
athletics, golf, tennis.

This aim has been assisted in both tennis and golf by the invention of
revolutionary new equipment.

No less an authority than Rod Laver told me, some years ago, that today it was
impossible to compare the best player of two different eras because the new
balls, the new rackets especially, have helped ordinary players lift their
games in a way never before possible.

What, I think, initiated the urge to succeed through power was the world rating
system whereby we know once a week where this man or woman stands in a
descending list of the best.

I don't know who started it but the Japanese developed the points system: your
performance in so many tournaments which had most top players.

Thus Martina Hingis, although she hasn't won one of the majors for 18 months,
is still number one.

In golf Tiger Woods, as everybody knows, number one. David Duval number two.

In women's golf, number one: a young woman who exactly matches Tiger's record
over the last 18 months is Karrie Webb - as everybody doesn't know, since she's
not an exotic Asian, Indian, African American with a lean athletic body.

She's an Australian, a slip of a girl, not pretty, not glamorous - therefore
not a candidate for world renown in this success-infected world. It's
outstanding success that people flock to see not beautiful or skilled playing.

At the last of the four major golf tournaments, the American PGA, the other
week, the New York Times took a survey and found that just on 50% of the crowd
in attendance knew absolutely nothing about golf, had never been to a
tournament before, and for some never-discovered reason enjoyed standing eight
deep beyond the ropes to peek at Mr Woods bending over a ball 50 yards away
rather than stay home in a comfortable armchair and see which weapon he was
taking and spot the beads of sweat on his forehead.

Individual success is equated with strength - muscular power. So innocents go
to watch a man drive a ball 320 yards, which has little to do with being
supreme at golf.

In tennis the men's game has become a scene of muscle men slugging away from
the baseline.

In the women's game, the arrival of the terrifying Williams sisters. Neither of
them is a graceful or subtle player but they can serve at a man's speed of 115/
120 miles an hour.

They slam dunk impossible cross court shots beyond the quick reach of an
ordinary human being.

I want to say at once that the sisters and Tiger happen to have splendid bodies
which they've trained to whipcord perfection by dedicated, hour after hour,
daily exercise - no drugs.

The same with Pete Sampras. There was a sad, revealing interview with him a
week or two ago.

He said that during the year 1997/8 he gave 16 hours a day and many sleepless
nights to become the best in one particular category - to be the first tennis
player to be rated number one in the world six years in succession. He yearned
for this more than for any grand slam title.

He confessed, the other day, that the whole year was a nightmare. He developed
nervous tics, constant insomnia, his hair came out in clumps - all to be the
best, better than the next man.

Today he's engaged to be married. He sees the prospect of a life above and
beyond the net cord. "I think," he said wistfully, "I have matured somewhat."
Glory be.

Before the British Open at St Andrews Tiger Woods spent a month or so watching
television tapes of previous championships at St Andrews. When he wasn't doing
that he was practising, practising for hours on end with his coach. Any time
left over he gave to eating and sleeping.

This is called, in the trade, dedication. To the cool outsider it's known as
total obsession.

But for the less than greatly gifted there is no drug to improve cunning,
subtlety, touch, and as more and more young athletes dedicate their lives to
the religion of their game there are fewer and fewer professional athletes who
are great - not quite the best - by the possession of these other qualities.

In all the furore about the intrusion of drugs - and without drugs the
overwhelming of the old game by muscle - there emerged, this week, a voice of
sanity, of wisdom you might say.

It came from a 19-year-old girl, of all improbable sages - Martina Hingis - who
was asked first about drugs and then about the urge to win every grand slam
which she has not been doing since the bounding, pounding arrival of Williams
sisters.

She said, simply: "I'm scared of that stuff. I don't want to die when I'm 30."

She does not aspire to put on gobs of muscle to be like anybody but herself.
She will, she said, do the best she can with her leanness. She might have added
with her speed and her cunning.

If it doesn't overpower the power girls, so be it. "My life is nice right now,"
she says.

The tournament physician had a comment on Hingis's remarks: "They need to be
written in stone and presented like a mantra to all young athletes in our
enhancement-crazed culture." So they should.

In the meantime I find myself all the more grateful to have seen, not
necessarily the best, the greatest or the strongest players, but down the years
the most engaging ones who lived by Martina Hingis's mantra.

First among all great equals, Bobby Jones - an amateur, a weekend golfer. A
modest entrant to 20 major tournaments, he won 13 came second in five. Walked
the tough, rough courses of Scotland with a slow smile and played the game with
more magic and more grace than anyone before or since.

In tennis the incomparably graceful Baron von Cramm.

And today the effect of the power mongers has been to make me, for one, cherish
all the more the subtle, easy touch play of Freddie Couples in golf, Martina
Hingis and the engaging Tim Henman in tennis, and all those not great but
simply very good players who, as Ethel Merman sang and Irving Berlin wrote and
Martina Hingis said: go on "doing what comes naturally".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS
COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP