A Vague Beast Called Big Oil - 29 September 2000

I suppose if you were to stop people in the street in Britain, France, Belgium,
Germany, and then do the same all over the United States - that would be some
galloping poll, wouldn't it? - if you asked people to say, honestly, what two
things were most on their minds, one that affected their own interests and the
other more of a national concern, I guess anyway that in Europe the honest
answer would be petrol and the fate of the euro. In this country, gasoline -
meaning petrol - and the presidential election.

The petrol problem, the lurching of the price at the pump in various parts of
this continental country, has been a chronic popular grumble since the spring
though it never erupted anywhere into the recent general sit-down strike of the
truckers and the farmers.

The phrase to notice in that last sentence of mine is "in various parts of this
continental country" because the availability of petrol for any American
depends largely on the climate, on how far away you are from a port, from a
refinery, from any other source of supply.

Some very different anxieties spring from these differences of place. We've
heard no complaints for the people in, say, Arizona - that desert state is
close enough to the ports of the West coast, its population is comparatively
small and it has mild, by our lights hot, winters and probably never gives a
thought to heating oil.

The steadiest concern here in the North East is about the price of oil in the
barrel and the total control of it by the Opec nations.

This concern is felt by, I should say about half the population - say 130-odd
millions - who suffer from Arctic winters. This takes in the whole Midwest and
the prairie all the way through to the Rockies.

And here, from where I sit, by the great population that reaches from
Washington DC, up through New Jersey, New York State - which is the size,
exactly, of England - and the six New England states.

At the moment they're the last people to start a general complaint about the
price of petrol. But they're the first to ask all their candidates for public
office, from town councillors, to congressmen, to hopeful senators: What are
you going to do about next winter's heating oil?

The six New England states have discovered that they have only 10 days heating
oil reserve instead of the normal six weeks.

The other question, often asked in the same breath, is why is this fuel oil
inventory, the reserve kept back for heating oil, lower than it has ever been?

First I should say that, of course, automobile - motorcar - drivers and
homeowners don't use crude oil, which is what we're talking about when we name
the price of oil in a barrel. They burn a product refined from crude.

The crude costs about half of what Americans pay at the pump. The other half
takes into account city taxes plus state taxes plus the federal tax. The city
and state, of course, vary greatly from place to place.

In the regions where, this summer, the cost of a gallon of petrol went over two
dollars people began to yelp but, as I say, they soon learned that the reserve
fuel for next winter's heating oil was at an all-time low.

The Democrats and some Republicans blamed the Arabs. Many Republicans,
especially ones running for election next month, found it more convenient to
blame President Clinton and the Democrats.

Some people who are not noticeably partisan blame the refiners for responding
too greedily to the car owners' huge demand in this blazing Clinton prosperity.

The oil industry - in which, by the way, both Governor Bush and his running
mate, Mr Dick Cheney, made their fortunes - the oil industry blames the
administration and the Environmental Protection Agency in particular for the
strangling restrictions it has put on building new refineries. A big point they
make is that there is no major refinery operating today that is under
25-years-old.

Vice-President Gore, running full speed just now as the Democrats' presidential
opponent to Governor Bush, is a very inviting target here.

For the past eight years, throughout Mr Clinton's two terms, the
vice-president, more than any other American except the environmentalists' guru
Mr Ralph Nader, has gone relentlessly after industrialists who befoul the
rivers, the lakes, who fuel smoking chimneys with gases rushing up into the
atmosphere, to create global warming and bore holes into the ozone layer so
that very soon we shall all fall down in the streets from a melanoma plague.

This, of course, is not literally what Mr Gore has ever said but his long
campaign to clean up our world and punish the besmirchers has been conducted
with such evangelical fury and without a smidgen of humour that he does present
an inviting target.

On oil his main alleged crime is that he's the one most responsible for closing
to oil drilling the vast spaces of Alaska - area 600,000 square miles,
population 600,000, hence population density one human per square mile. Ah, but
there are living creatures other than human, including rare wildlife.

There is an ocean of oil swilling along deep under this vast lonely land but Mr
Gore has been against further oil drilling.

I won't say that Mr Gore has ever said that in an agony of choice he would
rather save the spotted owl than the automobile but he does sometimes take off
on utopian flights and he has said - and don't think Republican candidates
won't quote him - that he hopes to see the end of the internal combustion
engine.

It is on the oil problem then that Mr Gore is most vulnerable and in return he
is saying that the villain is "Big Oil" - not defined except to set up in an
audiences' mind a nasty connection with the two oil millionaires from Texas -
the Messrs Bush and Cheney.

But so far, anyway, in blaming some vague beast called Big Oil you'd have to
say the refiners should have thought about the coming winter and held back a
bigger reserve of fuel oil and that would, of course, have sent up the car
drivers' petrol everywhere in a surge.

As it is the refineries are going all out to meet the enormous demand in this
high riding, high energy, Clinton prosperity.

Does this fact - of refineries at full blast - does it not point to the true
culprit: the American people themselves, who for the past giddy nine years have
assumed a right to drive their cars - big cars, sports utility vehicles, the
great gas guzzlers - anywhere at any time as often as they choose.

Most of the many millions of commuters, by the way, drive to the city and back
all alone. And Ralph Nader has sensibly proposed that the coming crisis of
supply be met now by instituting - which in this freewheeling democracy would
have to mean a congressional bill or an executive dictate from President
Clinton - by instituting a car pooling system such as we had during the Second
World War, at least two people to every car.

Can you imagine with the election a month away or realistically at any time
other than a war or an Arab oil embargo which provoked the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve Bill in the first place.

So what to do, especially if you're President Clinton hoping to get
Vice-President Gore elected, and you've reflected that any increase in oil
availability takes about five weeks to affect and please the consumer? And last
week, oh dear, it was just five weeks away from 7 November.

Mr Clinton had facing him also a more exquisite problem intact. It concerns his
ever-loving wife, who, as you must know, has been running - forever it seems -
to represent her new found home state, New York, in the United States Senate.

This date has been as vocal as any in expressing anxiety about the coming
winter and the grim prospect of insufficient heating oil for their homes.

Mr Clinton's problem is how incidentally to help his wife by appearing to help
the nation?

Last week a proposal came up to have the president do something he'd never done
and which has been done only once before which was during the Gulf War and
which most informed politicians and oil men and the military deplore - namely
to release oil from the nation's strategic petroleum reserve, which is there to
be called on in a war or other national emergency not necessarily when your
wife is running for the Senate in a state that fears a hard, cold winter.

Promptly the secretary of the treasury despatched a memorandum to the president
saying that to tap the strategic oil reserve would be "a major substantial
policy mistake." He added that Mr Alan Greenspan - the chairman of the Federal
Reserve who's become an oracle on all matters affecting the economy - Mr
Greenspan thinks also it would be a grave error.

So a week goes by, a week longer for any new infusion of oil to help the
Democrats by election weekend.

So this week President Clinton ignored these warnings and did what he thought
was best for the nation. He released from the strategic reserve 30 million
barrels.

Experts whose political bias they don't care to disclose say this would relieve
the shortage for about one weekend. President Clinton hopes and prays it may be
well over the first weekend in November.

In saying a little earlier that the American people are as much to blame as
anybody I meant, I now realise, I'm blaming prosperity itself.

A transport survey finds that traffic in the big cities is heavier, more
gridlocked than ever in history - more trucks carrying more goods, more things
being needed or wanted by more people. That's the very definition of prosperity
isn't it?

In the happy process we forgot that, as the poet nearly said: "Getting and
spending, we lay waste our oil reserve."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS
COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP