The Outrageous David Merrick - 5 May 2000

An extraordinary man has just died at the age of 88, once a great force in the
American theatre, though all that force and energy were extinguished by a
stroke 15 years ago and now, even to theatregoers here, his name is an echo
from the heyday of such as, say, Carol Channing, Glenda Jackson.

He was not a great man and, as a professional curmudgeon and meany, he would
have been the first to repudiate the attribute of goodness.

But his particular talent sends us back in recollection to people like
Chicago's 19th century master criminal, dubbed the Napoleon of crime, who lived
most of his high life in London as a very respectable host and patron of the
arts.

And in this country I think with relish of the late Harry Gerguson of Brooklyn
who, assuming the title of Prince Michael Alexandrovich Dmitry Obelensky, a
young refugee from the Bolshevik Revolution, applied to enter Harvard and was
rapturously received by the president of Harvard no less as if he were
conferring an honour on the most ancient of American universities.

However, rubber cheques, it turned out, were not acceptable currency at Harvard
and when his bank account turned out to be as fictitious as his title a greatly
embarrassed president saw him on his way.

He was deported to France, whence, having served a month or two in a Paris
jail, he somehow re-entered the United States, reinvented himself as the last
of the Romanovs, sold himself first to Broadway and then to some writer friends
in Hollywood who admired the gall of a cheerful fraud who in one and the same
breath could proclaim himself to be the last of the Romanov princes and at the
same time the first Jewish boy from Brooklyn to claim the title.

They set him up in a restaurant, indeed it was the best in Hollywood, and he
lived out his days and nights there in opulent grandeur disposing the favoured
seating arrangements of the stars, according to his own personal liking for
them, despatching the disliked to the corners of a back room which he would
occasionally deign to visit to refold an untidy napkin and see that its crest,
of the double-headed eagle, appeared on top.

Well the 88-year-old we're celebrating now is nothing like so colourful or
conspicuously fraudulent as Harry Gerguson. But like him David Merrick, that's
the name, David Merrick succeeded not in spite of his gall but because of it.

David Merrick then was born in 1912 in St Louis, Missouri - birthplace of among
others the late T S Eliot and Ginger Rogers. But David Merrick was not meant,
by nature, to stay long in his native state.

He was stage struck and moved, as if by a magnet, in his youth to Broadway.
Theatre was the young Merrick's passion.

And early on he adopted a well-defined, if not theatrical image, his flashing
brown black eyes were underpinned by an appropriately waxed black moustache.

In the early days a high stiff collar, grey silk tie, wide cuffs, distinct
cufflinks - all in all he brought to life the typical early motion picture
villain, the one you'll remember who led astray innocent lasses with his
villainous demitasses.

I don't know if Merrick ever had an itch to be in a play - that's to say, to be
an actor - but I believe from the start he spurned such an ambition. In fact in
life he strongly disliked actors but, discovering that they were essential to
any play he wished to produce, he had to put up with them.

Running things, alone, was his forte and he made it clear from the start that
democracy had played no part in running his affairs.

There was a kind of wild courage in this. Very few plays - musicals certainly -
dared take the risk of being launched on one man's money.

Today a New York journalist wrote: "To finance a Broadway show you need either
some huge multimedia conglomerate or a list of backers as long as a football
team."

David Merrick at first borrowed but pretty soon put up his own money and in
time was responsible for smashes like Hello Dolly, 42nd Street, Gypsy.

He did not restrict himself, as most producers do, to one style of play or
musical, he leapt at anything he happened to like which included, one memorable
time, Peter Brook's Marat/Sade.

And Merrick had a peculiar virtue, I suppose you'd call it, he had a sort of
fore knowledge, a pricking of the thumbs, that something he very much wanted to
put on would be wounded by the critics and killed at the box office.

But, unlike the rest of us, Merrick would not say: "Well, win some, lose some"
- he regarded hostile critics and an indifferent public as a challenge. He
would promote a flop in a peculiar way.

He despised advertising and public relations men, not for the thing they did
but because of the poor, amateur way they did it. He shared H L Mencken's sour
belief that nobody ever went broke underestimating the intelligence of the
public.

So, for example, he produced a play called Subways Are For Sleeping - a title
practically invented for disparaging critics. They all slated it.

So Mr Merrick riffled through the Manhattan telephone book, picked out, say,
half a dozen men with exactly the same names as the most prominent critics,
paid them a handsome fee, then took a big ad in the New York Times signing
these famous names under reviews he'd composed which varied between the
enthusiastic and the stunning.

His most audacious attempt at the reincarnation of a failing play was to put in
the papers an advertisement announcing that his theatre had seen a rat or two
let loose in the auditorium. A threat to the public health and safety he wasn't
going to countenance.

So he announced he would close the play until the theatre could be cleansed of
the foul invaders and re-open with his splendid play as the most hygienic
theatre in New York.

He returned all the booked seats, the tickets, to the tune of $1m which he got
back in the early revival and subsequent success of the show he'd closed. The
public flocked to see a play with such a bizarre and amusing history.

He assured the success of another play, which New York's most influential
critic had damned, by printing the critic's name joined to the name of his
secret girlfriend, framing the couple's names inside a big pink heart and
publishing this as a newspaper ad on Valentine's Day with the caption: "People
are holding hands in the theatre again."

I bring up David Merrick here not for the tricks he played on theatre but for
the strong, unmentioned effect he had on those advertising men who, in the past
quarter century or so, have run the election campaigns of the mightiest in the
land, in your land no doubt as much as in this land.

I remember, must be 40 years ago, being introduced to a fellow reporter - a
first rate magazine Washington bureau chief - and he mentioned to me, very much
as a state secret, that Senator Nixon's campaign was being handled, as we were
learning to say, by H & E. I'd never heard of them, apparently two whizz-kids
from an up-and-coming advertising firm.

In ways I could only guess at they created a new, acceptable image of Nixon and
a brutal line of talk. I remember one phrase about the Democrats having
presided over "20 years of treason". Anyway Mr Nixon got in by a landslide.

I learned that H & E stood for Haldeman and Ehrlichman.

Now of course, the best politicians - I should amend that to say the most
effective or shameless campaigners - have known forever that well-informed
readers and studious editorials don't win elections: short snappy slogans do.

Assertions, preferably alarming - they don't need to be true.

I recall with matching shame Lloyd George's great chant that won the so-called
Khaki Election of 1919: "Hang the Kaiser" and "Homes fit for heroes to live
in".

Lloyd George went roaring in, though the Kaiser lived out another 22 years on a
country estate in Holland and the prime minister, alas, was unable to provide
homes for heroes or non-heroes.

I myself have known two or three advertising copywriters who moved on to
politics and would be the first to admit their debt to the outrageous David
Merrick.

And with the advent of television it's got to the point that the winning trick
can require nothing more than a ringing phrase and one memorable picture - film
shot.

Do you remember "Did you ever have it so good?" and the reverse "Are you better
off today than you were four years ago?"

Ronald Reagan's frequent, rueful aside at practically anything dogmatic Jimmy
Carter said?

"There he goes again," Mr Reagan would say with a shaking head. Mr Carter
looked foolish and the audience roared.

President Ford is remembered for one phrase which he spoke the day after he
took over from the abdicating and disgraced Richard Nixon.

"At long last," he said, "our national nightmare is over."

Mr Ford hated the phrase but the speechwriter who composed it begged him to say
it. He did and it's the only memorable sentence he ever spoke.

Many people that President Bush's election was assured by one brief, sinister
television advertisement in the election of 1988.

The Democrat was the governor of Massachusetts, one Michael Dukakis, and the
Bush people heard that his state - like many others, incidentally - allowed
jailed rapists to go on weekend parole after years of rehabilitation.

The Bush people showed a revolving door and a shadowy black man coming out of
it on to the street. It terrified legions of voters.

The best the Democrats could do was a pathetic film shot, to show they were
strong on defence, showing a tiny Mickey Mouse figure - a helmeted Dukakis just
visible peeping out of a huge tank. It convulsed legions of voters.

If David Merrick had been running the Bush campaign he probably would have sold
the Bush people on the outrageous black man and contrived to get the Democrats
to film the ludicrous Mickey Mouse tank shot.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (Â©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts Â©BBC. Letter from America
scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP