The Last Demo Circus of the Year - 03 December 1999

In a guide book written so long ago as 1941, before the United States found
itself in the Second World War, I read this, which is not meaning to be
poetical but to describe precisely and literally the overview of a city - the
city being Seattle, then and now the largest city of the Pacific North West.

It was here described as one of the most important import/export cities of the
United States, having a junction of four railroad systems with the East and
having the short great circle route to the Orient.

And I should say that the emergence of Seattle as the builder of the Jumbo Jet
fortified its position as now the export/import capital of the United States.

Here's the description -

"The city is impressive on a clear day, when the Olympic mountains with their
serrated snow laden ridges can be seen to the west and the Cascades - the blue
green Cascades - way off in the distance are visible in the east, with the
lonely snowy cone of Mount Rainier looming above all the other peaks of the
range.

"A city built on seven hills, a city of mountains and many lakes in which, at
night, the myriad lights of the city are reflected."

Sounds today like a great city for tourism and so it has become - second now
only to San Francisco as a Western pleasure haven.

By today I should have said during the past few years, today or the other day,
it was not the safest city in the United States to stroll in or go sightseeing.

Last Wednesday the front page of the New York Times carried a four-column
colour photo that looked like one of the bloodiest days in the recent history
of Kosovo - terrified people crouching before or alongside armed robots -
that's what they seemed to be - men with goggled protective masks pointing
barrels into the air, the whole frightened scene billowing with clouds of smoke
and the hullabaloo of shouts and obscenities punctuated by hacking coughs from
tear gas.

I doubt if any old resident of that prosperous and beautiful city can remember
when the National Guard was called out to save the city from an engulfing riot,
or even the city was put under curfew.

"What?" cried one, who has known the city for 60 odd years, "what is going on
here?"

Well simply put Seattle was chosen, I don't know how soon or late, as the
appropriate place to invite the delegates of 135 nations to sit down at a
convention of the World Trade Organisation to begin again to put together some
basic rules that might bring order, sense and discipline on an event in history
that has overwhelmed us like an unforeseen hurricane.

Simply the fact of globalisation - a clumsy word for an immense radical turn in
the whole business of international trade. What, in shorter words, could be the
- should be - the ground rules for promoting free trade among as many nations
as possible instead of between one or two and two or three?

It couldn't be put more simply than that but also no other common phrase in the
language can excite more passions in more different people than the phrase
"free trade".

And what happened in Seattle this week was a public relations disaster that
nobody, in or out of Washington, had anticipated.

Many of the foreign delegates had a rough time getting to their hotels or
didn't make it at all or got trapped in them - what with angry crowds and a
strike of taxi drivers in support of any one or two of about 500 protesting
groups.

If there were 135 delegations there were in all, at last count, something like
60,000 protestors - I say "in all" because the number of separate protest
groups has been uncountable.

If they have one thing in common it's a view of the World Trade Organisation
that none of the delegates shares - it's the view of the WTO as the servant or
running dog of every big company, corporation, that does an international
business.

Also the belief that any resolutions or rules that the WTO passes are aimed at
undermining the health, environmental and labour protections around the world.

Well that's almost as crude a definition as one of the slogans being waved in
the turbulent streets - "Capital Kills".

There are, of course, green groups from the Sierra Club down to people who
want, like Pol Pot, to abolish cities altogether but of course in a more humane
way.

There are anti-China groups on China's violation of human rights.

There are passionate large bands of paraders who proclaimed their loathing of
child labour anywhere on Earth.

Others specified the crimes of companies who make shoes or shirts in Korea,
Thailand, Malaysia.

And since the millennium approaches - the fact that it's a year from next
January makes no difference to us who are going to celebrate it anyway in a
month's time - since we've all decided that the millennium is on us many groups
believe also that the end of the world is at hand and they were there.

They thought they might as well get in their final kick in the last demo circus
of the year.

So we have also in the words of a distinguished foreign affairs specialist who
was there - "We had a Noah's Ark of Flat Earth advocates, protectionist trade
unions, and yuppies looking for their 1960s fix."

Now a week ago when some of these people began to slouch into Seattle we saw
them dressed in funny or lurid costumes, waving defiant placards, and it seemed
we were in for a jokey demonstration like some of the fringe groups that
protest almost every parade these days.

We assumed that they would dissolve in the general laughter or be quietly
diverted to a side street - this happens every year at the Saint Patrick's Day
parade in New York where there are always gay protesters, anti-gay protesters,
and there are still in New York people who don't like the Irish on principle.

But on Saint Patrick's Day they have the sense to stay mum and just glower.
Otherwise, as a cheerful cop once said to me - "Liable to get your head broke."

However the scene in Seattle this week was more than the balmy little yuppy
circus we'd expected.

The big surprise was the cumulative bulk - the size of the protesting groups -
the elaborately printed slogans of many groups, the well-staged attacks on
chosen victims, the big nationally or internationally famous department stores.

It became suspiciously clear that much of the violent protests must have been
planned well ahead of time.

One militant, in fact, said - "We'd laid all this out months ago on the
internet." Which would explain why protesters came from near and far and why
the militants created a civil disturbance far larger than their numbers.

But now apart from all the loonies left, right, centre, off the wall and from
outer space - which allowed the Europeans, especially, to get in their
favourite anti-American digs - there were solid dogmatic bodies of men and
women who were there to proclaim very valid missions.

To demand that the WTO face and try to resolve substantive and nagging issues
that divide nation and nation, continent and continent, First World interests
and Third World concerns.

And there are, as you'd expect, issues so rooted in national interest that the
chances of a resolution that satisfies the majority of WTO now seem remote -

The American plea to Europe to abandon subsidies to farmers which make the
export of America's abundant produce difficult.

The driving complaint of the main American industrial union that humane
conditions of labour must be set for those poor countries in which rich
countries can manufacture necessary clothes at a third of the price Americans
would have to pay if they were made here.

How the world's environment can be protected without incidentally throwing
millions back into poverty, by drastically restricting their daily work on
trees or fish or whatever.

Or how about the coca plant?

These great questions are the ones that the best brains in the WTO must
confront before such sincere but comparatively frivolous issues as the
preservation of the spotted owl or a campaign, say, to maintain the mahogany
forests of Malaysia - even if it sends the people who earn good money making
furniture back to earning a starvation pittance in the fields.

And how about the coca fields of Peru and Columbia? Are you against the
American drug trade? Of course, but you must then find another crop to provide
the livelihood for the otherwise jobless quarter million harvesters.

What was painfully plain when the bruised delegates of 135 nations eagerly left
for home was that the World Trade Organisation must mend its procedures.

It must put up with the horrors and inconvenience of today's fact that
diplomacy, which used to achieve great things and much mischief by being
conducted in secret, has now to advertise every grievance and conflict in front
of a mischievous press. Its discussions and fights nevertheless must be more
open.

What was also plain but not noticeably clear to the protesters was that
globalisation, whether it's a good or bad thing in itself, is not something
that can be deplored and abolished - it's here, like the nuclear bomb,
something that good men and true have been trying to abolish or neutralise for
half a century.

Last year 7% of American families did their Christmas shopping over the
internet. This year 20%. Next year, perhaps, 40%.

The internet is becoming the world's shopping mall, supermarket, stock
exchange. And with that in mind globalisation can no more be abolished than the
internet can ever be anything but at once a boon and a curse - no more than the
bomb can be put back in the bottle.

To abandon or abolish the World Trade Organisation would be like saying -
"Let's abolish government. Let's march with that small proud bunch of Seattle
protesters who carried a flaming banner - 'Anarchy is triumphant'."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (Â©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts Â©BBC. Letter from America
scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP