Dot Dot Dash Dash, Over and Out - 5 February 1999

A small ocean liner is ploughing westward across the Atlantic in the summer of
1910. It is on its way to Quebec. Aboard the ship there are two passengers who
particularly interest the captain since two days after his ship had sailed out
of Antwerp, he'd received a wireless message about these two passengers.

They were a youngish Mr John Robinson - a neat, diffident, courteous man - who
was accompanied at all times by his son, the devoted Master Robinson who, if
anything, was even smaller and elegant in an almost girlish way.

The wireless message transmitted from London by the commander of the line was,
to put it mildly, fascinating but bristling with perils if misunderstood or
acted on rashly.

The captain, before he made a move, wanted to be quite sure that Mr and Master
Robinson were who the wireless message said they might be. So he spent much
social time with them - they listened to concerts together, they told stories,
they reminisced about America. Mr Robinson was an American doctor it seemed
who'd lived long in England and his son, understandably, had a London accent.

Five, six, seven days went by. On a bright day when the ship was approaching
Quebec there was a brisk wind, the captain was standing at the head of a
staircase looking down over the promenade deck. Along it, going away from him,
were Mr and Master Robinson linked arm in arm on a walkabout.

The wind behind him, the captain shouted: "Mr Robinson". No answer, no response
of any kind. The two walked on.

The captain shouted the name again and a third time, when Mr Robinson turned
and apologised he was, he said, slightly deaf. The captain knew he had his man.
Both the alleged Mr Robinson and his alleged son were arrested at sea. The
father for the mutilation and wilful murder of his wife, the pretended son -
who was a girl - was held under suspicion.

Sailing into the harbour from which the two would be extradited back to
England, the captain had occasion to beckon the doomed little doctor to be
quite sure he called to him along the deck: "Dr Crippen". The doctor turned
round at once.

This famous episode has passed into history as being the first and, perhaps
forever afterwards, the most dramatic use of wireless telegraphy in detecting a
criminal. And we were reminded of the man who was responsible for wireless
telegraphy in the first place when the word went out this week that no more
words would go out - dot dot dash dash - in the Morse Code.

In the age of the microchip and the delivery world-wide of an encyclopaedia of
information in the blink of an eye, no more Morse Code.

Samuel Finley Breese Morse - a very interesting character - was a Yankee. Born
in Massachusetts at the very end of the 18th Century to a famous geographer.

From his boyhood Sam Morse had a single passion which was painting. He was
described at Yale as a fickle student and he spent all his spare and his study
time painting miniature portraits. Reluctantly his parents allowed him to make
a career of this pursuit and paid for him to go to England and study historical
painting - there was a terrific vogue at the time for enormous, definitive
canvasses of the Battle of Lepanto, the Surrender at Yorktown and so on.

So young Sam went off to London to study under the acknowledged master,
Washington Allston - famous for such colossal canvasses as The Deluge and Dead
Man Revived by Touching the Bones of the Prophet Elijah.

Young Morse had little luck with his own historical canvasses when he got back
home so went back to miniature portraiture. He went in to politics. He ran,
unsuccessfully, for Mayor of New York. But he was first and always, 'till the
day he died, a painter. And by now is recognised after Allston as the second
best American romantic painter of the early 19th Century.

But how about his telegraph? Morse was the genuine heir to an admirable 18th
century tradition. That of a man thoroughly professional in one trade or
profession but a creative amateur in many others.

These young Americans thought no knowledge was odd. Benjamin Franklin is, of
course, the prototype or archetype - statesman, scholar, printer, but also
thinking up the first public library, pondering lightning and inventing the
lightning rod as also an ingenious downdraft heating stove and a volunteer fire
brigade and bifocal spectacles.

When Morse, 40 years old, was coming home by ship from his long stretch in
Europe he had a shipboard conversation with a man who seemed to know a lot
about the new electromagnet. And at home, back to painting and teaching, Morse
thought about this and after four years of nightly labour he produced his first
working electric telegraph.

He went into the business with two other men and then in 1838 announced the
invention of his Morse Code. As with many another startling invention most
people - the professionals especially - were sceptical. Don't forget it took
the British Navy - the Admiralty - 60 years to agree with James Lind that, yes,
citrus fruit was the answer to scurvy.

Morse nagged away at Congress for seven years until they finally let him build
a telegraph line from Baltimore to Washington and a year later came the famous
day when the now 57-year-old bearded, magisterial figure of the famous American
painter sat down and threw a switch and flashed out to an astonished nation the
message: "What hath God wrought?"

After that his days were spent in trying to stay afloat in a flood of legal
claims from other alleged inventors. On the side he passed on to the Civil War
photographer Mathew Brady, the art of daguerreotypes.

In his 60s, after 11 years of wrangling litigation, the Supreme Court
established his patent right. He was honoured by several European governments
and he made a fair amount of money. Whereupon, setting an example for Andrew
Carnegie, he gave it all away.

The Morse Code is now to be replaced by a satellite Mayday system on all ships
over 300 tons. In the matter of the Morse Code, and that chilling use of it
aboard the SS Montrose in July 1910, astonishment now passes to me who, after a
casual galloping poll of my own, was startled to discover that four friends,
all of whom are well into their 40s or beyond, had never heard of Dr Crippen.

So would anybody like to be filled in briefly about what certainly, till about
1950 I'd say, most English speaking middle aged people would have said was the
crime of the century.

Well, as I said, Dr Crippen was an American doctor - small, nice, impeccably
courteous man - who went over to live in London in 1900. He was in his 39th
year.

Half the time he practised and for the rest was with a pharmaceutical company
doing lab work. He made a pretty decent living most of which he lavished on his
well-loved wife - a pretty, plumpish woman with aspirations first to be an
opera star.

The truth was she wasn't nearly good enough for the tattiest music hall. So she
settled for a fantasy life and having her husband throw parties for bohemian
types who'd made it, in a modest way, on the halls.

One day Dr Crippen had to go on business to America and while he was away Mrs
Crippen discovered a friend - a male friend - who gave her presents. And not to
elaborate on an old, old story the Crippens came to loathe each other but made
a pact to keep up a pleasant front.

Dr Crippen joined a new company and there met a pretty fragile young secretary
of a modern type - a typist in fact. He fell in love with her and soon after he
and his wife decided on separate bedrooms Dr Crippen enjoyed the young typist -
one Ethel le Neuve - by day.

Until the day the doctor bought a deadly poison nobody perhaps, including
himself, could have imagined this sweet, kindly, hospitable man as a murderer.
Nevertheless he gave the poison to his wife, took her body, cut it up with
anatomical precision into slabs and slices and buried the remains under the
cellar floor.

He gave out that his wife had gone on a trip to America and then after a while
he said he'd heard that she'd died of pneumonia, and there was much sympathy
from his friends. Until he brought Ethel le Neuve to live with him and one
evening party she was seen by a friend to be flaunting the vanished Mrs
Crippen's jewellery. The friend went to Scotland Yard.

The upshot: an early visit from a detective inspector. Dr Crippen at once broke
down and confessed he'd woven a tissue of lies. The truth was his wife had gone
away, possibly with a lover, and had told him she'd never see him again.

The inspector spent the day with Dr Crippen searching the house and he found
this a fair enough explanation. He left, presumably for good.

And then, weirdly, incomprehensibly, Dr Crippen went into panic. Suppose the
police came back and implicated Ethel who'd been acquitted of all involvement
from the start? He decided to flee, bought two passages on the Quebec ship, had
Ethel cut her hair and dress like a boy, went off and hoped to get lost and
beyond discovery in Canada.

The sudden disappearance of Dr Crippen prompted the inspector to go back and
search the house again. And, the second day, to come on a loose brick and
eventually the grizzly human remains and that sent Crippen's description over
the wires onto the newspapers, the wireless to Amsterdam and the famous message
to the captain of the Montrose, two days out.

The inspector said later that Crippen's fatal mistake was to flee. The day the
inspector spent with Crippen at his house convinced him that Mrs Crippen's
voluntary disappearance was nothing but the truth. If Crippen had stayed put,
said the inspector, the case would have been written off as closed.

Dr Crippen, aged 47, was executed in November 1910. The SS Montrose's Morse
Code could signal: Over and out.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.