The Stars and Stripes - 9 November 2001

Something that every first visitor to America notices - and I mean during my
lifetime here - is the constant display of the American flag, in places both
public and private.

I couldn't count the hundreds of times that a visiting European friend - off,
say, after arrival on a little tour of the town or the village - has seen the
flag draping from a pole outside the firehouse or hanging from a humble bedroom
window.

And the visitor says: "Hello, what's the occasion, some famous American date?"

"No," you say, "nothing special. Somebody got up in the morning and felt good
and instead of taking the dog for a trot or cooking up a special batch of
pancakes decided to hang out the flag."

In country places there are always families who make a point of hanging out the
flag every Sunday morning in summer.

The first, flaming, public response to 11 September was an outburst of flags.

Overnight two suddenly-famous flag factories were reported to have gone a
24-hour working day. And orders came roaring in for flags to be woven or
impressed or embedded into every sort of item of clothing or decoration.

The two teams playing off the baseball championship appeared, the second night,
with a neat Stars and Stripes planted above or alongside their team's logo.

A hundred flags flew outside Rockefeller Plaza. Flags flapped into the late
afternoon fog atop San Francisco's Golden Gate Bridge.

Flags on hats, sweaters, blouses, trousers, motor cars, bikes, shopping bags,
from windows, roofs, awnings - a continent blanketed by the Stars and Stripes.

I didn't hear or read a squeak of a complaint from anybody about the wholesale
violation - punishable by fine and a prison sentence - that this coast-to-coast
flourish represented. Which just shows how old I must be.

Some days after the original horror which stirred this vast wave of patriotism
I had a most lively recall of a time when I was begged by the newly-arrived
British ambassador, no less, to do a broadcast to Britain, as soon as possible,
and acquaint the people of Britain with the hideous crime that an English
manufacturer was perpetrating against the law of the United States.

The time was 59 years ago. The United States had come into the Second World War
and the first shipment of American troops was about to arrive in England.

A British manufacturer, in the Midlands I believe, had an idea - of
heart-warming hospitality - to make and deliver an item of clothing for each
and every arriving American soldier which should have knitted into it the
American flag.

Now whether or not the Foreign Office or the prime minister was consulted about
this idea, all the evidence suggests that they thought it a splendid and a
touching tribute to the arriving allies.

Nobody, it seems, had ever heard of the Code of Etiquette issued by the United
States War Department in the early 1920s to dictate once and for all how the
flag was to be flown, where and when, and especially certain abuses of the flag
which must be forever prohibited.

The code is a pretty elaborate one but the gist of it says that the flag is to
be flown only between sunrise and sunset. Is to be hoisted briskly but lowered
ceremoniously. That it must never touch the ground. It may be displayed at
night only on special occasions and then it must be lighted.

Another thousand words prescribes the flag's role, position and function in the
United States, its dependencies and at sea whenever a president or former
president dies.

The really tough part of the code is the list of prohibitions. The flag must
not be dipped to any personal thing. It must not be displayed on a float,
motorcar or boat except from a staff.

It is by no means ever to be used - here's the nub, or the rub - as a
receptacle for anything or for any advertising purpose nor to be embroidered on
such articles as cushions, handkerchiefs or boxes of any kind.

The code did not even reach to what a United States senator once called "the
obscenity of the flag's being printed on the cover of a box of chocolates"
which was a very frequent and welcome sight to me as a boy at Christmas time -
except of course the flag was the Union Jack.

You'll gather at once that no such code had ever been thought of in England,
where the royal standard and the Union Jack were indeed the most popular emblem
for advertisers of everything from biscuits to a mysterious potion, I well
remember, called a "lung tonic" - the implied suggestion, I suppose, was that
if it could liven up the royal lungs it certainly could ginger up yours.

Well imagine the moment in Washington when the British ambassador was told, by
an American friend, that a British manufacturer had delivered to this American
camp in England a whole year's supply of an object of clothing which violated
the official American code in a particularly tasteless way.

"What," asked the embattled ambassador, "is the code and what is the offending
object?"

He was told about the code and according to his own later testimony blushed
with embarrassment.

But the blush was nothing to the groan that followed on his hearing about the
item of clothing which the innocent manufacturer - bless his warm intentions -
had thought would be specially cute.

A pair - a thousand pairs - of, how shall I put this?, ladies' short
undergarments, the seat being composed of the stars and stripes.

I was asked to broadcast a report on the War Department's code and the next we
heard was - you can well believe - that the panties were immediately ...
withdrawn, I suppose is the inevitable word.

The result of this famous clanger or boo boo was that within months, in June
1942, Congress passed a resolution amending into public law all existing rules
and customs pertaining to display and use of the flag.

The assumption was that from then on nobody - not even the British - would dare
desecrate the American flag in any of the stated or unstated ways.

We had a quarter century to observe the code and by now the law.

We reckoned without Vietnam and the uproar of students in the streets in an
outbreak of deliberate burning of the flag - an act so outrageous to many
Americans in many states that in 1968 Congress passed a law making it a federal
crime to burn or otherwise desecrate the flag, on pain of one year's
imprisonment or a thousand-dollar fine.

And for 20 years that law was on the books but only randomly observed for in
several states the students went on burning the flag.

Eventually an appeal against the new law was taken to the Supreme Court and the
court ruled, only 12 years ago, that burning the flag is a permissible
expression of free speech.

The effect of this was to have the flag desecration laws of all the states
declared unconstitutional.

And from now on, plainly, you can do anything you like with the flag - wear it
on top or underneath, hang it, flaunt it or, if the war goes on too long for
the already chanting students at Berkeley, you can freely flout it by burning
it. So yet another old value bites the dust.

Already though the wholesale displaying of the flag, on humans particularly, is
fading along the gently-falling graph of the president's popularity.

Only two weeks ago 87 Americans in a hundred approved of President Bush and the
war in Afghanistan. Today it's down to 69%.

And these two parallel falling lines are a graphic reminder of something about
the American character, if there is such a thing, which is its impatience with
difficult, slow solutions.

This is essentially the nation of the quick fix, the miracle drug. And though
so many such promises turn out hasty and false it's surprising in even the last
hundred-year stretch of American history how often the sudden flash of
intelligence, rather than interminable research, has produced a whole raft of
blessings to mankind.

Think of cheap steel, the dollar watch, the refrigerator, traffic lights, the
assembly line, the oil freighter, the electric bulb.

The president said a month ago that the new war would be strange and long. He
never defined long.

But day after day at the White House press briefings the president or his press
secretary or Secretary Powell are unceasingly pressed by the media to say how
long.

There are people, raving enthusiasts in the week after September 11, who
already suggest the war is not showing results.

They can't have thought much about the history of Afghanistan and its guerrilla
warriors. They've lived on a battleground for eight centuries.

In the 19th Century Great Britain fought them for eight years, tried to conquer
them and failed.

In 1979 the Soviet Union moved in to occupy the country and after fighting for
nearly 10 years, with 300,000 men, the Soviets gave up and withdrew.

Our trouble is, I think, that to the old generation of Americans war recalls
the long quagmire and defeat of Vietnam.

And to the middle and younger generations the only war they remember is the
Gulf War - a spectacular display of night missiles flying, minimum casualties,
of the enemy surrendering. And all over in a hundred hours. So how long is
long?

If Americans are looking for a role model they couldn't do better than think of
Thomas Edison, a man who didn't flaunt his patriotism but acted on it.

He had one brilliant, bright idea - the electric light bulb - but not before
he'd failed with 6,000 different vegetable fibres did he find one, in a
Japanese bamboo, a high-resistance filament that would burn permanently in a
vacuum.

He had inspiration which was God-sent but he had something better: Stamina.

And you can sense, I think, that behind President Bush's gung-ho assurances
there is a slightly nervous, earnest, appealing manner that stamina is what
more than anything he wants people to begin to show.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (Â©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts Â©BBC. Letter from America
scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP