The Origin of the Continental Blow Out - 24 November 2000

Last Thursday was Thanksgiving, the first truly American festival and the one
that sets more millions of Americans in a turmoil of transit, criss-crossing
thousands of miles to join long-separated families at a feast of turkey,
cranberry sauce, sweet potatoes and pumpkin pie - the strange, unknown foods
that the native Indians introduced to those starving English men and women and
children who'd landed, 380 years ago, on the bleak and unfruitful soil of a
Massachusetts cape.

This festival was inspired by a letter from America written by a Yorkshireman,
son of a farmer, written as a report on his first transatlantic voyage, along
with other mostly humble folk, who sought new land across the ocean in order to
practise a religion freed from the corruption in 1620 of the Church of England.

They had none of our advantages so William Bradford's writing is bereft of
parliamentary English, congressional English, business English, advertising
English or the lawyers' English we've been exposed to for the past fortnight in
the case of Gore versus Bush.

This company of very mixed social types, just over a hundred of them, had been
64 days out of England and meaning to settle at the mouth of the Hudson River
and start a trading post. However, this is William Bradford's account of what
happened. I thought it might be a refreshment:

"But after they had sailed at course about half a day they fell among dangerous
shoals and roaring breakers and therewith conceived themselves in great danger.
But the wind shrinking among them with all they resolved to bear up again for a
cape to the north - later to be known as Cape Cod - and thought themselves
happy to get out of those dangers before night overtook them as by God's
providence they did. And the next day they got into the Cape harbour where they
rode in safety.

"Being thus arrived in a good harbour and brought safe to land they fell upon
their knees and blessed the God of heaven who had brought them over the vast
and furious ocean and delivered them from all the perils and the miseries
thereof, again to set their feet on the firm and stable earth - their proper
element."

During the relentless battle between the vice president's flock of lawyers and
Governor Bush's flock of lawyers - 72 in all - a foreign friend called me to
wonder if life still went on in the United States.

The questioner was not a naïve man but when it comes to picturing life in a
troubled world spot we're all innocents.

I remember during the civil uproar in Beirut writing to a friend there
wondering if she was safe and sound. She sent back a colour photograph of
herself with friends in swimsuits stretching by the poolside at one of Beirut's
swankier hotels, one of course still intact.

And I recall how in the 1960s how many anxious friends in London would ask in
letters if we stayed off the streets, if we too had been mugged. True, at the
time, about one, sometimes two, even three people a week were mugged in New
York City's eight parks but that still left seven millions of us un-mugged.

If you've read the nightly television stories about our crisis in civil
aviation, the desperate flight controllers, the airports adrift with thousands
of stranded travellers, I have to tell you that my wife and I have just
survived with ease two cross-continental trips. Thanksgiving eve, the worse
airline travel day of the year, has come and gone with a record low in
accidents, flight delays and general misery.

So to quote one of my favourite columnists on turkey feast morning: "Whichever
way it goes we'll live with it - no Armageddon yet."

Well, we left William Bradford and his crew on their knees giving thanks to the
God of heaven for having saved them from the vast and furious ocean. But that's
not what Thanksgiving is about.

Within 24 hours they had good cause to bemoan the place they'd landed on. They
had intended, when they left Plymouth two months before, to land in Virginia -
"Earth's only paradise," wrote an English poet who'd never been there, "where
nature hath in store fowl, venison and fish and the fruitfulest soil."

But they missed the southern coast of Virginia. Storms sent them up 500 miles
north, kept them from the Hudson channel, blew them another couple of hundred
miles and on Cape Cod found - what? No friends, no houses, no inns but - I
quote from Bradford - "A hideous and desolate wilderness full of wild beasts
and wild men."

Well it was, as I hinted, those wild men who saved most of the Puritans with
their introduction of the, unknown to Europeans, turkey, potatoes and a red
berry they'd never seen either which was the only fruitful growth on the Cape.
The cranberry bogs produced this red berry which, as an accompanying sauce, is
- as one of the Bush/Gore lawyers might say - "considered mandatory" at the
family's Thanksgiving dinner.

I'd better say at once that cranberry sauce is to me one of those things you
must be born to - like peanut butter and drum majorettes.

Today cranberry juice has become a mad fashion in this country as a health
drink of choice, recommended strongly even by cardiologists - heart doctors -
since the recent large, and I believe, first long-term clinical trial of
vitamin C pills which reported that whatever else vitamin C supplements may do
they are first rate producers of hardening of the arteries.

Consequently an eminent cardiologist predicts that the retreat from orange
juice will be as fast as the advance on cranberry juice. All I can say with the
Japanese, who they say started this fashion, is "rots of ruck."

I deduced, I think you'll believe correctly, that of those four dishes that
saved the Puritans' life - not to mention of course the cod swimming by - the
cranberry is the one that would most interest most listeners since most of them
today have known about turkey and potatoes for centuries.

Not long ago I ran into an old English lady who said: "Turkeys came from
America? What rubbish, why my grandmother had a turkey every Christmas and that
was in the middle of the 19th Century." I hope I made it clear at the start
that William Bradford ate his first turkey in 1621 when he was 43.

But many of the Puritans did die from starvation during the first winter. It
was in the late summer of 1621 that they had their first harvest. They'd
learned too about planting the crop known from the Canadian border to the tip
of Chile as corn but in England, just to be different, as maize.

I often wondered how that early maker of breakfast cereals would have done if
they'd tried to popularise maize flakes, which is what they are.

Well it was some day after the first harvest was in and the Bradford crew knew
that they were in Massachusetts for keeps that legend has it they held a feast.

Somebody made up a hymn - the one we sing now is a 19th Century invention - and
gave up a public prayer of thanksgiving. That's what we'd like to say is the
origin of the continental blow out that took place last Thursday.

In dry fact it wasn't until the middle of the 19th Century when somebody
thought it would be a charming thing to have a national day of thanksgiving,
really to congratulate each other on having settled in America, or having been
born American. This year, you'll gather, there are in some places some
misgivings.

Anyway it wasn't until 243 years after the supposed event that Abraham Lincoln
proclaimed a national day of thanksgiving.

Many, if not most, states paid no attention. But gradually over about 80 years
it dawned on people it was yet another excuse for another day's holiday.

Finally Franklin Roosevelt not only proclaimed it but read it over the radio
and put in a little sermon of his own about William Bradford and company. And
by 1940 it had become an immovable feast celebrated by Act of Congress on the
third Thursday in November.

Forty years ago this weekend there was a terrific national panic that blew up
when, a month or so before Thanksgiving, the Pure Food and Drug Administration,
which passes on the safety of all crops and new drugs, put out a general
warning that cranberry crops set aside for Thanksgiving had been found - well,
two shipments anyway - to contain a weed killer poison - aminotriazole.

The secretary of health, education and welfare was instructed to go through the
entire Thanksgiving reserve to see how much threatened the survival of the
nation. Two small bags of cranberries were found to be suspect.

The rest of the seven million pounds he searched were safe - home free.

On the Wednesday evening before Thanksgiving an enterprising reporter asked if
President and Mrs Eisenhower were going to serve cranberry sauce as usual.

"None of your business," the White House replied, in the days when you could
say such things. Quite right.

A little later your own enterprising reporter made enquiries. President
Eisenhower, the American hero of the Second World War, served apple sauce.

Everybody wondered this weekend what they ought to be thankful for. Miss Gail
Collins, the New York Times light-hearted columnist, said: "New Yorkers ought
to give thanks that they live in a chad-free zone."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP