The California Election - 10 October 2003

California spoke last Tuesday and what California said will not be known until
we find out whether the recall procedure is an extension of democracy or a
mockery of it.

One thing we can be sure of already about the electoral landslide in the most
populous state in the union (33 millions) - the state whose economy is larger
than that of all but four existing nations, the state which time and again has
signalled a change in the direction of popular prejudice - is that the rise to
its governorship of Arnold Schwarzenegger is not the joke it was in the
beginning of the recent headlong campaign of, wait for it, 135 candidates.

Before we think over the election let's remind ourselves who the Californians
are and what the recall procedure is all about.

Two years ago the ethnic majority of California tipped over from white to
coloured.

That's to say just under 50% of its population is white, just over that is
Latino, black or Asian ("Oriental" is not an acceptable word any more).

And when I say acceptable I'd like to recall the permissible changes in my
American lifetime of the proper word for what so late as the Second World War
were called, without offence, either Negroes or coloureds.

And then if there is a decisive date of change it has to be May 1954 - what a
celebration in prospect next spring - when the United States Supreme Court
pronounced the historic ruling about the plight of an eight-year-old Negro girl
in having to cross a railroad track and walk two miles to a black school, since
she was not allowed to go to a nearby white school.

The day of that ruling - the case of Brown versus Board of Education in Topeka,
Kansas - was the beginning of racial integration in the political and social
life of America.

Certainly from that time on there arose a lyrical cry among the Negro people -
"black is beautiful"!

And for the next 30 or 40 years black was the correct word. Negro - or worse
"nigger" - had become so unspeakable that to this day all public figures, when
they want to indicate an impermissible vulgarism, refer to "the N-word".

But after a decade or two blacks themselves seem to want a more specific,
grander nomenclature. And "African American" was, you might say, demanded, if
not required in formal speech and writing.

When that happened I couldn't help recalling the funny, awful day in the middle
1940s when my old friend and mentor, the most famous talent in American
journalism, Mr HL Mencken, one day wrote in a chapter of his memoirs about his
hometown Baltimore about fond recollections of the local "African Americans" -
a usage that caused an uproar in the Negro community of more cities than
Baltimore.

In fact the most prestigious of all coloured national organisations - the NAACP
- the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People - brought to
the floor, at one of its conventions, a resolution damning and blasting Mencken
as a "bigot", "fascist" and, I believe, the new villain: "racist".

The California ballots were printed in seven languages. One of them was Eskimo.

You'll see by now that, if all generalisations are false including this one,
very few generalisations can be made about the character of a Californian.

What we can say with confidence is that California has 58 counties and that for
the better part of a century the southern-most counties vote Republican, though
not the largest city, Los Angeles.

The northern counties - taking in the northern, say, 400 miles - are invincibly
Democrat, including certainly the city of San Francisco.

The figure that's important to memorise is that in last Tuesday's election only
about 50% of the qualified voters voted. So half of the registered Californians
aren't interested in politics or don't care enough about domestic matters, no
matter how fervently they may worry about foreign policy.

Now exactly what is this procedure of recall?

I ought to re-sketch an account to listeners who missed the history of it that
I did almost two months ago and which several authorities have told me had not
been seen or published elsewhere.

Well, to my great surprise when I started to bone up on the word and the
custom, I found that recall came into being just 100 years ago in Los Angeles,
then a city of only 50,000 that was so rowdy and ill-governed - one murder
every day - that the city fathers decided on a drastic step.

They found time and again that they'd elected to an influential city post so
many men who turned out to be crooks or grafters that they voted to write in an
amendment to the city charter authorising a special election to be held after a
certain number of voters had signed a petition to throw out an elected official
and replace him before his elected term had expired.

Governor Davis was in only the first year of his second term. And the main
charge against him is that he's responsible for the largest deficit of any
state.

I should say it's a moot point whether a governor - or a president, for that
matter - should be held responsible for the health or sickness of the budget.

But it's long been the assumption of the American voter that he is - just as in
American football when a team keeps on losing matches you fire the coach.

Herbert Hoover was in some ways a very good president. Many of the fiscal and
financial reforms adopted by Franklin Roosevelt were thought up by Hoover. But
Wall Street crashed and the Great Depression set in on Hoover's watch and he
was ignominiously fired.

After Los Angeles had the recall idea a century ago, it was put into the state
constitutions of three or four western states where cattle rustlers, crooked
lawyers, claim jumpers and other miscreants were rampant.

When news of this experiment got to Washington it was debated. But not for
long.

President Theodore Roosevelt brought his great authority to declare that it was
a quick fix, an easy way of venting political revenge on elected officers, an
actual evasion of the democratic process.

The chief argument against it indeed was memorably stated by Alexander Hamilton
more than a century earlier when the founding fathers were writing the
Constitution.

The great question was: on what grounds could a president be justly impeached?

After some strenuous legal wrangling Hamilton held out for a minimum charge of
treason, bribery or other high crimes and misdemeanours.

By applying a lesser standard, he said, the president would hold his office at
the whim of the Senate.

While many today - governors around the country, governors with heavy deficits,
which is most - are wincing at the California result, there are influential
Democrats already thinking of working up a petition to recall Mr Schwarzenegger
if he turns out to be as inept as they fear or hope.

When I first heard this I thought it was a late night television joke. But
within 24 hours of the result Senator Dianne Feinstein, a Democrat and probably
the most popular politician in California, said that the recall Schwarzenegger
petition should be held in abeyance.

Many serious politicians - Republicans and Democrat - were blithely convinced
before last Tuesday that Mr Schwarzenegger (who the Democrat's state leader
says hasn't a clue about how to govern) would at best sneak in by a hair's
breadth majority.

Well, a landslide was a painful puzzle, especially after the disclosure by 15
young women that they had been intimately groped and fondled by the famous
movie muscle man.

Not too many years ago the first proof of that sort of behaviour would have
produced the hasty withdrawal of a candidate.

As it was, Mr Schwarzenegger shouted out loud that he had done bad things in
his past and he apologised to all the ladies. The accompanying groupies cheered
him loud and long.

Perhaps the sexual harassment charges came in too late. Perhaps in our decaying
civilisation not enough people care whether or not a governor or a president
has any moral authority at all.

Anyway it made no difference whatever to the result and the predicted defection
of the women's vote didn't happen.

There is, however, a general agreement, irrespective of party, that
Schwarzenegger's landslide was an angry vote against the men, the people in
power, who cannot seem to lead us out of our continuing woes - the economy,
joblessness, corporate greed - the usual impatience every 30 years or so at not
getting the war over by Christmas.

In a simpler word, a strong vote against incumbents.

Some thoughtful, if pessimistic, people see in the Schwarzenegger triumph a
darker vision.

He has admitted to his early admiration of Hitler, especially of Hitler's power
to rouse a despairing, poverty-stricken people and lead them on to visionary
heights.

The thing he most admired about Hitler was the "Fuhrer princip" - the strong
leader principle. Schwarzenegger wants to be that strong leader.

So we must wait and see whether in the course of his governorship we shall see
democracy invigorated or the emergence of the first American fuhrer.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.