Trial of the Century - 21 January 1999

I've covered quite a few trials in my time including a long one - 15 weeks in
all - for espionage and a short one - one afternoon - for murder in a small
town in California. The defendant was found guilty in no time because - 60
years ago anyway - he had no business being a Mexican and wandering into the
white part of town to settle a row with a gun.

Of the two most interesting trials I ever covered was, first, one of an
apple-cheeked, gentle, kindly old man who happened to be the boss of the
democratic machine in New York City. He was noted for his unflagging generosity
to the poor, especially towards the ones just off the boat. His kindness to
their families was always rewarded with their vote. Sometimes registered in the
name of an old constituent of the boss who'd died and whom the boss couldn't
bear to think of as a non-voter.

It turned out that the boss also had in his pocket quite a few Congressmen,
leading gangsters in control of protection and prostitution and, as the saying
went, the best judges money could buy.

He went to the pokey for life and as he was led away out of the courtroom, I'll
never forget his defending lawyer - a famous old New Yorker, a small man with a
chiselled profile and ropy hair who looked like a Roman senator - as old apple
face was led away his lawyer struck a pose in marble and shouted: "If that old
man is guilty go down to Philadelphia crack the Liberty Bell still deeper and
say 'Liberty no longer inhabits these shores'."

The other truly fascinating trial is as bright and clear in memory as the Texas
sky that enclosed the goings on in a little courtroom in the foothills of the
Rockies that could have come from an early John Ford movie. An air force
colonel had gone off to the wars and left behind his ever loving wife who
unfortunately got up to some hanky panky with another man - a bartender.

The colonel came home on leave, heard the rumour, had no cause to doubt it,
went to the bar, sat and drank a while till the bartender went off, naturally,
to the men's room. The colonel followed him and shot him then came out, picked
up the bar telephone, called the police and turned himself in. The trial was
gripping in the fabled one syllabled Texas manner: "You shot him?" "Plumb
through the heart." "On purpose?" "That was my aim your honour." But I must
move on, the end of the story is worth waiting for.

I also covered the Hiss case which half a century ago was called the trial of
the century. But then, remember, a few years ago along came the OJ Simpson
trial and that annexed the title of the trial of the century.

But now the title has passed to the Clinton trial. And, of course, the trial of
a president on impeachment charges, since this is only the second time in
history, is impressive and sounds more dramatic than anything dreamed up by
Earl Stanley Gardener or Raymond Chandler. But the trouble is it's a wholly
unfamiliar kind of trial, unfamiliar not just to us but to the people taking
part in it. And, at present, nobody can say how it's going to proceed or who
can have the floor at any given time.

The rules they're going by were laid out 130 years ago for the impeachment
trial of President Andrew Johnson - you've no doubt heard about. And they say
those are the rules that will be controlling. But imagine a trial in which the
jury can, at any time, overrule the judge. At which the hundred senators
sitting as the jury are not allowed to talk to each other. Do you want to take
bets? And we still don't know if witnesses will be called. A trial without
witnesses? That's because the 13 prosecutors from the Republican Party and the
president's defending lawyers have to agree together, sometime soon or late,
about witnesses which reflects the peculiar fact that this trial follows, on
what amounts to, an indictment by a Grand Jury.

A Grand Jury hears evidence, testimony, hearsay even, from nobody but a
prosecutor. It is the prosecutor's creature. The accused is not allowed a
lawyer even or witnesses. So what we forgot long ago and many of the
congressmen and senators seem to have forgotten is that Mr Starr's - the
Special Prosecutor's - report and the House Judiciary Committee's acceptance of
it - however devastating - say no more than this case ought to go to trial. And
so the president's lawyers with a blissful or artful indifference to the
grizzly facts have provided their answer to the charges in a town of outrage
that recalls Claude Raines crying out when the Nazis walked into Rick's night
club: "I'm shocked, shocked there is gambling going on here."

So far then all the writing and commentary about the trial has been
speculation. We know that at some time the jurors might agree to put a vote for
a majority to decide if the case does not spell out impeachable crimes and
therefore should be dismissed - very unlikely. But if the trial goes through to
its prescribed end we know the verdict - know the verdict - that's why the
Democrats are so cocky. There are 45 of them, 55 Republicans - a verdict of
guilty, which would at once remove Mr Clinton from the presidency and have Mr
Vice-President Gore sworn in requires a two thirds vote - 67 votes. This would
require then 12 Democrats to desert the president they have stayed with all
along. Whatever they privately think they know the balance of the polls of
public opinion. It's now 79% in favour of the president staying. So the
Democrats don't, as some fretting commentators do, have to explain this
phenomenon - they just like it.

So you see why, I may be repeating this point in the weeks to come, why I'm
reminded of an old lady who wrote to me once a few weeks before a presidential
election, when I was going over the pros and cons of which of the two main
candidates might win, she wrote me a postcard - a picture of the beach at
Eastbourne - and inscribed it sweetly: "I may be wrong but would it not be
better instead of telling us now who might win to wait three weeks and tell us
who did?" I like - I may be wrong.

What I want to say, and maybe should say it every week, is that faced with what
the professionals call the trial of the century the American people will by no
means be glued for long to the tube - many other more pressing things are on
their minds. For about half the country keeping warm and or getting to work are
the priorities. Mountainous snows from Oregon on the coast across the whole
prairie to upstate New York whose town of Buffalo, which normally has about 120
inches a year, has already had in the first two weeks of January 45 inches and
can think of nothing but repairing power lines, getting light and heat - forget
the trial of any century.

Businessmen and business commentators are engrossed with a fascinating equation
that somebody's just worked out - from the burglars' break-in at Democratic
headquarters in June 1972 to President Nixon's abdication in August '74 the
Stock Market lost 20% of its value. From President Clinton swearing he never
had a sex relationship with Miss Lewinsky to the day he was formally impeached
the Stock Market has gained 20% in value. The commentators were congratulating
each other on this explanation of the popularity poll when the market fell
almost 400 points in three days and may still be plummeting.

Oh yes: that short tense trial back there in the Davis Mountains, the foothills
of the Rockies in West Texas - bare mountain country. Too bare for cattle or
sheep but goats can nibble a life out of anything, it's great goat country. So
there's always a congressman from that part of the country who automatically
goes on to the House Armed Services Committee since goats produce mohair and
mohair produces army uniforms. So, therefore, though it's only a small town
it's always had its quota of army purchasing department and retired army
doctors and the like.

The one we were talking about was a colonel - air force and active. Now this
was during the Second World War. Came the day when he was posted far away and
had to leave his loving wife in the mountain town where, after some months, she
got involved, shall we say, in an inappropriate relationship with a smart
bartender. The colonel came home on leave one fine evening. He went to the bar,
called for drinks all round, plainly, to the bartender's sweating relief, knew
nothing about the shenanigans - sub rosa - between the sheets. After a while
the bartender went off to the men's room. The colonel followed him and shot him
dead. The colonel came out, called the police, turned himself in.

It took, in the nature of things, a month or two for it to come to trial. The
evidence was straightforward and none of it denied. The colonel replied briskly
in monosyllables.

"That's right - through the heart - dropped like a log."

How did he plead - guilty? Sure thing. The jury retired.

What I didn't know until it happened was that in Texas at that time the jury
not only pronounced the verdict but handed down the sentence. And Texans
recognised fine distinctions between cold and hot-blooded murder. After no more
than 15 minutes the jury returned.

"How say you?"

One by one: guilty, guilty, guilty - all the way up to 12.

"Will you now pronounce sentence? Is your sentence unanimous?"

"Yes, your honour: sentence suspended."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.