Birth of a Christmas Fairy Tale - 19 December 2003

"Instant relief", it says here on the label of a small bottle.

You'll guess immediately that it's a quack medicine.

You'll also guess that the bottle I'm holding is advertised for "treatment" of
the common cold.

They'd love to say "cure" but since nobody ever discovered one, if you claim
cure you'll be prosecuted by the Food and Drug Administration for fraudulent
advertising.

I note a small asterisk beside the glowing promise of instant relief, and at
the bottom of the label in tiny, tiny print it says "by way of moderating
symptoms". Thataboy.

Well I'm here to tell you that I am going to offer you instant relief. it is
the relief of telling you that I'm not going to talk about Saddam Hussein,
whose photograph in his hideaway, unfortunately for our view of him, gave him
an astonishing resemblance to the noble, long suffering Job.

Not the best image to present to us of a man the military described as a coward
in a rat hole.

Well for two hours I listened on Sunday morning to, it seemed, a hundred
commentators - senators, congressmen, congresswomen, boring generals, pompous
United Nations delegates - all of whom were there to tell us what it all means.

All in fact claiming a gift, not given to man or woman: the gift of prophesy.

I began to nod after I'd heard a score of repetitions, like a drum beat, of two
favourite phrases: "the international community" - whatever that is - and an
even more illusory body known as "the Iraqi people".

I've said before and I expect to say it many times that there is no such thing
and there are the defiant Kurds who want to be no part of the Iraqi people and
have lost hundreds of thousands of lives in a century in saying so.

I believe that if Churchill were president or prime minister of the coalition -
not a bad idea - he'd say, as he said on similar thrilling occasions - do not
be too jubilant, this is not the beginning of the end, it may not even be the
end of the beginning.

So on to, to me, the never-failing magic, the most good-natured of all
festivals: Christmas.

I mentioned I think two years ago how in the American South West the great
influxes of immigrants - as many as poured into the North East a hundred years
ago - had brought into the American Christmas a whole new variety of symbols -
the Christmas tree being down there either a cactus or a pepper tree, the
decorations green and yellow and black, and a whole variety of virgin Marys
seen as senoritas.

The last Christmas that President Bush presided over as Governor Bush at the
governor's mansion in Texas was such an exotic event that a northerner might
wonder what was being celebrated.

He would soon guess however from the posting of crosses and crucifixes
everywhere - inside houses and churches of course but often also stuck up
boldly outdoors.

Little fear there of people bringing a First Amendment suit against the display
of a religious symbol, simply because the vast majority of the new flood of
immigrants from the South - from Colombia, Mexico, Puerto Rico - are Latinos
and overwhelming Catholic.

We have recently, here in New York, had two separate weeks, notable for the
festivals of Rosh Hashanah and Ramadan.

What occurred to me during these observances was that in the religions we know
best, that are close to us in this country, each one has a period of a year, a
month, a week, even with Yom Kippur a single day, which is meant to be a time
of meditation about oneself, to say frankly with former Mayor Koch, "How am I
doing?"

I must say, speaking as an outsider I've always thought that in the
confessional the Catholics have a custom, you might say a discipline, that most
of us could use - to look yourself over periodically, admit how you've behaved
and might have done better.

But what penitent period does the unbeliever, the agnostic, the atheist have?

I believe I know - the Christmas Carol. Dickens's fairy tale is thought of by
believers and non-believers alike as a charming bit of moonshine about an old,
flinty, mean man who changed his character overnight - something we've only
seen in life in a rash of Hollywood movies of the 1930s and 40s.

However, to see the Christmas Carol as something else, as an escape into one of
the unsolved riddles of the human spirit, I think it helps to know how it was
conceived.

It did not come about in a light-hearted Christmas party spirit. it was borne
in a sweat of its author's despair and helplessness.

In 1843 Dickens was 31 and already the most famous novelist in England.

In the spring and the summer of that year he was preparing a novel on the new
factory slums, a grim novelty throughout the north of England where the
Industrial Revolution had been borne and was lustily thriving.

He went off on a personal tour of the manufacturing cities.

Day after day he noticed anew, what a famous visitor - the American author
Ralph Waldo Emerson - had been shocked by.

"In the manufacturing towns the coal smoke and the fine soot darken the day,
give white sheep the colour of black sheep, discolour the human saliva,
contaminate the air, poison many plants and corrode the monuments and
buildings."

I have to say all this was still true during my own boyhood in Manchester -
adding, I should say, a thin veil of slippery mud that covered the pavements
most of the winter.

It was to Dickens a new and far-ranging face of squalor but he was depressed by
the wretchedness, the dirt and open immorality he saw among the inhabitants of
these long rows of new, cramped brick houses.

And one evening in November he retreated to the comparative heaven of his hotel
in Manchester and wrote to his closest friend: "God forgive us for the
prosperity that is the fruit of our new machines and factories." Dickens add to
his lament to his friend: "I am going to throw myself on the feeling of the
people with a short story. it will attempt to exploit the notion that Christmas
is a merry time but entails duties and obligations, especially to the poor."

In what William Makepeace Thackeray, his friend and rival novelist, called "a
flash of genius", Dickens by conceiving the idea of a resurrected, decent
Scrooge presented Christmas also as a special festival of redemption, a secular
version available to believers and non-believers, a time for everybody to take
stock and lead a better life.

This may sound heavy stuff to readers who've always thought of the Carol as a
lightweight, jolly, sentimental thriller.

Thackeray saw in the light of the Carol "literary criticism is a secondary
thing". the Carol "is," he wrote, "a sublime thing beyond criticism".

The book was an instant and immense success.

New printings went ahead at the rate of two or three in the first few weeks, so
you might say that Dickens's spiritual purge earned him a material fortune. Far
from it.

Throughout the run of his fame Dickens was badgered by literary pirates. The
copyright laws were very ragged and the transatlantic protection of his work
practically non-existent.

A couple of agile pirates printed in very large numbers their own cheap
edition. Dickens sued them, whereupon the couple declared bankruptcy.

So even as Dickens was awarded £1500 damages - about £125,000 today - he
received from the pirates nothing, but from the judge a bill for £700 court
fees.

There's one other thing I ought to say - rarely, very, very rarely, a classic
story is better in the motion picture version. it's true of the Christmas
Carol.

I suppose I've seen every motion picture Scrooge since Rupert Julian (1916) to
Finney, Alistair Sim and beyond.

almost without exception Scrooge is a paltering old crone or a croaking whiner,
a suitable lead for a bad musical.

But in 1984 William Storke and Clive Donner put out a television version with
the late George C Scott as the star.

The toy London emerged as the real Shrewsbury. the script was purged of Dickens
moralising. the tone, the style of production was exactly right.

But Scott was far and away the best, the most believable Scrooge there has ever
been: no paltering, no whining, a fine, well set-up banker, handsome in a
portly way, firm, patient, with a fine line in low key sarcasm.

And in the subsequent replay of his life: a vital, sad, complex human being.

Before he died George C Scott gave an engaging, vibrant interview. He was in
private life an engaging, vibrant man and often a violent man.

Nature built him to play the volcanic General Patton.

But the Carol, he confessed, had done something to him. He saw in it the vision
of a different man.

So it was a surprising and happy thing to hear him say that his favourite role
was Ebenezer Scrooge.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.