Changing Tastes: 25 Years of Social Taboos - 29 June 2001

Since President Bush came back across the Atlantic and failed to impress
practically any European, including Mr Putin, with his stand on a whole range
of issues his popularity rating here has dropped to 50%, which is the lowest
mark for any president at any time, however troubled, in the past five years.

Last Wednesday the Federal Reserve cut basic interest rates by a teeny weeny
quarter of one per cent, which nevertheless was the sixth cut in a year.

And whereas the first two provoked a cheerful leap in stock prices the later
ones produced a universal yawn.

Wednesday's bold effort did not even show a reaction as gymnastic as a yawn.
The main industrial index simply slumped a little more and many companies said
that while the outlook for the next quarter had looked grey at best it was now
tinged with a black cloud or two.

So seeking solace, surcease or maybe just escape from our woes I found myself,
as the French say, scanning a high bookshelf that I rarely touch to see if some
forgotten book suggested a topic that might cheer us up.

And my eye fell, as we say, on a fat red leather volume much frayed at the
edges bearing on the spine a single word inscribed in faded gold. It said:
Shakespeare. It was my father's copy.

Must have been very popular in its time - well printed, all the plays, no notes
but scores of photographs of the leading actors and actresses of the day, which
was the heyday of Sir Henry Irving and Ellen Terry (my father's two favourites)
and rafts of other players whose names even are forgotten except by old,
eccentric theatre historians.

The book was published just after the turn of the 20th Century. I flipped
through many pages admiring the extraordinary quality of the hand-coloured
photographs - this was 30, 40 years before colour photography - but remarking
most on the looks and appearance of the famous actresses, mostly British but
quite often American.

First off, most of them today would weigh in at about 160lbs. Next thing, they
had firm, strong features, most with aquiline noses, and when they weren't
playing Lady Macbeth in a nightgown they had waists bound in at say 24ins,
busts overflowing at 44 maybe.

The publishers had plainly chosen beauty before acting fame and these were the
reigning beauties of the day. Each an example of what my father called "a fine
figure of a woman".

I remember thinking, as a boy, how - by contrast - how handsome the men were.
They all had large, firm features, they were athletic, they had prominent
noses, square chins - men not from the same planet as Tom Cruise and Hugh
Grant, who, even today, look to me like actors in a high school play.

So there it is, the fact which the more you face the less you can deny, that
the standard, the type, of what one generation thinks is handsome or beautiful
changes more than you in your youth could guess.

So lately I thought I'd make a little private test by inviting two or three
young women to see a film, a famous film, with Greta Garbo - who everybody in
the 1930s thought the most beautiful woman alive. Show it and then just wait
and see what their ideas were about the movie, about Garbo - her acting and so
forth.

I said young people and make them young by your definition. Enough to say that
none of these three was alive when the film was made in 1935. It was Camille -
possibly the oldest chestnut of a melodrama in the European theatre, with or
without music, the Lady of The Camelias, La Traviata (the fallen woman) in
Verdi's opera.

Simply and lugubriously the courtesan who repents of her wicked ways when she
falls in love with an upright, decent man. Alas too late, too late - she is
dying of tuberculosis.

When this movie version came out in the mid-30s it was universally praised as
one of Garbo's tragic masterpieces.

So when our private showing was over and I looked at my three youngsters the
awkwardness of the silence, which was almost a noise in itself, and then
somebody chuckled.

The verdict was that Garbo was mighty statuesque - yes, beautiful you could say
in an unmodern way - but any thoughts about her looks were overwhelmed by the
absurdity of her part.

I gathered from the following talk that the, to me, very familiar character of
a femme fatale (a fatal woman), the temptress - Mata Hari (Garbo played that
one too) - a constant standby character in my time was now so unreal, so
unfamiliar, either in life or on the screen that when Garbo coughed and
prepared to die, my irreverent trio of guests giggled, actually repeating the
response of the first audience at the opening performance of Verdi's La
Traviata.

That Italian audience showered the theatre, not with applause but with loud
laughter, because to them the sight of a very large, probably boundingly
healthy Violetta preparing to die of consumption, was comic.

To my guests Garbo was slim enough but the part itself, the repentant courtesan
giving the required cough to indicate oncoming consumption, was just as funny.

The memory of that failed test convinced me that standards of beauty change
drastically and as with many other inexplicable changes it's no use old folks
going on as they do that things aren't what they used to be and they've gone to
pot.

Having reached this noble conclusion I was ready to move back and talk about -
I don't know - Mr Bush and Mr Putin, which sounds like an old music hall turn
but is alas far from anything so genial and harmful.

I turned to my newspaper and I found a far more serious issue than changing
taste but a piece about a change over 25 years in social taboos.

It was an obituary of Carroll O'Connor. The name may not mean much to listeners
outside America, it's not however about the late Mr O'Connor himself I wish to
talk but the part he played in a television series that ran here for years and
years as I believe it did in Britain.

The series was known here as All in the Family and was an American adaptation
of the British series Till Death Us Do Part.

The main character - Alf Garnett was it not in Britain? - was Archie Bunker
here. Very much the boss of his working class family, his simpering, half dotty
wife, rebellious daughter and frowning, cowering son-in-law whom Archie called
a pinko Polack.

Archie, Alf himself, the strutting, absurd, semi-literate bigot with his
suspicion of every type that wasn't what he called "true American" - which
meant either of English or Irish heritage. Suspicious of Jews, blacks, fearful
of Latinos, making occasional sly, belittling remarks about homosexuals.

The main thing about Archie was that he was pompous and funny, absurd but
acceptable, even loveable. In the subsequent brief television biographies of Mr
O'Connor they showed short clips of typical scenes - always examples of his
dependable bigotry.

But you may be sure that the accompanying commentary was quick to stress that
while the audiences of the time - both conservative and liberals alike -
enjoyed the show it could not possibly be put on today. A much more sensitive
time we gathered.

And it's quite true. Years and years ago, in the late 40s, one of these talks
was devoted entirely to a change that had been enforced on the theatre - the
vaudeville theatre - and on popular songs which I took to be illiberal and
lamentable.

The standard funny characters of the old burlesque houses had been told to
vanish. Jewish comedians, German comedians, Irish comedians - each kidding the
others' quirks and prejudices.

I said I thought this a healthy thing. But as the immigrant moved into the
middle class, the mainstream, he didn't like his peculiarities being pointed
out as he thrashed in the shallows.

Fair enough. But it seemed a pity that my daughter's school wouldn't let a
Jewish girl play Shylock. An absurdity that the lyrics of the Basin Street
Blues no longer sang about "the street where the dark and the white folks meet"
but had to be "where all the elite meet".

But now, not only are the different types and their different humours banned
from plays, movies, television but any mention in life of them as separate or
remarkable human beings.

And no wonder. One of the many fascinating discoveries of the recent census is
that the all-American family - the regulation film, TV soap, TV commercial
American family of white mother and father and two adorable children - is no
longer the norm. Only one family in four conforms. That's a shocker.

And so is the news that a new president of the famous Ivy League College, Brown
University, has been appointed. She is black. The daughter of a sharecropper,
the granddaughter of a slave.

All the old blues lyrics, all the ethnic comics, all the national jokes were
acceptable just so long as the white, the Anglo Saxon Protestant, was on top
and gracious enough to accept them. But he's no longer boss man but a suspect
native.

Fifty years from now, an old Southern friend of mine suggested, blacks may be
privately chuckling over the jokes that secretly circulated through southern
whites in the 1950s, shortly after the Supreme Court ruling that ended the
separation of blacks and whites.

Then whites, whose long reign was about to be over, told with typical wryness
such a tale as that of two black men coming into their club, ordering a
cocktail at the bar and the white bartender shaking the ingredients vigorously.

And one black club man says to the other: "You've got to give them one thing -
they got rhythm."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP