The "Loss of Eden" - 28 September 2001

I dare to quote an old paragraph of mine simply because it describes Long
Island as concisely as I'm able to.

Long Island, then, may fairly be seen as a fish nosing into the North Atlantic
mainland at Manhattan - an island itself and one of the five boroughs of New
York City.

At the tail end of Long Island, a hundred miles east into the Atlantic, there
are two fins, widely separated, which enclose the large Peconic Bay.

The north fin, called the North Fork, is inhabited by the survivors of colonial
settlers from Suffolk county in England and by the descendants of early 20th
Century immigrant Poles who are unpretentious, hardworking, pure and good.

The south fin, called the Southshore, is inhabited by the rich, the bad and the
beautiful - and, since the Second World War especially, by affluent stock
manipulators, television producers, interior decorators, actresses and their
parasitical ten percenters.

You can gather the shudder that goes through us North Forkers when a friend, a
stranger to these parts, asks: "And how are things in East Hampton?"

It's not unlike the stab or wince that I, a born Lancastrian, feels when
anybody says something like: "Oh he's an Englishman, I think, like you, he's a
Yorkshireman."

After 11 days and nights watching and hearing the intolerable sorrows of 11
September I manage with much relief to get out to the end of the island to join
my spouse, nurse, best friend.

And coming along the last stretch of the narrow peninsular that falls into the
bay, as I've done a thousand times, I looked hard - for the first time in years
- I looked hard to my right for the lawn or plot of land on which, during the
second war, stood a small summerhouse owned by one Dr Moore.

His cottage is not there anymore, which I've often thought is a blessing to all
of us who enjoy the quietness and the lapping water of the North Fork. For if
it were still there we'd have been inundated for the past half century or so
with a flood tide of tourists.

Dr Moore's cottage was rented every summer, from about 1937 on, by a most -
possibly the most - distinguished exile from the Hitler persecution.

He was Albert Einstein and on 2 August 1939, a month only before Hitler invaded
Poland, Dr Einstein was persuaded by two obscure Hungarian physicists - exiled
Jews also - was persuaded about the lethal properties of an element nobody had
ever heard of and to which Einstein himself had given little thought - uranium
235.

It's been so long - 62 years - and I've been struck in the past year or two by
how many people have never heard of this letter which historically lit the fuse
of the atomic bomb that I think it would be useful, at the start of what could
well or ill be a new age, to read it over.

I don't know where the original letter has got to but wherever it is it would
today bring at auction I suppose as much as the original Declaration of
Independence.

So, you get the scene - by the waters of Peconic, on the porch of Dr Moore's
cottage, sit three men: Dr Einstein, one Leo Szilard and Eugene Wigner. The two
visitors, who found Einstein's retreat only after two failed trips down the
island on hideous hot days, they read over a letter that they've composed and
decide that Einstein alone should sign it and send it to nobody but the
president of the United States.

None of them knew very well the proper forms of address but came up finally
with this: In the top right hand corner: Nassau Point, Peconic, Long Island,
August 2nd, 1939

FD Roosevelt,

President of the United States,

White House,

Washington DC

Sir,

Some recent work of E Fermi and L Szilard which has been communicated to me in
manuscript leads to me expect that the element uranium may be turned into a new
and important source of energy in the immediate future. ... I believe,
therefore, that it is my duty to bring to your attention the following facts
and recommendations:

In the course of the last four months it has been made probable - through the
work of Joliot in France as well as Fermi and Szilard in America - that it may
become possible to set up a nuclear chain reaction in a large mass of uranium,
by which vast amounts of power and large quantities of new radium-like elements
would be generated ... by which, my dear President, it might be possible to
unleash an immense destructive force.

Sincerely,

A Einstein

Through a banker, who knew another banker, who had an acquaintanceship with the
president, the letter got to Roosevelt two months later, by which time the war
was on.

Roosevelt found the letter interesting, though mysterious, I don't know how
many army and navy high-ups, British scientists, all kinds of experts ever saw
or heard of the letter but not until two years later, a month or two before
Pearl Habour, did the president look at it again and form a committee of the
vice-president, the secretary of war, the chairman of the chiefs of staff and
two American scientists, to look into it.

They thought it worth a small exploratory study and the president set aside
some funds that didn't need the approval of Congress, called executive funds -
$300. (Ultimately $2bn produced the Judgement Day roar and the mushroom cloud
of Alamogordo in the New Mexico desert, close by the Trinity Mountains.)

As I say this I'm looking at my paperweight - a small glass cube into which is
embedded what looks like a broken piece of lead or black rock.

It too is a new element formed by that first nuclear trial blast at Alamogordo
in the Trinity Mountains. it is called trinitite. A constant reminder of the
day when somebody, quoting Milton, wrote: "It was the beginning of all our woe
and loss of Eden."

They're saying it again in many places this week after a sober but chilling
press conference by Attorney General Ashcroft, warning us of the real threat of
known terrorists and unknown terrorists to use the weapons they have already
manufactured for massive dispersal. Among them anthrax and cyanide.

Hence the government's action this week in grounding all crop dusters - those
innocent, floating little monoplanes that skim back and forth over a field of
needful crops.

And hence this week the decision to recognise the appalling prospect of trucks
carrying poisonous materials.

Already many of those huge trucks that clog our highways carry hazardous
materials necessary to industry, to research, even to our health. I stick on my
chest every morning a bit of dynamite - nitro-glycerine - which at a sufficient
intensity could blow me up, but the doctors have seen to it, thank god, to
modify the dose.

The FBI, the states police which means the separate police forces of the 50
states, and also city police have formed a committee representing these law
enforcement agencies and they're now facing the colossal job of how, without
totally crippling the flow of the goods we live by, how to monitor or screen
every truck and van on the roads of America to be sure its cargo is safe and
legitimate.

I doubt it can be done by any agency known to man.

In this country the railroads long ago ceased to be the main transporters of
freight, or goods. today 65% of every raw and developed material we need to
work by, to eat, to manufacture, to live by is carried by the truck drivers, by
the powerful Teamsters Union and by various independent trucking companies.

Yet, already passionate upholders of civil rights are beginning to whine about
violations of their rights, implicit or made plain by the Department of
Justice, the FBI and of course the police.

Mr Ashcroft, as I talk, is going before Congress to see if it is constitutional
of him to ask if the legal wiretapping of regulation telephones may be extended
to cellphones.

This of course has already been done by Western countries that don't have an
18th Century written constitution to tell them how to behave in every
contingency of life that might upset the freedom of an individual to go where
he pleases and do what he wants.

There are going to be some nasty and tedious collisions between the necessities
of war - called maximum security - and the restrictions of the Constitution,
written in a previous age when the enemy was visible and far from home.

As for the injunction of St Rudolph Giuliani which has been urged on us many
times now by the president, by the harried attorney general and by many others
to adjust to the new age: The report from religious leaders is mixed.

The Muslims live in fear, many going back home but the vast majority, brave
enough to stay and hope for the best of "the American way".

The sale of bibles has soared to best-selling proportions. The Jews, on the eve
of Yom Kippur, trumpeted an affirmation of hope.

A congregation of congregationalists in the rural state of Vermont, direct
descendants of those Puritans who came here to purify the corrupt Church of
England, are disturbed.

"Fragile" is the word used by their minister, to whom I am close.

Last Sunday she preached a short sharp sermon. She told them to buck up and
cease the whining.

"For 10, 20 years," she said, "you've lived in a dream world of material
prosperity. you've lived in the Garden of Eden.

"well, you've been expelled and you've got to get used to it."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP