The Supreme Court - 4 May 2001

I don't remember a time before now when a Supreme Court decision in an
apparently trivial case has prompted such a swift popular outcry.

Last week, a young mother appealed to the Supreme Court as a victim of what the
Constitution prohibits: Unreasonable search and seizure.

She was driving home with her two small children, each of them peering out for
a toy they'd lost. They were stopped by an angry cop for not wearing their seat
belts.

The mother was handcuffed and thrown in jail for several hours and made to pay
a penalty six times the usual fine. The Supreme Court ruled against her by five
to four.

Which, not so strangely, as you shall see, takes me back to the memory of a
trip across America on which I caught up with the Soviet leader of the time - a
man who I believe in our time was the most belligerent, most threatening of the
Communist leaders, if by threatening we mean a man with a fierce ambition to
destroy the democratic world and the one most likely to do it. Indeed he came
closer than anyone to a first strike.

I'm talking about the incomparable, the insufferable Nikita Khrushchev. And I'm
suddenly humbled, intimidated anyway, by the discovery that many listeners may
have only the fuzziest picture of him or any memories of his ever-looming
presence in our lives.

So older listeners must forgive if I begin with a sketch of my man, such as you
might pick up from an almanac or a handy cyclopedia.

Nikita Khrushchev was a coal miner's son who dropped out of high school to
become a miner himself.

He fought with the Red Army in the Revolution and he started climbing high into
the Bolshevik (later called the Communist) Party. Became a close friend of the
Mayor of Moscow, one Bulganin, and helped him build the city's famous
underground (the tube, not the secret police - that had been there for a couple
of hundred years).

When Stalin died in '53 Khrushchev contrived to install his pal Bulganin as
general secretary, premier, head man. But perhaps because it was Khrushchev who
chiefly managed to suppress the Polish bid for independence and the Hungarian
uprising that he was destined to become the premier himself - a destiny that
was self-anointed when he took over from Bulganin in 1958.

From the beginning of his rule Khrushchev abused the United States as a
fascist, imperialist beast.

And to try and melt the Cold War by a dramatic gesture President Eisenhower,
who was then in his second term, invited Khrushchev not only to visit the
United States but to be taken on a tour of it with Henry Cabot Lodge, the
American ambassador to the United Nations, as host.

From Ambassador Lodge, a handsome New England Brahmin and former senator,
several very salty memories were, shall I say, available. And one I'll never
forget is the starting point of this talk.

It was on a special train going up along the beautiful coastline, the corniche,
from Los Angeles to San Francisco that Mr Lodge and Mr Khrushchev got into a
discussion - lively but never argumentative. It was difficult to argue with the
burly, balding, fiery little Khrushchev because he cut short debate with a flat
denunciation of your side and then changed the subject.

At some point Mr Khrushchev declared that after all there was little difference
between the Soviet and the American systems of choosing a leader. Well the
startled Mr Lodge wondered how so.

"Well," said Mr Khrushchev, "we choose one man, you choose one from two." A
nice jokey point.

But Mr Lodge went on to explain the long, rough democratic road, the year-long
party jostling, the primaries, the supremely democratic institution of the
conventions and on and on till you reached the choice between those two.
Khrushchev was unshaken. Then he remarked: "Your Congress makes your laws and
who overturns them? Your Supreme Court."

I don't know if Mr Lodge was up to this but laughing effusively he said
something like "Ah yes, but there are nine of them."

Point taken you'd think. Not at all.

Mr Khrushchev: "Nine old men to begin with but then they vote and sometimes
wind up with five to four to maintain a law or overthrow it. So in the end your
country is ruled by one judge, one American, not even elected. With us the
general secretary puts everything up to the central committee."

Well with little time and not much deeper thinking this analogy could be shown
to be preposterous. Still Krushchev's joke revealed a remarkable flash of
insight into an element, a weakness if you like, of the Supreme Court, if not
of the Constitution that created it.

It's an insight that's becoming uncomfortably clear to very many Americans
who'd always retained a respect bordering on reverence for the court, until the
outcome of the court's entanglement with the statutes of Florida and the
decision, which by a single vote of the nine judges, threw the election to
Governor Bush.

Let's start by reminding ourselves that a majority decision by the Supreme
Court, more than any other institution, can shape the laws of the land for
generations. Not by ever making or suggesting law but by the court's power to
invalidate both state and federal laws.

Now what is Mr Khrushchev's wily complaint of government by one human being? It
is about five-to-four decisions.

I should remark that in the 200 years of the court's existence the number of
justices has gone from six to seven to 10. Once for all, in 1869, it was fixed
at nine - a chief justice and eight associates.

And since then there's been a low rumble of complaint, especially from states
which lost their appeal, that matters affecting every American could be decided
by a majority of one among the nine.

Now, for many years this protest was muted because it was found that in a
century and a half, since 1789, the court had adjudicated 26,000 public laws
but only 11 acts of Congress had been found unconstitutional by a five-to-four
majority.

I haven't been through the recent tally but I'm pretty sure they've been 11
five-to-four decisions in the past year or two. They have certainly increased
alarmingly with the present court and the decision in the arrested mother case
was a startler.

In the presidential election fiasco it was seen very late in the day that the
national decision lay in the hands of one justice, of one woman: Justice Sandra
Day O'Connor.

Now why should it have fallen to this 70-year-old lawyer from Texas, the first
woman ever to be appointed to the court, who started as a county attorney,
moved up and up to being a trial judge and then went to the court of appeals?
She was chosen by President Reagan as a sound, conservative Republican who yet
had a fair sense of justice.

This may be a good time to say that every president of either party always says
he will appoint justices to the court who are strict constructionists - that
is, will interpret the Constitution literally without political bias or any
attempt to reshape the law. And every president then appoints judges who share
his political beliefs.

Franklin Roosevelt got so frustrated by the court's knocking down so many of
his New Deal laws that he put up a serious proposal, which now seems
inconceivable, to retire the old conservatives and appoint a pack of new,
liberal justices. The court shot that one down too.

But so far as I know there's been only one outstandingly unrepentant
constructionist. He was the late Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes.

Before helping, with his vote, to send a radical politician to jail in
accordance with a law which Holmes himself thought was stupid and outdated, he
wrote: "Forget justice, our business is to enforce the existing law and if it
is a bad law let the Congress make a better one."

Unendingly, year after year, administration after administration, this conflict
grinds on, the opposition party ceaselessly and correctly accusing the party in
the White House of appointing political judges.

When President Reagan appointed Mrs O'Connor there was no audible Democratic
outcry. From her record on the appeals court she was a moderate who could be
counted on to vote most of the time with the conservatives.

But, as so often happens even to sophisticated presidents who should know their
history, even a moderate can turn immoderate.

President Eisenhower made the very conservative governor of California chief
Justice. But Chief Justice Warren turned into a comparatively flaming liberal
and led the historic majority decision in 1954 to render unconstitutional the
separation of blacks and whites.

"The worst damn fool mistake I ever made," Eisenhower moaned in his old age.

In the arrested mother case Mrs O'Connor voted for the woman against the
majority.

Now Mrs O'Connor has made no sharp left turn, performed no theatrics. She's a
patient quiet pertinacious lawyer, notable for wanting to find exact legal
grounds for her decisions.

She's surprised us from time to time by switching and voting with the liberal
four, thus disappointing the Christian right, for instance, by upholding the
abortion law.

She became known to the court reporters as the switch vote. Little did anybody
guess, as the Florida voting mess got messier, that the election would go to
the Supreme Court. It had never happened before. The Constitution makes a
state's power to select its electors absolute.

After a quiet but seething private debate in which the liberal justices
demanded a recount of those two counties, and the conservatives pointed to the
calendar and the Constitution's time limit on a count, the court went into a
sort of restrained panic.

Mrs O'Connor thought things over, decided for once not to switch and voted 'no
more counting' - thus making Mr Khrushchev's monstrously absurd point that the
president of the United States need not be elected by the people but might be
selected by one American, one justice.

It may have been feminism's finest hour but it has left more Americans than the
defeated Democrats baffled and uncertain for the first time in their lives of
the function, indeed of the integrity, of the court.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP