Déjà Vu All Over Again - 13 April 2001

There's an old, retired baseball player - a small, bow-legged, cheerful droll -
who's become a beloved American folk figure, if not hero, not for his prowess
as a player, not for being in the baseball hall of fame - which he is.

He was the Yankees' catcher in their glory days and come to think of it I can't
think of another athletic hero whose habitual stance is squatting on his heels
with two gloved hands pushed up in front of his chest. Somehow an heroic wicket
keeper doesn't seem right either.

But this bent-over and, when not bent-over, waddling figure is nationally loved
because of his way with the language and his coining of some of the most
ludicrous, true simplicities that - one time or another - are on every tongue.

His name is Yogi Berra and though he's long retired and is 75 he's not
forgotten. Because every now and then there's a new Yogi-ism.

His autobiography carries the title of one of his earliest wise sayings: "It
ain't over till it's over". A later variation was: "It ain't over till the fat
lady sings."

About a restaurant which was a favourite of baseball players he said: "The
place is packed. Nobody goes there any more."

I suppose the one that every schoolchild knows is the one that contains just
about the only French phrase that every schoolchild knows - déjà vu - meaning
I've seen it before. About the reoccurrence of some familiar plot or happening
Yogi said: "It's déjà vu all over again."

And that's what I groaned to myself a day or two after the American spy plane
crash landed on that Chinese island.

What made me say: "Oh dear it's déjà vu all over again" was the recollection of
the times the United States has had to respond to a similar Soviet incident,
indeed not even to an incident.

All through the five years or so when I daily covered the United Nations it
didn't take an accident or the suspicion of a spy plane for the tireless and
wearisome chief Soviet delegate - one Mr Gromyko - to declare that the United
States, alone, was wholly in the wrong and that he would walk out of the
Security Council, which he did, and not return until the United States had made
a formal apology.

There was never any need for one because the United Nations laid it down in its
charter that to take any military action against an aggressor all five of the
big nations in the Security Council must agree. And from the start the chances
of the United States, the United Kingdom, China and France agreeing with the
Soviet Union on anything like defining an aggressor or acting against one were
remote.

And since the bold Article 43 of the UN Charter asking every member nation to
offer "armed forces on demand", since that article was never ratified, never
obeyed, in other words there was never a United Nations army that could
overpower any aggressor.

Well let's say simply that since 1945 there have been 240 wars to mock the
sentence which gave the reason for the founding of the United Nations: In order
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.

So, through the decades of the Cold War, from the day that the Soviet Union had
the bomb, and the world had only two superpowers, the constant problem of
American foreign policy has been how to contain the power of the Soviet Union
and its ambitions - first to get to the Persian Gulf and dominate the oil
fields on which Europe and the United States depended, to help the Germans
prevent their domination by the Soviet Union and all the time to match or
surpass the Soviets' nuclear power.

There never will be any agreement among Americans or I suppose among her
European allies about which kind of diplomacy has been most successful if any.
The approach of Mr John Foster Dulles (for Eisenhower) - which was rigid
opposition to all Soviet moves and an accompanying lamentation for their
godless ways.

Or Kennedy's highly idealistic, rhetorical challenges to Soviet power at a time
when he knew that America had the nuclear edge.

Or Henry Kissinger's pragmatic conservative approach based on staying ever wary
about Soviet moves but acting in the belief that in spite of the unending
public battle between Communism and the democratic world we had to live with
the other superpower.

Now, in 1960 President Eisenhower was faced by the Soviets with exactly the
nasty problem with which the Chinese confronted President Bush.

Mr Khrushchev - the most belligerent of modern Soviet leaders - was about to
meet President Eisenhower at a summit conference in Paris. All the
preliminaries had been taken care of - the two delegations at the ready, 600
media people gathering - when an American spy plane was brought down in Russia
by a Soviet ground to air missile.

Mr Khrushchev stormed before the world press and accused President Eisenhower
of using electronic spying over the Soviet Union.

The President said: "Rubbish, we never send reconnaissance planes over Russian
territory."

He thought they'd never be spotted at 60,000 feet. And the US held to this line
until it was plain that the Soviets had got the plane and thoroughly examined
its electronic spying equipment. They also had the pilot and kept him for two
years.

So finally President Eisenhower stuttered: "Well, you do it too." Which was
true but was no way to placate the Russians or improve relations.

Mr Khrushchev promptly cancelled the summit meeting and the president went home
an angry and a baffled leader - and a humiliated one. That is what a Communist
leader requires of an adversary.

The Chinese Communists however go further. They treat the adversary the way
Russia used to treat dissidents before the Second World War, which was to bring
the chosen villain or villains to trial - the famous journalist, the unfrocked
politician, whoever - bring him to a public trial where it was not enough for
him to say he'd done wrong, even when he was guiltless, he must make an
elaborate confession of treacherous acts - most of them invented and dictated
to the defendants.

During the years of those Russian show trials Moscow was host to several young
Asian radicals who'd come to learn the technique and the disciplines of
Communist leadership.

Name the first Communist leaders of China, North Korea, Vietnam and you have
the names of those young visiting pupils who were taught that the debasing, the
public humiliation of an adversary, was essential to the stability of the
regime because it renewed or fortified the belief of ordinary people in
Communism itself.

The Communists from Lenin to Castro call this training re-education or thought
reform. Little Elian Gonzalez - remember the Florida waif - is being
re-educated in Havana at this moment.

We call it brain washing. We're probably both taking liberties with the
language.

But with the Chinese there is another deeper element, native to them alone. It
is one tradition preached by Confucius, which is that the ruler of the nation
is declared and known to be morally superior to any adversary and in any
contest - of war or peace - the essential thing to do is to establish before
the people that an adversary is morally inferior.

The traditional way of doing this is to ask him to "confess" in Russian, but in
Chinese the word is "apologise" and it has all the force for shame and
humiliation of a true confession of wickedness.

To the Bush administration the big stumbling block was this word, which of
course has a much, much weaker meaning in English. It took more than a week for
these elementary facts of Chinese behaviour and their normal diplomatic
language, first to get through to the Bush administration and then to be
reported to the American people. And for us to learn the Chinese basic truth -
to be a good Confucian - is at all times to conform to the views of the
patriarchal father and then to the emperor.

Add to this deep-seated religious belief the evergreen memory of the shameless
way the Western nations in the 19th, 20th Century ravaged a weak China, simply
occupied Hong Kong and set up treaty ports and used the vast country as a quasi
colony. It will go far to explain the sort of seems-to-be habitual paranoia of
the Chinese.

Well this time the sticking point was reached when the administration decided
that in our language, even our comparatively genteel meaning of apologising was
too far to go. It would imply that the spying mission - the whole practice -
was wrong, illegal and would not be repeated, which would have been a terrible
precedent to set.

Like every other country except China the United States maintained there was
nothing to apologise for, that it was working in international waters. The
Chinese don't recognise the 12-mile limit.

As for apologising, in the Chinese sense of admitting that the Chinese leaders
are morally the superiors of President Bush and his men, Washington's problem
was to find a formula of regret that the United States could decently express
and yet one that satisfied the Chinese people in believing that the United
States had indeed, as Confucius requires, been made to bow low.

And apparently the phrase "very, very sorry" was enough. Once for the loss of
the Chinese pilot, once for the crashing crew, not to have asked for landing
permission. The word came, by the way, you notice, not from the president but
from the American ambassador.

What caused the greatly influential Chinese army leaders to back off into such
a genteel compromise we may never know but I think there can be little doubt
that their president must have warned the belligerents that three issues remain
and matter more than the spy plane hassle:

- The need to be accepted in the World Trade Organisation

- the desire to get the 2008 Olympic Games

- most of all somehow to stop or hinder the American sale of those top
sophisticated weapons to Taiwan.

"Don't think," said a Chinese foreign office official, "this is the end of the
affair."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP