Some Colourful Legends are Based in Fact - 15 August 2003

All great men, and especially inventors, sooner or later get legends attached
to them which usually prove the more false the oftener they're retold and
sentimentalised.

I had in the mail, a week ago, a heartbreaking story sent to me by a kind
stranger who felt I might never have heard it. I hadn't.

But I sent it on to a friend who spent part of his time, for many years,
examining the hundreds of legends that have accumulated around this famous man.

Briefly the letter told about "a noble lord" out for a country stroll one day
and saw his little son floundering in a bog and about to drown.

He was saved by a poor farmer and thereupon the noble lord, after learning that
the farmer had a son of about the same age - a tot of five - the noble lord
swore he would pay to give the farmer's boy the same education as his own
rescued son.

The name of the sinking son was Winston Spencer Churchill. And the poor farmer?
Fleming.

And, lo, the generous offer was accepted. And the studious farm boy went on to
become the very Alexander Fleming who discovered penicillin, which - here's the
marvellous clincher - which subsequently saved Mr Churchill's life one time
when, in remote Tunis, he was far gone with pneumonia and, his doctor feared,
close to death.

This is a compact and moving tale and absolutely comically false.

My friend, the expert in mythical Churchilliana, tells me that the story first
appeared in print in the late 1940s and has ever since been festooned and
filigreed in various ways.

One version has the farmer telephoning the noble lord at his mansion -
Blenheim, no less - to recount the dramatic and finally happy story.

I must say the chances of a poor farmer or a rich farmer's telephoning anybody
at that time are about one in a million, due to the collision of two awkward
facts.

Young Winston in 1879 was five. Only two years before - 3,000 miles away -
Alexander Graham Bell had demonstrated the very first test telephone and the
miraculous instrument was not available to poor farmers or rich farmers or even
noble lords of that day.

Nor, by the way, was penicillin available to Churchill in December 1943. He was
saved by a sulphur drug which was the magic drug of the time.

All the rest of the story, while heartbreaking, is false. But some lies are
true and the mention of Fleming reminds me sharply that the main legend about
him is true.

Looking over a specimen whose mouldiness would have made most researchers throw
it away, Dr Fleming paused long enough to work on the mould itself and find it
could stop or inhibit the growth of some bacteria and become universally known,
I suppose, as the first antibiotic.

And you'll recall how Monsieur Laennec, strolling one day in the Champs
Elysees, noticed two little boys playing an odd game. One put his ear to the
end of a fallen log and listened to the amplified tappings of the boy at the
other end.

Gave the doctor an idea. He went home, folded a thick sheet of paper into the
shape of a cone in order to listen to the chest of a very fat patient whose
bronchi or other wheezings were barely audible through the naked ear.

And behold: the stethoscope was born.

Well just as casually as eye surgery was made possible when Sigmund Freud
complained to a friend that after he took a nip of a new drug the tip of his
tongue was numb, so we can now add another homely idea, which gave birth to the
immense discovery of deoxyribonucleic acid, slangily known as DNA.

We should, I think, note and salute the passing of a lady who offered a simple
suggestion to her research boss - one Dr Hershey - which within 11 months had
inspired the famous discovery of the two molecular biologists Watson and Crick
and subsequently helped Dr Alfred Hershey to receive the Nobel Prize for
Medicine.

The name of this gifted - and incidentally rather beautiful - woman, who has
just died, is Martha Chase, a biology student from Ohio.

Just out of college she got a job with this Dr Hershey who came to be concerned
with the methods whereby viruses repeat or rather make replicas of themselves.

In an experiment described as "simple and elegant" they wanted to find out if
the DNA core of a bacterial virus and/or an associated protein was a carrier
for infection or as they technically say "carried the genetic information for
infection".

But how to separate the DNA from its protein colleague? At an historic but
unnoticed moment in time Miss Chase said "How about a kitchen blender?"

The humblest, you'd guess the crudest, of separators. It worked.

At the moment of infection the DNA alone entered the bacteria and so the DNA
was the only replicator of the virus.

Within less than a year Watson and Crick had their helix model.

So, dead at 75, Martha Chase will remain an important footnote in the history
of medicine and proof that some simple and colourful legends are based in fact.

One hundred years ago the California city of Los Angeles, a growing city of
50,000, was already popularly or slanderously known as Los Diablos - the city
of devils - because of its grisly reputation for one murder a day.

In time Los Angeles, as we know, became known for many other distinctions - a
centre of education, finance, of medical research, famous for its museums, its
contributions to modern architecture, not forgetting a neighbouring tiny sheep
town in the hills, to which only four years later arrived a little band of
immigrant glove salesmen from the east.

They remarked on the balmy, sunfilled days and quickly turned the place into
the world capital of a new form of entertainment - variously known as the bio,
the pictures, the cinema and the movies.

Within two decades Los Angeles had been overrun by an oil rush and a land rush
and the arrival of every kind of developer and exploiter and off beat religious
sect.

Together they gave Los Angeles its label as the capital of isms and only last
week an eminent European newspaper called it "a legendary gathering ground of
California's kooks and crazies".

But exactly one hundred years ago Los Angeles introduced a new wrinkle to
American government.

The city charter of Los Angeles in 1903 introduced something called the recall
- the institution of a special election to decide whether a public office
holder should be replaced - superseded - before his elected term had expired.

Los Angeles at the time was a rowdy and ungovernable town. Later inhabitants
would say - well you know, it was still after 50 years a Mexican city.

Anyway it was so unreliably governed that quite often an elected official
quickly turned out to be a crook or a runner for the mob.

The recall election was an idea whose need had come to several other western
settlements. And after Oregon made it a state-wide option, it was soon put into
the state constitutions of California, Arizona, Colorado, Nevada, Idaho.

Once however the recall provision was extended from city government into state
constitutions, thoughtful politicians in Washington, beginning with President
Taft, began to wonder if it couldn't become a quick way of bypassing the
elected representatives in the legislature - in fact overturning the democratic
system at the whim of enough political opponents with a grudge.

Californians, way back then as now, suddenly decided to think of the recall
idea as direct democracy.

In 1903 - and now in 2003 - the phrase has been recited to justify the recall
solution which prescribes a special election to throw the elected governor out
of office and then have another election at which the people will choose a new
governor from the huge field of candidates. Anybody, in fact, who can put up
$3,500 and 65 signatures.

What a gas, young Californians are crying. And as you've no doubt heard the
already registered candidates include the film star - the ex-Mr Universe -
comedians, a hard pornography publisher, a well-endowed stripper whose platform
is to tax breast implants.

Already the country is shaking with laughter or disdain at this new California
melodrama.

And now a young but veteran politician has stepped into Governor Davis's
picture to polish it up for a third term.

He - enlisting to retain the traditional system and forget direct democracy -
is a man named William Jefferson Clinton.

A national survey indicates he's long forgiven for his sins and much admired
still as a politician.

He should give weight to the view, not only of the Democratic Party in
California but to many more of its voters, that the recall movement is a
dangerous one, no laughing matter and could make Lincoln's "government by the
people" into a prescription for anarchy.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP