It's a Nine Ring Circus and You'll Never be Bored - 1 December 2000

When I arrived on these shores for a second time, no longer as a visiting
student but as a resident young, green, foreign correspondent - I went down to
Baltimore, Maryland at the invitation of a great man, immensely famous in his
day, but since his day was the 1920s and 30s he is quite forgotten.

His name is Henry L Mencken, better known as HL Mencken, son of an immigrant
German cigar merchant.

He was the most influential American journalist of the 20th Century and I had
the good fortune to know him because in the last of my two student years I'd
been studying the American language from the books as she was being spoken and
written about not least by Mr Mencken who was the living authority, having, at
the end, written four incomparable volumes on the history and range of the
English language as it had developed and changed in 300 years.

When I told Mencken that I was to be the second string to both the Washington
and New York correspondents of an august British paper I carried away two
remarks of his, one of which was a reassurance, the other a precious guideline
which gave me a new pride in the word reporter.

"First," said Mencken, "in your time here as a correspondent you'll be
appalled, delighted, outraged, charmed, disgusted but generally tickled pink at
the antics of this lively democracy.

"But I'll tell you something: It's a nine ring circus and you'll never be
bored."

Well in that he was right.

What I call his guideline was - I didn't realise it at the time - has remained
a guiding light to me throughout my career.

"To the extent," Mencken pronounced, "that you're a Conservative reporter or a
Liberal reporter, a Republican or Democratic reporter or a Socialist reporter,
you are no reporter at all."

Later I translated Mencken's warning into a simple credo: The test of a good
political reporter is, you don't know how he votes.

Well it's been a testing time indeed for a reporter because whereas in some
countries the electoral stalemate might have been solved by a body - a
commission, a judge, some disinterested person above the battle - so far no
such saint has put in an appearance here.

Suits filed in county courts and then before the Florida Supreme Court, more
suits - some now in a district court.

Every time you saw a new lawyer appear on television and noted the telltale
initial in brackets - D for Democrat, R for Republican - you knew almost
exactly what he was going to say.

Things were getting so tangled, so confusing and on the streets so bad tempered
that it was a relief to hear that an appeal had been made to the supreme court
- the United States Supreme Court.

But then thoughtful people began to ask: "What had the Supreme Court to do with
it?"

The Supreme Court exists to interpret the Constitution if it sees a case in
which the rights of an individual - not a state, not a corporation, not a
family, not an act of Congress as such - only if an individual has been denied
some Constitutional right.

Almost at once a very high-toned controversy got underway between
constitutional scholars wondering if the Supreme Court had any right to step in
here at all and other scholars and politicians reminding everybody that the
Constitution clearly lays down that disputed elections shall be decided by the
House of Representatives - each state having one vote.

"Ouch!" cries the most populous - California - knowing it gets only the same
representation as the least populous, Wyoming.

By that rule the House would likely vote in automatic party fashion. So you
know right away that the party prevailing in the House, which is now
Republicans 222, Democrats 211, would vote in - guess who.

The general sense of disorder and legal mystery is compounded by the hundreds
of young television reporters on 50-odd stations assigned to, as far as they're
concerned, the story of a lifetime.

They end most brief reports by the reminder that this situation is
unprecedented, unique in American history, heading to a Constitutional crisis
and so on.

Well it's not unprecedented, it's not unique, it's so astonishingly close to
the presidential election of 1876 that I believe, on hearing about it, you'll
find yourself echoing that great sage Yogi Berra, the philosopher-baseball
catcher: "It's déjà vu all over again."

Let me then this precedent unfold. 1876, the Civil War has been over for a
decade, the country is in, believe me, an unprecedented turmoil.

Whole regions of the South and one entire state, governed by the blacks, who
were then called negros, or carpet baggers from the North.

The railroad robber barons are stealing money from everybody who uses what
somebody called "their confounded damned useful convenience".

Politics in both parties is rife with strife and corroded by corruption.

The marvel is that when the 1876 election year came around each party produced
a candidate noted for - of all things - integrity and good manners.

The Republicans at their convention picked the governor of the Midwestern state
of Ohio, cradle state of many presidents.

The Democrats chose the governor of New York, Samuel Tilden, a likeable man but
also greatly recently admired by Republicans as well as his own party for
having broken the power, but not taken away the swag, of the infamous Boss
Tweed who controlled the Democratic Party.

Just over eight million people voted. Result? Tilden won by a popular majority
of a quarter of a million - handsome indeed.

So how about the electoral college? Ah, the electors - well the time has come
to try and say what was in the mind of the men who wrote the Constitution and
invented the electors.

I think I should say right away an unpleasant fact which is barely if ever
mentioned in American school books - the founders were not interested in
founding a democracy.

In 17 weeks of debate the word was mentioned only once by George Washington
quoting the scornful words of Governor Winthrop, the first governor of the
Massachusetts colony: "As a form of government, democracy among civil nations
is accounted the meanest and the worst."

"Leading," George Washington reminded the founding fathers, "to factions" by
which he meant political parties - another nasty innovation they did not mean
to institute.

A republic - that's what they were after. And the presidency would be elected
by influential men, which meant men of property.

And even though the vote was extended to many more men it would be well not to
have the president elected "by direct vote of the people" - of the demos - too
much risk there of electing a popular demagogue.

So they invented what they called the electoral college as what someone called
"a refining chamber" - filter away the noise of the mob, the voice of
demagoguery and find a civil responsible candidate.

Each state would choose as many electors as it had congressmen plus its two
senators. Thus Vermont has three, California, today, 52 plus two senators.

These electors would be chosen by the legislature of each state. They must not
be men in any public office.

A month or so after the election they would appear in their state capitals,
write out their votes - which traditionally followed the popular vote in their
own state but was not actually binding - and send them on to Washington.

After travelling over rutted 18th Century roads they'd get all the votes back
to Washington by mid-December. Now they would be opened and tallied.

We have the same deadline today thought the internet could take care of it in
30 seconds.

In 1876 this is how it came out. For Governor Tilden of New York: 185 electoral
votes. For Governor Hayes of Ohio: 184.

Now I read from a famous historian's account: "Hayes of course considered
himself defeated but his supporters alleged irregularities - some said fraud,
even crime - in three states: South Carolina, Louisiana and Florida. These
abominations ought to be looked into.

"There was no provision in our Constitution for, and no legislation provided
for, a settlement of such a dispute. There was much public excitement and
threats of violence but the people behaved with remarkable moderation.

"Finally Congress passed an Act providing for a commission. The commission
looked into the disputed points" and indeed beyond, and found that
"incompetence, ignorance, fraud and corruption were rampant in many states."

The commission decided not to go any farther than the three disputed states.

They emerged and voting in Congress on strictly party lines voted Hayes to have
185 and the popular, victorious Tilden only 184.

Whereupon without pride or foolish boast Governor Hayes "reluctantly assumed
the presidency" and Governor Tilden, bearing no recriminations or ill-feeling,
retired to his house on Gramercy Park in New York City.

Let us hope and pray it will happen again in just that worthy fashion.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS
COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP