Healing the Alliance Against Terrorism - 8 August 2003

A remarkably thoughtful, or perhaps I should say a remarkably intuitive
listener has found me out. He - unless George has turned into a female name -
says: "I sense that you feel a constant obligation, a duty almost, to talk
about Iraq, wish you didn't have to and then sound all the more relieved when
you find something else to talk about."

Well, he's touched a nerve. But I feel no wince of guilt at the touch. He's
right.

I shall try to cease feeling a duty to go on about Iraq, but Iraq is the
central problem of foreign policy not only for the United States but for
Western Europe and - since I am not one who shares the fashionable belief that
Europe is dead or the contagious popular nonsense that under President Bush,
the United States is going into the empire business - I believe also that the
closest unity of principle and action between the United States, the United
Kingdom, France and Germany is essential to their future both as
self-respecting nations and as a powerful and influential alliance. The
terrorist enemy is widely scattered in its operations but it is a worldwide
alliance.

The opposition to it cannot afford for its survival to be split into two or
three conflicting blocs - the US, UK, Spain, Italy and 20-odd smaller nations
against France, Germany and Russia.

I was once asked in some interview what was my mission in life and I said if
you have a mission you should become a bishop and not a journalist.

On government and politics, I am and continue to be, a reporter - collecting
facts, however awkward or contradictory, and leaving you to arrange them into
an opinion. But for once, I have to admit a secondary purpose. I mean other
than reporting. It is the hope of playing a small part in the healing - which
must happen - between the Anglo-American Alliance and Germany and France.

For the time being, I have two items that ought to be brought up - the first
particularly because it has lain on my desk for months. I have not seen it
mentioned anywhere, and it might have a bearing on the German and French votes
in the UN Security Council which fired the whole uproar about the
Anglo-American invasion and started the apparently unending controversy about
the actual legitimacy of the war.

I am holding in my hand a map printed in the New York Times after the invasion
of Iraq. The map shows the countries that in the 1980s, sold to Iraq "chemical
agents, equipment and munitions which were declared by Iraq to United Nations
inspectors".

Iraq had declared 17,600 tons of sensitive chemicals. Most of the sarin, tabun
and mustard gas came from the Netherlands, Singapore, Egypt and India. The
interesting category is "equipment". Iraq reported 340 pieces of equipment
"used for making chemical weapons".

A small fraction from Spain and Austria. But from France - 21 per cent. Germany
- 52 per cent. So between them, Germany and France provided - by Saddam's own
declaration - 73 per cent of the then existing equipment with which to
manufacture chemical weapons.

If I'd been a member of the German or French delegations, I think I should have
been in a quandary - whether to want the UN inspections to go on and on
fruitlessly or whether I should share the suspicion of the Americans and the
British that maybe they'll never be discovered because they had very likely
been hidden away in a neighbouring country. It's a puzzle still worth going
into.

You must bear with me on the second item. It came as a shocker to me, even
though it is a piece from my own hand and mouth. It is a Letter from America
which more than suggests we were on the verge of going to war in Iraq.

The United States Secretary of State had just said, after a tour of the Middle
East to recruit allies, "We should prefer to act multilaterally but if
necessary we shall act unilaterally." So - which Secretary of State said that?
Madeleine Albright, that's who!

I shall re-do for you the gist of this old talk - dated second weekend in
February 1998 - because the other day I came on good cause to look up a five
and a half year old talk.

The cause was a recent survey of popular European opinion. The simple,
appalling (to me) result was that an actual majority of ordinary people in
Europe (Europe of course taking in also the United Kingdom) is under the
delusion that the whole problem of Saddam and chemical weapons started last
autumn!

Well here is the gist of that talk - it was only one of about a dozen talks
about Saddam.

"On the eve of what turned out to be a fruitless talk fest at the United
Nations, President Clinton defined the problem and his policy simply and truly:
all the sites of Saddam's chemical and biological weapons - the laboratories
and the materials of their production - must be discovered and destroyed. If
Saddam resists the UN inspection team or otherwise hampers their work, he will
have to be punished by the United Nations.

The existence of these ghastly materials is known and the elements spelled out:
the anthrax, botulin and the hideous muscle-paralysing gas - VX. The use of at
least one of these on his own people, on the Kurds, is well authenticated."

That speech was given just before the Security Council met in November 1997 to
- as President Clinton and the British hoped - go through the formality of a
resolution condemning Saddam Hussein and then voting to take action against
him.

However, the Council debate was hardly under way before it became painfully
plain that France, Russia and China had no intention of punishing Saddam with
war - a word incidentally never used then or subsequently.

So then the United States - the Secretary of Defence Cohen and Secretary
Albright - went off on a recruiting tour of Europe and the Middle East looking
for allies.

Saudi Arabia refused to serve as a base this time. Egypt thought things over
and decided that military action would be inappropriate.

Britain alone was ready to join. From most delegations to the UN came the
parrot cry: "seek a diplomatic solution". The Secretary General, one Kofi
Annan, urged everybody to be "more flexible" and announced, "We should not
insist on humiliating Saddam Hussein."

Still, the United States went on preparing - another aircraft carrier gone to
the Gulf, tense discussion at the Pentagon about the tactics of the war - the
efficacy of new, more precise, smarter aerial weapons - followed by a
controversy about the peril of an air strike on a biological van or tub,
releasing a nerve gas that could destroy a whole population.

The message was: "Think twice before you bomb the very materials you mean to
destroy". And then the debate started about ground forces. How many hundred
thousand?

So - the UN settled into a "flexible" mode. Otherwise known as wobble or "a
diplomatic solution".

In this hopeless stalemate, President Clinton was ready to give up on the
United Nations and go into Iraq with Britain.

So what happened? My talk was given, as I say, the second weekend in February
1998.

I didn't mention the fateful thing that had happened only three weeks before.

President Clinton had been called to testify in a long-hanging sexual
harassment suit and, on television before the whole nation, he denied that he
had ever been sexually intimate with a young White House intern and/or that he
had ever covered it up. Within days, it became manifest that the President had
lied.

By then, considered as a warrior leader or even as a President of the United
States, he had lost every shred of moral authority.

So he talked on and on about Iraq and the need to act, and the United Nations
blushed and settled back into an on-looking position, or what Secretary General
Annan called "a more flexible mode".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP