A Million Iraqis Will Get the Message - 05 September 2003

A summit meeting on behalf of many nations was held here in New York city on
Wednesday evening and ran well past midnight.

At the start of the following news conference the presiding official was asked
if the current situation could fairly be called a crisis.

The summit chairman replied: "It's certainly challenging, you'll see a lot of
bleary eyes up here given the all-night sessions that will be necessary but I
would not categorise this as a crisis given what we've seen going on in the
world the last couple of years. Absolutely not."

Bravo! Well said. Especially when you consider who was saying it.

He was the chief executive of the United States Tennis Association who is
running the current United States Open tournament, or rather has been abruptly
stopped from running it by the heavens above when he had three days of
continuous rain.

74 matches waiting to be played. something like 200 players and officials
drifting around the lounges, eating, napping, playing poker, chess, just
hanging out.

On Wednesday night, sometime around 9 or 10, a solitary, slim, athletic figure
in a dark blue, zipped-up jump suit, strode on to centre court - the overhead
lights, of course, were still on in hopes - and started, out of hours of
frustration, just stroking and banging balls into the tiers of empty seats in
the vast coliseum.

She earned a grateful clap or two from the solitary couples hunched under huge
umbrellas and waiting, hoping, until finally a voice from above intoned the
news that play was positively suspended.

I ought to identify the single player who was defying the elements. She was
Martina Navratilova, in the trimmest shape and successfully so far playing
doubles. After Martina another deluge and the summit or non-crisis meeting.

There is a very rare type of athlete or sporting official who is aware that his
game is a human trifle, a simple escape from the wars and woes of the world
outside his sport.

More typically my experience is of the blissful attitude of a famous
professional golfer who a week or two ago was asked what he thought of Iraq.

"Of what?" he asked. Of Iraq. "Oh," he replied, "I don't read newspapers and
that stuff."

I myself have and have always had among my friends and acquaintances
professional men - lawyers, doctors, the like - who sooner or later confess
that they're "not into politics".

Which surely explains the enviable fact that mostly they're uniformly amiable,
cheerful, good-natured souls. How I envy them.

But there are some of us, more of us I think, who make their living by being
into politics and much else besides in a life of a nation.

And the pursuit of the social history of one nation has been a lifetime's
trade. Most of the time absorbing and often great fun but often, too often in
the past two years, it has been a very grim profession to follow.

And there are times when a single event - a bomb dropped in a place remote from
the United States Tennis Association - must take priority.

Well then it is hard to find a parallel in the Western world, the American
world, to the assassination of the Ayatollah Hakim.

He was not just an imposing national figure but the leader of the Shiite Muslim
sect which was born 1300 years ago.

A revealing New York Times despatch from Baghdad on Tuesday made plain a
principal, perhaps the principal, motive for the outrageous bombing of the
mosque and the assassination of the ayatollah and why the Americans should be
being blamed for them.

But first let's recall a little history. A decade or more, in his last year in
office, President Bush the elder made a speech about the threat of Saddam
Hussein to the stability of Iraq, which Mr Bush and just about everybody else
thought had been guaranteed by Saddam's defeat and the surrender of his forces
in the Gulf War over Kuwait.

I think I ought to remind you that there was quite a body of surly Americans
who complained for years after that war was over that it had been bungled
because "we should have gone on to Baghdad and removed Saddam ourselves."

Realistically, in retrospect, that might have been a good thing but it would
have violated the United Nations resolution voting for the war. The order was
to get Saddam and his forces out of Kuwait - no more.

Well in that unremarked speech of the first President Bush he simply said: "The
people of Iraq must make Saddam step aside."

Not a very fiery or threatening speech or a hint of how you'd do that.

But there were enough Iraqis to respond, and a legion of Shiites, and they
started a rebellion in the name of the ayatollah.

14 provinces rebelled whereupon Saddam shattered many of the Shiite holy
places.

The ayatollah himself yielded to the urgings of his disciples and followers and
he went into exile. Obviously he was the prime target for assassination.

The rebels begged the United States for help but the administration, fearing
that a declared war by the ayatollah against the Baathites of Saddam would turn
into a civil war, and chose not to launch any more expeditions into Iraq.

The administration trusted the ayatollah as a saintly man and a leader but they
could not guess at the character or intentions of the many thousands of Iraqis
who would join the rebellion against Saddam.

I don't believe there's any other nation on the UN Security Council willing to
intervene.

The ayatollah stayed in exile until Saddam was toppled and, we all thought, the
second war was over.

He returned to see and deplore the evident failure of the American-British
occupying forces to restore anything like stability to the warring factions and
religions and tribes.

Which brings us back to Tuesday's Times despatch.

A month or two ago the dean of one of the holy cities held a prayer meeting
with the Ayatollah Hakim and wondered if the ayatollah agreed that he, as the
Shiite leader, should join the movement to expel "the infidels".

The ayatollah granted that he thought the American and British had blundered in
failing to establish order, let alone law.

But he reminded his friend that for over a thousand years every ruler of Iraq -
king, general, dictator - had abused and persecuted the Shiite sect. There then
followed an exact quotation from the ayatollah.

"If we repeat the same mistake, if we don't cooperate with the Americans,
someone else will cooperate and we will have lost our opportunity. This is our
last chance."

There must be a million Iraqis who get the message - whoever cooperates with
the Americans is a target.

We may well ask, last chance for what? And we can only guess: to become the
government, the political leader of the nation.

I may be wrong but I think it very doubtful indeed in the ayatollah or the
leaders of any of the other religio-political factions is thinking of
instituting a democracy.

The Baathites - Saddam's socialist party that reigned so absolutely and
ruthlessly for years - is by no means a broken enemy.

This administration anyway thinks of Saddam or his successor as having the
means, the money and the weapons hidden outside Iraq to remobilise and reinvade
and renew the war that had been declared at an end.

Old Middle East experts in and out of the United Nations - they're usually
ageing European diplomats - shake their heads, often in private, and add a
little chuckle while bemoaning the "naivety" of the Americans in hoping by such
interventions - in the Middle East, in Africa, wherever - to usher in democracy
to countries like Iraq that have never known it.

Well it may be naive, it may be hopeless but believe me it is the true belief,
the ambition, of George W Bush.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP