Where Have all the Answers Gone? - 7 July 2000

A friend who knows me well said the other day: "Well, I suppose there's no
doubt what you'll be talking about this week."

Well, after about 30 years he doesn't know me well enough, for until the day
itself there's always a doubt in my mind.

But this particular week there was no doubt. I was not going to talk about the
genome, the just-discovered code for designing and running a human being.

It is a breathtaking thought which immediately had pundits and health nuts and
amateur prophets figuring that pretty soon, in a year or two, or maybe 10, we
might know exactly what gene causes every known disease and so presto! we'll
know how to cure them all.

I replied to my friend: "Not a hope of talking about that."

I'd been reading one of the New York Times's five full-time medical
correspondents for years, the admirable Miss Gina Kollata - their genetic
expert. And I'm as much in the dark about her speciality as I ever was, so no
thank you.

I think I'd rather talk about the 27 marvellous tall ships on 4 July or the
startling sight, the other morning, of a plane in the sky streaming a banner
which said: "July 7 - the new Harry Potter novel."

After which - an event almost as astonishing to me as discovering how to put
together a human being - it was calculated that about one million children
would be begging their parents to wake them at the crack of dawn on the 7th so
they could first in line at the bookshop for the next appearance of the most
popular child in the history of human fiction.

However, my friend persisted to the extent of saying: "Why not, anyway, give it
a shot?"

Alright then: a shot in the dark doesn't take long to fire. And with increasing
cheerfulness I thought, after all, the vocabulary of the genome's programming
contains only four letters: A, G, C, T - which, as you all know, are named
after the chemical units of deoxyribonucleic acid, which most of us slangily
call DNA.

Well just as we can't keep on saying deoxyribonucleic acid, we can't spend all
our time spelling out the three-letter words that A, G, C, T represent, can we?

Don't forget, though, that those 64 words come in strings of 300 and represent
about, oh, 50,000 instructions, otherwise known as genes.

And who receives these instructions? The cells of your body, of course, of
which the brain has about a thousand different sorts.

Now that's really the gist of the matter but some people are never satisfied
till they've gone beyond the gist to the nub.

That's where I was ready to throw up my hands till I luckily came on two
reporters who summed the whole thing up for us.

One is a super smart reporter - Nicholas Wade - and he illustrates for us just
how one gene can determine your state of health and/or your behaviour. Listen
to this.

There is a microscopic worm used in laboratory experiments - and I hope animal
lovers won't mind my mentioning this - it's called a C elegans. It exists in
all the soils of the world.

Some colonies of the worm eat, like monks or convicts, in groups. Others eat
alone.

Now here's the exciting news, which follows on the word that soon we'll know
why, say, a bad cold is caused by one particular slip in our 100 billion nerve
cells that are wired, don't forget, with 100 trillion interconnections.

Well back to the roundworm. Mr Wade tells us - or rather some biologist slaving
away at the University of California at San Francisco - that both the group
feeders and the lonely feeders are controlled by the same gene.

The social boys have the letters TTT whereas the ones who eat alone have GTT.
So one single letter out of 50,000 can decide whether you're going to be the
Wimbledon champion or a certified public accountant who doesn't actually like
the game.

Is everything clear now? If not help is at hand.

When the genome bit came on the evening news for the first time, it was, after
all, only one item in a roundup of world news and the Cuban embargo, Governor
Bush and the death penalty and the Midwestern howl over the price of gasolene -
petrol - still had to be dealt with.

So the anchorman turned to his science reporter and said, like a survivor from
the Titanic clutching at a deck chair: "Save me doctor, in 30 seconds can you
sum it all up?"

"Well," said the doctor, "well, yes, let me put it this way - my Uncle Morris
eats two cheeseburgers every day and has no symptoms of anything wrong. I look
at a hamburger - a cheeseburger - and my cholesterol goes through the ceiling."

"Thank you doctor and that's our report on the genome."

So let us descend from the virtual world of perfection to the real, imperfect
world we're living in.

There was just published a national survey of the American college population -
I should say of the male college population - and it reports the decline or
lapsing of an old and great American tradition, which is the desire of young
college men in any of their four years at college to get a summer job.

I might have said in my time here half my friends were working their way
through college - as janitors in the dormitories, washing dishes, waiting in
the dining rooms - very often doing some dull form of clerking at night.

But working your way through college is another thing most conspicuous in a
depression and I don't doubt we'll see it again come the next recession.

Even in prosperity though I'd assumed that most college boys, young men,
automatically at the end of the spring term looked around for a job.

One of the favourites for healthy, athletically-inclined men was being a
lifeguard at the beach - and the definition of a beach on this continent
includes within its enormous coastline mountain lakes, swimming holes, outdoor
swimming pools, rivers, creeks.

A lifeguard at every public beach in the land was as certain a fixture as a
deckchair. The recent survey added to its report that only 34% of college
students are looking for jobs while employers beg and pray - actually send out
an SOS for lifeguards.

This is as unlikely a story as reporting in England that the local schools,
say, can't find 11 boys who want to play cricket.

The survey asked the 60-odd per cent who didn't intend to get a summer job what
would they be doing instead. The communal answer? "Hanging out" - Hanging out?
Yes at discos, night-clubs, oh, just with the gang.

The report noted that they have this choice mainly because most of their
parents are flush with money. They, the young, are the beneficiaries of the
longest sustained prosperity in American history.

So where are the employers of all sorts, from hospitals to logging camps, where
are they seeking and getting the extra labour they need?

From the incoming population of European refugees and from their children -
Finns, Czechs, Kosovans.

I heard a forester say: "The Bulgarians and the Macedonians are fine workmen."

I'd never even thought that in the wake of the dreadful late troubles there
were Bulgarian and Macedonian immigrants.

But I can testify at first hand to a fine workman from Kosovo who came here
from his country's misery to the land where the streets are paved with gold and
immediately went to work to repair a cracked ceiling underneath a leaky roof
through which the rains had descended.

The ceiling fell in on him. He was philosophical - he had known worse things.

Along with this shocker survey about summer jobs for youth and their preference
- or the preference of 60% - just to "hang out" comes another statistical
college survey. A very simple one.

Taking the form of 32 questions about the simplest skeletal facts of American
history set down by the choice method - four answers to each question, choose
the right one.

Things like: During which war was Abraham Lincoln commander-in-chief: the
Revolutionary War, World War II, the Civil War?

Who said speak softly and carry a big stick: Bill Clinton, George III, Teddy
Roosevelt?

They were mostly on the order of which king came after George V? And what was
the name of the king who burnt the cakes? If the questionnaire had been taking
place in England.

Well the result from college seniors, this one, that's to say students in their
last - their fourth year of college - 52% right.

On the question of: In the Second War, was Stalin the ally or the enemy of
Churchill? half were not sure.

What does all this, any of these continual statistical surveys reveal? The
dumbness of American students?

No, it shows the American passion for finding out the truth instead of assuming
that you know it.

Apply tests of similar difficulty or ease to your own student population. The
results, I'll bet, will astound you.

Down the centuries wise men have always lamented that we think we know what
public opinion is but can only guess.

Thus Montaigne called it "unmeasurable." Lord Bryce, the best historian in the
American government system, wrote a hundred years ago: "The obvious weakness of
government by public opinion is the difficulty of ascertaining it."

Well in 1932 a 30-year-old man born in a small town in the corn country of Iowa
said to himself: "If government is supposed to be based on the will of the
people somebody ought to find out what that will is."

And he did it, the first man in the world, and by so doing changed, forever,
our views of government governing itself, punctured more of our social and
collective preconceptions, not with satire - which is after all another form of
personal opinion - but with the discovery of a scientific method.

Obviously a man whose story needs a talk to itself. And, pending a catastrophe
before next time, and provided the sky doesn't fall in, we'll tell his story.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP