Russia: The Victim of Democracy - 25 August 2000

Few recent human disasters can be more painful to go on thinking about than the
fate of the 118 men aboard the submarine Kursk which even all the Russian
authorities agree went down like a rock with no distress signal.

But what is, I think, worth going into is the official navy account of what
happened, the swift rejection of that account by independent journalists and
experts in Moscow and - more astonishingly - its rejection by somewhere between
75 and 90% of the Russian public in a television-radio-phone survey.

The official account is just what we'd have expected at any time before nine
years ago next Tuesday, when the Soviet Union was abolished. And that would
have been all we heard except, I imagine, their insistence that the probable
cause was an attack by a foreign submarine - Admiral Motsak says: "An attacking
British sub."

This story would have remained, in those days, one of those chronic Soviet/
Western squabbles in which they stuck to their story and we to ours.

But this time, for the first time, Russian officialdom finds itself the victim
of democracy, very much it must be to their dismay.

The top naval brass are in their 50s, crowding 60 maybe, and so were trained as
loyal communist warriors who if ever they knew the truth about an accident and
felt like spilling it thought again, and like all the millions the KGB kept
under wraps, kept their mouths shut.

The old admirals and the defence chiefs announced their findings with their
usual old-time confidence on Monday 14 August.

There had been, they said, "a malfunction" which caused the Kursk to "descend"
to the ocean floor but contact with the crew was established and now air from
the surface is being pumped down into the ship where "everyone is alive" and
the vessel's two nuclear reactors have been shut down. These are all actual
quotations.

In Moscow, independent defence analysts from several countries - a breed that
was never allowed to exist in the good old days - immediately made their own
investigation and one expert, whose name I will not disclose, sent a remarkable
dispatch to New York.

He reported: "No air power was ever supplied to the sub from the surface. No
contact with the crew was ever established and the state of the reactors is
still" - that was, as of last Wednesday - "unknown."

And what caused the malfunction? The foreign submariners believe that
conventional torpedo warheads in the bow of the ship exploded and almost at
once wiped out the entire crew. This version appears to be confirmed by the
Norwegian divers who found the hull of the ship smashed.

The experience of handling a bungled military exercise in a democratic country
was so new that it must never have occurred to Mr Putin to abandon at once his
holiday in the Black Sea and rush to the submarine base city and sympathise
with the mourning families.

I wonder if Soviet television ever showed President Reagan with the families of
the American marines blown up in Iran or his unforgettable touch - one mourner
at a time - when the crew of a failed missile went down with it.

Mr Putin reclaimed these democratic duties almost two weeks after he should
have jumped to the act that is performed spontaneously in the Western world by
every governor of a province, every mayor of a city.

Of course what Mr Putin did - new to such a public obligation - was something
to impossible to imagine in any Soviet leader. He made a proclamation of his
guilt and total personal responsibility.

Shortly afterwards, it is surmised, he lectured his whole inner circle on the
protocol of this new ethic.

The media here and no doubt elsewhere had been quick to deplore the lies of the
Russian navy brass and the shameless long silence of Mr Putin.

"Such public callousness," booms one newspaper, "would be unthinkable in any
Western democracy."

But the New York Times recalls an historical fact we need to remember - we're
not talking about a communist tradition simply, it's one that goes back to
Tsars like Ivan the Terrible, Alexander III, Nicholas II and, of course, Soviet
tyrants like Stalin.

Also the long historical repression of dissent springs from a Russian
autocratic tradition which the New York Times reminds us values state interests
above human life.

I'd no sooner read that than I recalled a scene after the Second War - an
intimate chat that I heard about - between President Eisenhower and a new
friend of his - Marshall Zukov, no less, who'd been the chief commander of all
the Soviet armies, as Eisenhower had been of the Allied armies.

They were reminiscing about the troubles of invading Germany and Eisenhower
mentioned the delicate business of deciding which breed of dog, sacrificial
dog, could be used to track through mine fields and, well, leave the field
safe.

Zukov was puzzled but only for a moment. He was, said Eisenhower, almost
startled to reply: "Dogs? We used to send a wave of old infantrymen."

There is a serious topic that is still in question - whether or not the Russian
delay in composing an official explanation, and their reluctance to accept
foreign aid, is due to the possibility that aboard the Kursk there were nuclear
or other military secrets.

The outside consensus appears to be that there could be technical matters -
probably nuclear - that the Russians would not want us to know about. After all
it's admitted among the Nato allies that the only military field in which the
Russians may be superior is in submarine sonar-anti-sonar detection and if any
weapon possesses it it's one of these giant submarines with a nuclear
capability.

After all in any nation the supreme national crime is spying for an enemy or a
potential enemy and during the 75 years of the Soviet Union the Russians, under
Stalin, made suspicion of the foreigner or anyone who dealt with foreigners - a
travel agent, for example - they made suspicion a patriotic reflex.

And this paranoia went far beyond military matters. From the beginning until
almost the end visiting foreigners were practically X-rayed for their
intentions and then allowed to see only those places and people and
achievements which the government wished them to see. The facts of universal
poverty and oppression had to be hidden. It was the same with China from the
moment it became a communist state.

I well recall the summer of 1976 when a priest up the Hudson River here, at
Fordham University's seismological station, reported an earthquake of some
severity in China.

The Chinese confirmed that it was so at a town called Tangshan. But as soon as
the United States offered help just so soon the Chinese government expressed
thanks and said they were coping well enough with what was, in truth, a minor
earthquake.

Pressed to release a likely figure they came through reluctantly with the
acknowledgement of "a few thousand lives lost". And that was the end of it.

Years went by - I forget how many - but eventually there was no way of covering
up the truth - the Swiss I think, anyway the Red Cross, had something to do
with the uncovering.

The simple fact now in the books was that on 27 July 1976 at Tangshan the loss
of life was 255,000.

To end up this sorry tale I remember one other small incident at a cocktail
party thrown by the British ambassador to the United Nations at his spacious
little estate up the Hudson.

Strolling along the lawn that sloped down to the splendid river I came on two
men - one an American I knew who promptly introduced me to the other, a
heavily-built, sombre man with perpetually dropping eyelids. I'd seen him a
hundred times when I was a United Nations correspondent.

He was Mr Gromyko which to my generation and beyond was like saying I met
Dracula.

He was, for years, the Soviets' head man at the United Nations, the man who
from the start month after month snapped out: "Nyet, Nyet" - "No" - to any
Security Council resolution that required the assent of the Big Five. More than
any other single man he froze the United Nations in its cradle. I'd never
talked with him before.

It was the late 1960s - a hectic and riotous time in more countries than the
United States.

It was the beginning of the public protests against Vietnam, there were
turbulent lawless political conventions, students taking over university
offices, frightening city riots in Washington and half a dozen other great
cities.

Mr Gromyko remarked on the appalling state of things in the democracies and I
said to him: "Why don't you report riots, student protests, ever in the Soviet
Union?"

He put on a wonderful eyebrow-raising show:

"But," he said benignly, "there is in our society nothing to protest about, it
is a sign of the public's approval of the system."

Well so far Russia's stumbling march into democracy has shown us that they've
picked up some of our worst properties - drugs among the young, random street
violence, obsession with public sex, a quick thriving mafia and much revealed
corruption in and out of government.

But if there is a heartening thought to be taken from the Kursk tragedy it is
that from now on the Russian government will have to be seen to treat less
lightly the death of simple soldiers and sailors who work for $50 a month.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP