Joy and Sorrow for the Libertarians - 17 May 2002

In Washington the other night there was a joyful, sad, moving scene, impossible
to imagine 25 years ago.

It was on a May evening in 1977 that a small society was founded, so small, so
oddly named, committed to so obscure, not to say ridiculous an ideal, that I
doubt it carried more than a tucked-away-paragraph in any newspaper.

It was called the Cato Institute, a political society not for Democrats,
Republicans, socialists, conservatives, liberals, but for some odd bodies
called libertarians.

Three dictionaries define a libertarian as one who believes in free will, which
doesn't get us very far does it?

But politically libertarians may be found in all parties, except the Communist,
shining here and there, about as conspicuous as needles in a haystack.

Every four years they appear on the ballots of many states as the Libertarian
Party and they run a presidential candidate.

Ever hear of Harry Grahame? Well last time he seemed, to many people - not too
many - to be no demagogue but a sensible, reasonable, very thoughtful man
talking not to the mob but as if to a friend - a fatal gift.

In more brutal words: not an impressive politician. In a total presidential
vote of 90 millions he got just over a hundred thousand. I expect he'll be
there next time.

But the party the other evening to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the
founding of the Cato Institute was struck a sad blow by the absence of the man
in whose honour the dinner had been arranged.

If the patron saint of the Cato Institute is Adam Smith, the founding father of
the libertarian charter creed was a Londoner, Peter Bauer.

All was set for his transatlantic flight, his weekend as the honoured guest. On
the 2nd of May he died. He was 86.

But it would be unfair, not to say maudlin, to pretend that the party was
blighted or stayed depressed.

Lord Bauer was to have been the first recipient of a new annual prize - the
Milton Friedman Prize - for advancing liberty.

Mr Friedman was also being celebrated, or hailed, for reaching the age of 90,
though why anyone would want to celebrate that melancholy milestone I can't
imagine.

Mr Friedman, however, like the lucky nonagenarians was frail but sprightly and
set the tone of the evening by recalling how unfashionable, how scorned, 25
years ago were the disciples of Adam Smith and the free market.

Since then, said Mr Friedman, we have moved from an era of galloping socialism
to an era of creeping socialism, what we need now is an era of declining
socialism.

I don't think that Peter Bauer would have put it quite that way.

He did not emerge under any opposition banner, he had his own cause, his own
positive recipe for liberty and the pursuit of happiness.

And as somebody said, when he started to preach or plead for the free market 50
years ago, he was hugely unpopular, ignored by many, derided by many.

And then in the rosy dawn of the welfare state, the benign spread of socialism
all over Europe, the birth of such wise and benevolent institutions as the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, when in fact we summed up the
economic future of Europe as the final triumph of Keynesism, there piped up the
voice of a youngish man warning that the general adoption of stateism was bound
to fail, that idealists had allowed the rosy view of the Soviet experiment to
blind them to the actual universal and continuing poverty of the Soviet
peoples, let alone the murderous means by which that utopia was imposed.

Bauer said that subsidies and huge money loans to the poor - what we now call
third countries - would in the end do little more than provide seed money for
bigger loans.

He advocated the preposterous doctrine that state planning was no way to cure
massive poverty.

But, as he later went on to demonstrate in Asia, it was better for a
poverty-ridden country to encourage private investment to help the poor choose
their projects, make the most of their own resources and labour.

It was called free market Asian target economies.

He predicted a quarter century ago that what would doom the Soviet Union and
its satellites was the core system of central planning itself.

Peter Bauer never claimed that the free market was a quick fix. There was no
magic anywhere outside the magic of human energies freed to act in a free
society.

If he had a passionate belief it was that the fatal, false way to help the
poorest countries was with regular, measured handouts of monies and loans by
well-meaning international bodies to governments that would supervise the
planning, the distribution of the monies, the assignment of the loans and the
projects.

At the dinner there were, among other distinguished and now acceptable guests,
three Nobel Prize winners, all for economics, all disciples or at least
admirers of the lone, lorn, once-ridiculed Peter Bauer.

"All of us," said one of them, "no longer sit in the back of the bus."

During the week that the Cato Institute was getting ready to toast and honour
Peter Bauer, Milton Friedman and the free market, in Beijing the President of
China, Mr Jiang, made a speech inviting the capitalists of the world to come
and make themselves welcome in the world's largest communist party.

He was eager to explode a common fallacy which is that the communism and
capitalism are necessarily in competition or not reconcilable.

Nonsense - our understanding of this issue, he said, has in the past been
superficial and simplistic.

I ought to say at once that these thoughts were not plucked out by Western
reporters as tiny but rare nuggets in a speech on some grand theme.

The grand theme was entirely about the excellent and necessary uses of
capitalism on the way to world communism.

And it took Mr Jiang two hours to trace and impress the new line, which I
imagine all good communists from now on will be required to take.

Well, old Chinese present, who have been lucky enough to follow every new line
and yet stay out of prison or labour camps, must be feeling very wary about
taking the new new line because, according to Mr Jiang, it makes clear for the
first time in, what, 85 years, that the present success of free market
capitalism is a necessary stage along the inevitable move toward world
communism.

Now who is the authority for this blinding new insight? None other than the
author of the bible himself, Karl Marx.

In the passage that sanctions the new party line Marx says that in the past
communist revolutions may have come too soon. They ought to wait for capitalism
to mature, flourish and burn itself out before an educated proletariat can then
overturn it.

And this doesn't have to happen, he says, through violence. The inevitable
forces of communism can be at work in the seeming progress of capitalism
itself.

For example, did you know Mr Jiang now says that the United States is farther
along the road to communism than anybody?

In that country the means of production are more and more owned by the workers.
Look, he says, at half the American population that invests in the stock market
or mutual funds.

A notable Chinese economist giving a gloss to Mr Jiang's exposition said, With
its social security system and Medicare - I don't know why he didn't mention
Medicaid, the full medical care of the very poor - the United States is far
more socialised than China.

And China, at its present stage, would do well to realise that what he calls
"advanced forces of production" - that means capitalists - should be welcomed.

The word capitalist itself is still frowned on. Mr Jiang calls "private
entrepreneurs", they're the people who are needed and their moving in on state
enterprises should be welcomed.

Has been welcomed - where? - it's news to many of us. In some state-run
industries in China private enterprise holds the majority stock.

In the end Mr Jiang urged his people to rejoice, once it understands that the
United States is not only not the enemy of Communism but is moving nicely along
the road to the Communist utopia.

I think, I'm sure, this speech was given well before the national report which
came in this week with all the sweetness and light of a tornado that 43 of the
50 American states have totted up their annual accounts and find they are
plunged into massive debt.

Only two years ago both the federal government and the separate states were
sketching out how they would most usefully spend the great surpluses that were
stretching out into the far future.

Today 43 states and still counting are desperately figuring how many vital
social programmes will have to be trimmed or abandoned because of the endless
vista ahead of deficits, deficits, deficits.

Worse off than anywhere is California - the state glorified, only 18 months
ago, as having an economy larger and more prosperous than the national
economies of only seven other nations in the world.

Today California is reeling under a $26bn deficit.

The effect on American economic life, social life - on work and play, eating
and housing and sleeping - is at the moment impossible to imagine.

Much of the news you see on television these nights about plans for new
housing, new baseball stadiums, new arts centres, new schools, et cetera, et
cetera, seems like an accidental replay of programmes made in 1999.

Only one thing you can bet on: by this winter there'll be an awful lot of
Americans singing, or moaning, "There's a hot time in the old town tonight".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP