Freedom in America - 18 June 1999

When you see, on television, some protest rally - I mean a spontaneous protest,
people suddenly taking to the streets brandishing fists, howling insults,
waving posters - do you ever wonder who planned the spontaneousness of it all?

We'd long ago accepted that in totalitarian countries - whose tyrannical system
is disguised from the start by calling it a people's republic - in tyrannies we
know that a people's uprising is as well planned as a coronation.

But I'm always surprised, after 40-50 years of television, why commentators on
riots and demonstrations still use the phrase "the people took to the streets"
when, from the evidence of the posters they flourish, somebody must have
ordered them to appear at the double, or else.

The posters: a genuine spontaneous uprising has single nasty words scrawled in
paint on random sheets or has no posters at all.

The regular popular protests - anti-abortion, anti-war, anti-hunting whatever -
usually have professionally-printed placards in coloured letters, the order for
which must have gone out weeks in advance of "the spontaneous uprising".

This struck me with new force this week when we saw everywhere - on television,
on the front pages of newspapers, cover stories of magazines - the face of a
sweet old lady with golden spectacles, her white hair swept up and topped off
with a ropey knot, sitting alongside the President of the United States and the
Speaker of the House.

She was the heroine of a ceremony in the Capitol Rotunda in Washington before
an audience of about a thousand, the Congress - including a senator in his 90s
who 44 years ago was the old lady's bitterest enemy. Miss Rosa Parks was
awarded a rare honour - the Congressional Gold Medal.

It goes back to George Washington and the last two recipients were Mother
Teresa and Nelson Mandela. It's awarded only to national heroes and it was
voted two months ago, by Congress, to Miss Rosa Parks as "a living icon for
freedom in America".

Well let us, to use the Victorian novelists' fancy phrase, turn back the pages
of history to see how and when and why this old black lady - now 86 - earned
this singular honour.

The pages of any history of America, that I might have recorded, lie - as you
might imagine - in the files of a newspaper reporter. And if I were a more
orderly man than you are, Gunga Din, I would keep files but I don't.

However, by the grace of my long gone editor, the cagey, spikey-haired little
Alfred Wadsworth, there is on my shelves a little pamphlet, brown-edged with
age.

It's some daily dispatches of mine which he thought worth reprinting. And they
were written in the south, from the south, at various towns in the spring of
1956 - two years after the Supreme Court abolished the segregation of the
races, one year after a bus boycott in the capital city of Alabama, Montgomery.
If you don't already know the facts of that famous boycott they're simply told.

On a December day in 1955 four blacks went aboard a city bus and sat where
they'd never sat before in the forward section reserved always for whites. The
bus driver, following the city law, asked them to move to the back. And the
three men complied. The fourth, a woman, refused.

A firm, upright little woman of 42 was asked again, and once more she said no.
If the bus driver had decided to make nothing of it and let her stay he could
have been prosecuted for flouting the city law and the company would lose its
licence. This was well understood on both sides.

The bus driver called two policemen and, still refusing to budge, she was
arrested - she was taken off, charged and released.

I put this down just as flatly as that in my piece. I didn't even print her
name. It was, of course, Rosa Parks. And the legend has grown and shone and
blazed of one coloured woman who took it on herself, on a whim, to stand out at
last against the separation of blacks and whites on a southern bus.

And so down the years the fame of Rosa Parks has grown and her courage has been
burnished with each new telling.

In that original piece and right after that humdrum recital of the facts I find
this sentence: "That same afternoon thousands of printed handbills mysteriously
dropped on the door steps of the coloured homes in the neighbourhood urging a
boycott of the bus line, to begin to start in two days, at an appointed time."

And then it went on for over a year and the blacks got more reforms against the
ills to which they had protested and sued against. In shorter words, Miss Rosa
Parks' decision to stay in a forward seat in the bus was the first move in a
planned boycott of the bus company and the city law - a campaign that had been
organised long before by the NAACP, the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People - which was being run by a young, bland, handsome
black parson, name of Martin Luther King, who while I was in Montgomery flew in
and out from Atlanta twice a week to buy little vans and station wagons for the
use of the boycotters.

We could leave it there, having made the seemingly mean point that Miss Rosa
Parks just happened to be chosen as the cat's paw or dupe of a boycott campaign
well planned beforehand.

Well it's not so. Miss Parks was not chosen arbitrarily. She did the choosing.

She was not just another bus rider, she was the secretary of a city chapter of
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 12 years before
she stood - or sat - her ground in 1955.

The first time she was thrown off a bus was for using the white entrance - the
front of the bus. That takes us back to 1943 - the middle of the Second World
War, in which her brother had served with honour, both in Europe and in the
Pacific.

He came home unhurt but she watched in disgust, helpless disgust, to see her
brother in uniform picked out by rednecks or white trash for specially bigoted
treatment.

From that time on she was a prominent civil rights activist. Now this is all,
remember, 10, more, years before the Supreme Court's ruling abolishing
integration in May 1954. All was given, and rightly, as the Bastille Day - the
day that started the revolution for equal black rights.

Well back in 1945-6 once the War was over Miss Parks, among other audacities,
tried to register to vote in an election, just like any other citizen. She
tried three times. And some discrepancy in her residential record, or
something, had her turned away.

From long practice the returns officers - as you'd call them - of southern
election districts were experts at finding some sort of discrepancy in any
black person's qualification to vote especially in those states in the Deep
South where blacks were a majority of the population.

Miss Parks, soon after the War, began to draw up a record of cases of actual
violence against her fellow blacks in the State of Georgia. And here's an
interesting oddity, she became chief advisor to the Youth Council of the NAACP
on how to, as she put it, "maintain one's dignity before situations of
insufferable insult, cruelty, contempt".

I can't conceive now, looking back on it, how any black person would have the
gall, the simple courage, ever to do anything but walk away as fast as possible
from the jeers and insults of street corner rednecks.

That's what all the most sensible blacks, young and old, did. So you didn't see
much of the beatings and the home burnings and the violence. It was done mostly
in quiet, private places and after dark.

I recall the first time I ever saw a sign, fairly prevalent throughout the
south in those days. A college friend of mine I was staying with in Baltimore
drove me one day, not too far out, into the beautiful Maryland countryside. And
remember Maryland is not a southern state, it's what they call a border state
but many of its customs and conventions, both generous and bigoted, bordered on
southern mores.

At the intersection of two narrow country roads a crude wooden sign was stuck
in a hedge. It had painted on it a device, a warning. It said: "Nigger, don't
let the sun set on you here."

That's how far away we are today from the culture of so-called separate but
equal rights - the doctrine that the Supreme Court overthrew in 1954.

Well only a couple of months before Rosa Parks chose to be the cat's paw on
that bus she heard the sickening news, which sickened the country, of a black
teenage boy from Chicago who'd been murdered just for being found, a
northerner, walking through a town in Mississippi.

The white men who killed him on a lark were acquitted by an all-white jury in
Mississippi.

Rosa Parks, the now 86-year-old lady so belatedly honoured, now recalls: "It
was not that I was just fed up in December 1955, I'd been fed up my whole life
as far back as I can remember with being treated as less than a free person."

So she stayed put on that bus, knowing there'd be unpleasant treatment, nasty
telephone calls. She didn't know that she and her husband would receive death
threats for another 12 years, which eventually forced them to move up north to
the middle west, to Detroit.

It wasn't the end of her activism. She joined in the 1963 march on Washington.
She was on the frightening but now famous march from Selma, Alabama, to
Montgomery. Montgomery, the city of her notoriety and her persecution and - now
that they're building a Rosa Parks Museum - the city of her glory.

So after all Rosa Parks was no accidental heroine. For her, December 1955 was
not the start of anything, it was the end of her rope, the last straw of her
tolerance, of harassment and shaming and white beastliness.

That gold medal and that resolution of Congress passed in April were little
enough compensation for a lifetime's crime - of being black.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (Â©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts Â©BBC. Letter from America
scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP