The Avenues to Express Greed had Grown - 19 July 2002

I am relieved to say (and I hope you'll be relieved to hear) that I don't
intend to talk at length about Topic A -- the suddenly discovered epidemic of
corporate fraud.

Since the dread word Enron emerged, in January, like a submarine surfacing to
inspect the damage it had done - we I believe, have heard nothing from the
Wizard of Us All - Mr Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve
Board, the only national institution which can set the primary interest rate
for all bankers.

You may or may not recall that during the Roaring Nineties, Mr Greenspan would
appear regularly before a committee of the Senate or the House - usually the
banking committee and announce that the economy was in fine shape but because
there was so much plunging speculation and an orgy of stock purchases, he would
cut the prime interest rate by, say, half a point.

He spoke to us always in the dense jargon of his trade which only experts in
his line could translate into English. Mr Greenspan knew full well that if he
started talking plain vivid English the market would stagger from a mere
glimpse of something everybody could understand.

Only once, when the bubble was swelling to bursting point did he express a
regret that the market was showing signs of "irrational exuberance." The market
sneezed and other countries caught cold.

He never talked English again. Until last Tuesday, when he summed up what's
happening by musing "an infectious greed seemed to grip much of our business
community¿it is not that humans have become any more greedy than in generations
past. It is that the avenues to express greed had grown so enormously."

He did not define these avenues as crooked paths that must be made straight. He
was, after the President, yet another diagnostician naming the disease but not
telling us how to cure it.

I suppose his appearance before the banking committee was intended, like the
President's speech to businessmen a week ago, was intended to reassure us. If
so, both of them failed. The market went on down and down - 166 points after Mr
Greenspan's talk.

But - if reassurance is to raise its happy head and encourage people (half the
population) to start investing in the market again - that reassurance will come
from Congress.

Day after day, in the past two or three weeks - the members of both Houses have
listened to the administration's lamentations, but what they heard louder has
been ordinary people asking what happened to their pensions. When and how are
corporation chiefs to be stopped walking off with twenty millions while the
employees lose their savings.

Consequently, every day since the President's business speech, both houses have
gone into session again and passed tougher and tougher bills going from stiff
jail sentences to a law prohibiting the firing of whistle blowers. Let's not
forget that the Enron scandal burst on us because of one young woman on the
board or the staff who smelled something rotten in the auditing of Enron's
books and the suspiciously ripe misstatement of their earnings.

Enough! Alright. Let me go now to a simple story, two simple stories, about two
schoolchildren whose complaints to their fathers changed the daily life of this
whole country - one profoundly, the second hilariously.

In a prairie town, Topeka, Kansas, one day in 1951 - the father of an eight
year old - what was then respectfully called a Negro - became more and more
concerned about his daughter Linda, who soon would have to go unaccompanied to
school - a two mile journey which entailed crossing a railroad track. There was
a school very nearby their home, but it was a white school.

Mr Brown decided to take an unprecedented step. He got a lawyer and sued the
Board of Education of his town, Topeka, maintaining the incredible doctrine
that forbidding Linda to go to the white school was a violation of her rights
under the Fourteenth Amendment, to the Constitution which decrees the "equal
protection of the laws."

For sixty years before Mr Brown's audacious move, the doctrine prevailing -
about the separation of the races was laid down in a famous case, which the
Supreme Court decided should provide - in the public (that is the Public)
schools "separate but equal" facilities.

It took three years for Mr Brown's suit to go through the intermediate courts
and land up at the United States Supreme Court - which on a May day in 1954 -
issued the stunning unanimous judgment (nine to none) that the 1896 ruling was
wrong. That in practice the facilities were always separate but rarely equal
and that therefore the Fourteenth amendment would now be invoked to illegalize
the separation of the races "with all deliberate speed", the court said, public
schools were now to be integrated.

Well as you must know the new ruling came to apply to all public facilities and
from then on there were to be no more separate sections in theatres,
restaurants, stadiums, schools, universities, separate drinking fountains,
swimming baths - in any public facility.

The second story is of today and simpler still. A father (who is an atheist)
decided that his son ought not - every morning at school have to stand with the
rest of the class and recite the Oath - The Oath of Allegiance to the Flag that
is - which was composed by a Boston journalist in 1892, a turbulent time in a
United States about to acquire an empire of its own.

It was an affirmation of patriotism, and this is how it went: "I pledge
allegiance to the flag of the United States, and the republic for which it
stands, one nation indivisible, with justice and freedom for all." And that's
the way it was recited by two, three generations of American schoolchildren.

But in 1954, a two word phrase was added by Congress. Now in 1954 the United
States looking across the Pacific saw Communism thoroughly established in China
and North Korea and feared for Indochina, Burma and India.

Looking across the Atlantic, it saw Moscow in virtual control of Eastern Europe
and threatening Western Europe, which accordingly mounted a defensive alliance.

It was a time ripe for fear and suspicion, and a Senator from Wisconsin, one
Joseph McCarthy, chose a melodramatic route to fame.

He exploited the popular hatred and fear of what he kept calling "godless
Communism" by saying that the government was riddled with Communist cells. He
said he had names - fifty odd in the State Department alone.

He never identified one - but for a time he rode a whirlwind through
Washington.

The only thing he achieved was to see the Congress pass a resolution adding two
words to the Oath of Allegiance - "one nation, under God, indivisible, with
justice and freedom for all."

And that's the clause the atheistical parent doesn't want his son to have to
utter. He got a lawyer too. And behold, suddenly a week or two ago - a federal
court ruled that he was right - that the phrase violates the First Amendment to
the Constitution which says: "Congress shall make no law respecting an
establishment of religion".

What the founding fathers meant by establishment - there shall be no official,
no state, sect, no Congregationalist, Catholic, no Church of America.

The same sentence says Congress shall not "prohibit the free exercise of
religion" but in our time liberals and agnostics and non-religious people (and
some of the courts) seem to have used the non-establishment clause to
discourage or even forbid any mention of religion, of God anywhere in public
life - in spite of the second phrase of the sentence -"Congress shall make no
law prohibiting the free exercise of religion."

Anyway, this federal court says the father is right and implies that under God
should be stricken from the Oath. This will now undoubtedly go onwards and
upwards to the Supreme Court.

If it agrees, what a technical revolution the government will face. There
should be little trouble persuading presidents-elect to drop the phrase "so
help me God" when they take the oath of office: "I do solemnly swear that I
will faithfully execute the office of President of the United States and will,
to the best of my ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the
United States. "

George Washington, at his first inaugural improvised "so help me God" and every
President since has echoed him. It should be easy to stop that.

And I suppose there'd be no great brouhaha over abolishing the daily prayer
(which is to a general God) which precedes each session of the Senate and the
House.

But the Herculean labour will come with the obvious obligation to destroy and
redesign and reprint the entire currency of the United States. How did this
come about?

In November 1861 - a bad month for the Northern armies during the Civil War, a
New England parson wrote to the Secretary of the Treasury declaring that "our
national shame has come from disowning God....". He begged the treasurer to
print on all federal coins the phrase "In God we trust." It was done.

Years later it was dropped - but the idea was revived again in the wake of the
McCarthy storm - in 1955, Congress enacted that "In God we trust" should be
printed on every coin and every piece and negotiable paper money. And there it
is, in all the change in my pocket.

There seems to be no constitutional reason why "in God we trust" should stay,
if "one nation, under God," has to go.

A saving solution has been suggested by none other than the droll one-liner -
Robin Williams. He says the whole uproar could be side-stepped if the oath were
adjusted to say "one nation indivisible - under Canada."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP