From Exciting Horserace to Exhibition Trot - 4 August 2000

I began the talk last week by noting that the three biggest, the oldest, the
most famous national television networks - NBC, CBS, ABC - intended to devote
only about a third of their usual time to covering the two political party
conventions.

I misjudged them - I greatly exaggerated.

In the event one of the three skipped the whole thing except in its regular
news bulletins. The other two devoted just one hour - 10 to 11pm - each
evening.

Why is this? Because they'd caught up, a little late in the day, with the fact
that in the past quarter century the conventions have abolished their main
business which was to meet, to battle between several contestants and to
choose, by a series of ballots of every state, choose the man - name their
presidential candidate.

The conventions are still called presidential nominating conventions but the
naming has nowadays already been done before the convention because of the
spread, throughout the country, of what you might call the "winner takes all"
primary.

It used to be that most states sent a delegation which split its choice between
two or three even four men and they were voted for at the convention. Now all
the Republican primaries except in two states picked one man - George W Bush -
months before the convention.

Put it simply - as I said last time - it used to be the most exciting horserace
in America. Now it's like going into the derby to watch an exhibition trot of
the winner. The winner having been chosen in a series of preliminary run-off
races around the country.

Consequently the conventions now hold all the suspense, the newsworthiness, the
hypnotism of a Conservative or a Labour Party conference.

That is exactly what they have become - devoted entirely to saying, with many
various flourishes, that "our country is great and good" and "our man is the
greatest and the best".

A few months ago the network chiefs took a backward look at the audiences
they'd mustered down the years for the once every four years conventions.

In 1960 for the Kennedy/Nixon bout 28% of all homes with television watched the
conventions and that's, by the way, much less than most people would have
guessed.

In 1976, the last time there was a big tussle between two contestants, between
the Reagan camp and the Ford camp about who was going to get the nomination -
Ford got it - 31% of homes watched - that was the peak.

And since then, which after all is almost 25 years, since then no convention
has ever put more than one name in nomination. The man's been chosen beforehand
by these primaries and since then the listening figures have gone down and
down. Last time - Clinton versus Dole - only 16 American homes in a hundred
watched.

Well the networks' decision this time has been dramatically vindicated. This
past week only six families out of a hundred watched on the Monday evening and
it rose to between 10 and 12 on Thursday when Governor Bush delivered a speech
which had been re-drafted and re-written by his speech writers 17 times before
it was given over to the teleprompter.

All of which only goes to show, I think, that the people have been way ahead of
the network moguls in anticipating that the new style convention is about as
riveting to watch as a school speech day or commencement.

And at this Republican convention it became startlingly clear from the first
speaker on that all the speeches had been vetted or cleared for acceptability
by the Bush chieftains.

In fact the most striking feature of this speech week has been the absence of
controversial figures - not people who might oppose or deny the main beliefs of
the party but those who've been most vocal in expressing them.

Both Governor Bush and his vice presidential choice - Mr Cheney - have been
strong to repeal the law that made abortion legal, both as strong for prayer in
schools, both are against gun control - no mention of these issues or deadly
phrases, no sight anywhere of Henry Hyde who led the impeachment hearings or of
the old, great warrior Newt Gingrich.

All speeches were to be proud, resonant, vague, patriotic and non-specific, and
so they were. The old Kremlin could have learned something from the Bush
managers.

So those of us who, for one reason or another, had to pay attention watched and
listened to the TV commentators and so-called analysts sweating to find hints
of policy and deep or subtle meaning in speeches which, as Churchill said of
the speeches of an opponent: "compress the largest possible number of words
into the smallest possible amount of thought."

All the obscure or well-known figures in the party came obediently to the
rostrum and spouted their pieces like schoolchildren hailing Horatius on the
bridge.

Why then, somebody asked, are there 2,000 delegates but 15,000 reporters mostly
from abroad, how do you explain that?

A veteran reporter, who'd covered conventions for 60 years, said promptly:
"Sheer ignorance of recent American history, or perhaps they read up about the
early famous party conventions but didn't notice along the way that their main
business had been abolished or possibly their introduction was, like mine, an
account of the incredible, the outrageous, the most melodramatic of all
conventions - the meeting of the Democrats in 1924. Maybe they hoped for
something like that."

I wasn't there but I was 16 - older enough to be sentient - and read about the
extraordinary goings-on called a party nominating convention and tried to
imagine the unimaginable scene at Madison Square Garden in the summer of 1924.

The Democrats met on a Monday in July in the usual infernal New York weather.

Every day it was in the middle or the high 90s. No air conditioning then - the
only breeze wafting among the 2,000 or so delegates was coming from a thousand
hats, newspapers, whatever could be used as a fan.

Two or three nationally known characters had already canvassed the country and
mobilised enough support to get their names before the convention.

There would also be some minor hopefuls - governors of states - who would be
nominated because the bureaucrats they employed were too scared of losing their
jobs not to pretend their boss would make a great president.

But by the Wednesday of that sweating July there were two main contestants who
loathed each other and for whom the whole convention would vote state by state
from Alabama to Wyoming.

There was a third man - a non-entity - a distinguished non-entity, lawyer, had
been a congressman and Wilson's ambassador to Great Britain: name of John W
Davis.

Anyway came the balloting, the gavel falls, the baritone intones one by one the
states and records the ballots.

The main bout was between a handsome, rather swagger, Southerner, McAdoo - a
lawyer, once secretary of the treasury, first chairman of the Federal Reserve.

Having political ambitions he had the sense to marry President Wilson's
daughter and thereafter became known as the crown prince of the Democratic
Party.

McAdoo would have been a shoo-in if he'd not been opposed by an American who in
origins, in style, in character, was at the other end of the poll - the
Brooklyn end - Al Smith, governor of New York State with an inimitable East
Side accent, born very poor, little schooling, son of a truck driver who died
young.

The boy went to work in the city fish market. Al Smith worked his way up in
city and state politics. He improved life for the working poor. He became a
fine governor.

He was a Catholic, the first ever proposed for president. And he wanted to have
Prohibition repealed.

The South solidly backed McAdoo who was in favour of retaining prohibition and
publicly, at least, shared the South's rampant fear that on the day of Smith's
inauguration it would be the Pope and not the chief justice who would
administer the oath.

On the first ballot McAdoo had 431 votes, Smith 241 and the distinguished
ex-ambassador 31.

Now in those days the Democrats required for nomination not a simple majority
but a two-thirds majority. It was a long way to 728.

On the balloting went, through the fourth day and night and the fifth and no
recess. At night people can spin successful plots, so many delegates went to
their hotels and left their alternates - every delegate has a stand-in - to
vote through the night. But many stayed and brought in camp beds.

After the 38th ballot a venerable old Democrat, three times unsuccessful
nominee for the presidency, got up to explain his vote - that you could do,
which meant a little preliminary speech.

In the case of William Jennings Bryan it was an interminable, incoherent speech
from an old man no longer the party's hypnotising orator.

Towards the end he was booed and hissed and he sat down saying all he wanted to
say was "vote for McAdoo."

It went on. The 71st ballot: McAdoo way ahead with 528 votes, but still 200
short, that was his peak.

On the 72nd ballot some votes went over to Smith. On the 73rd ballot many more
and poor ambassador Davis polled 50, 60, going up.

I came to know him later and asked him: "Was there any time when you thought it
possible that things might move your way seriously?"

He was a gentle, modest man, he said: "Oh yes. After the 73rd ballot I thought
it might happen."

It was - wait for it - the steady collapse of the votes for both Smith and
McAdoo and the vote to nominate John W Davis on the 103rd ballot - 10 days and
nights.

The delegates stumbled off to bed and next day slouched to Grand Central
Station and scattered to their homes. Heroes or victims of the longest ballot
in history.

The Northerners sad to know that spirituous liquids would still be prohibited.
The Southerners relieved to know that the Pope would not come to live in the
White House.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (Â©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts Â©BBC. Letter from America
scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP