It's Dangerous for Journalists to Retire - 25 July 2003

They used to call these the dog days and, if they're referring to the time when
the Dog Star rises and falls with the sun, they're right but to most people it
means the sultry time in our hemisphere, between early July and early
September.

And sultry it certainly is, though I suspect that the weather you could
complain about in Kent, England, is very different from the lamented dog days
in Kent, Ohio.

I was just watching the 24-hour world weather station and in succession I saw
and heard two different weathermen.

One was based in the south of England, his key sentence was: For the next day
or two in the high 70s Fahrenheit, no relief in sight.

A little later, settling in here to a cool drink in a cool room, I saw Sam, our
regular ABC weatherman, an affable fellow, who this time was practically
soaring off into euphoria.

We've had a nasty stretch of hot weather. Indeed in over three quarters of this
huge country everything from 115 in Phoenix, Arizona, to 92 in this here New
York city.

So what brought on Sam's euphoria? "The next five days", he said, "are
beauties, all seasonably cool in the middle 80s - enjoy."

Before we had air conditioning in houses it's a miracle we stayed alive during
the dog days.

I remember sitting here at this desk naked except for a loin cloth, sweating
out daily reams of prose worthy of the Mancunians who boasted, thanks to the
holy writ of the then Manchester Guardian, that they thought today what London
would think tomorrow.

I just found from an expedition into some old, yellowing files that it was
during the dog days, and when I was in my 60th summer, that I had a note from
my mother wondering what plans I had for retirement.

For retirement? It was as if the bailiff had rapped on the door and was ready
to attach the house.

I wrote back and told her that it was dangerous for journalists to retire. They
were apt to grow stupid.

No more was said in our house or has been said since about retirement.

I was left with the thought: surely the age-old rule, retirement at 60, is long
overdue for abolition or revision when so much of modern medicine has become
available to so many lower and middle class people and when the expectation of
life at birth, among males in the Western countries, has increased by five
years in the past three decades.

In this country, indeed, most legislators have abolished the compulsory
retirement rule. The government - the federal government - came to with a shock
and a bang about 10 years ago and discovered that the general population is
ageing alarmingly.

Alarmingly? Yes. Most Western governments have discovered that by, say, 2035
there will be three pensioners for every two people working to pay for their
pensions.

The day of doom in this country is said to be the year when the baby boomer
generation retires.

They will then face the fact that there is nothing left in the social security
fund. All that money they paid out in taxes to cushion their old age has
already been spent cushioning my old age and seeing me for free through
surgeries, hospitals, office visits, prescriptions, the lot.

A grim topic, let us move on.

A listener laments - the Masters came and went, the US Open, Wimbledon, the
British Open, nary a word about golf or tennis.

I know, I know, but what most golfers and tennis players do not know is that -
from a stern, reliable source - 94% of the United States population (and it's
slightly higher in Britain) does not play golf, watch it or read about it.
Tennis is even more a minority sport.

However, I hope I'm about to satisfy my golfer but also to attract the
curiosity of people who belong in that 94% who live in outer darkness.

It's about a scientific experiment started five years ago at the most famous,
surely, medical centre in the world - the Mayo Clinic, out there on the
far-flung prairie in the vast, rolling farmlands of Minnesota.

The Mayo Clinic opened 74 years ago. It is not a hospital, it is a diagnostic
clinic, and by this time is surrounded by hospitals and a hundred hotels for
people who've come from every station in life, from every land, who hope they
can be diagnosed and helped by the staff of the clinic.

The clinic is 22 storeys high, a dozen of the lowest ones given over to a
single specialty.

So one whole circular floor looks into nothing but heart disease and is staffed
by a dozen heart specialists; another floor urology, another paediatrics,
another neurology, another the brain and so on, with other floors for various
advanced kinds of medical research.

The experiment we're going to look at involved a team of neurologists,
physicians, a brain man, a heart man, various medical technicians and - just in
case - one expert in Parkinson's Disease, another in Huntington's.

And what they'd been working on and hope some day soon to know is whether
putting is a mental, emotional or a physical disease.

I said putting - with a putter. The last type of stroke a golfer makes, having
on his approach to the hole used normally a driver, a long or mid iron, then
pitched or chipped onto the green and finally taken his putter and bang, holed
out. Oh no, most of the time not.

I must refine my definition - the Mayo team is not homing in just on putting in
general but on a bizarre ailment that afflicts many golfers. It's called the
yips and it shows an inability to take the club back and return it to the ball
and sink or nearly sink a short, three or four-foot putt.

The yips are no respecter of persons. Bad golfers may never have them. Most
mediocre golfers get them at some time or another. So do the very greatest -
Arnold Palmer, Sam Snead - and I never forget the pitiful sight of the great
Ben Hogan in his last year or two on the tour standing paralysed over the ball,
which had only three feet to go into the hole, addressing the ball, standing
up, walking away, going back - same routine, a sweaty 30 seconds of no motion
and then a jab and the ball sliding three, four feet on the other side.

The question is, is it the mind, is it actually something disabling about the
nerves of the fingers, the deltoid muscles, what happened at breakfast, or are
you not looking forward to a visit from your mother-in-law?

So how could the outcome of this study affect people who don't play golf?

A neurologist on the team says they're trying to find out enough to help other
people who suffer from spasmodic hand movements or over-control of them -
violin players, surgeons who occasionally or alarmingly lose their touch,
writers who stop because of what they call writers' block.

In an outdoor test this week, 16 golfers of various trades, professions, skills
- mostly low handicap golfers - started the trials.

The first hour was taken up with fixing 42 electrodes on each player - tiny
jumper connections in various colours. An electrocardiogram registered the
heart, a musclegram the muscles, another machine recorded brainwaves.

They've tried all sorts of conditions, knowing that being watched and measured
might bring on the yips as might being left alone.

They tried to put them under various types of stress to mimic the nervous
tension of a tournament.

So far the Mayo boys have drawn only one tentative conclusion which came from
watching calm to violent activity of the brainwaves and I do believe this could
be of use to many more people than golfers.

To golfers of every degree it could be a new golden rule. It is this: golfers
were seen to be putting better when the left side of the brain, the analytical
side, is quiet and when therefore the motion is taken care of by the right side
of the brain, the instinctive side.

Most golfers know this in a semi-conscious sort of way, hence the cliché
"paralysis by analysis".

I think of two golfers. Firstly one of the top three or four golfers in the
world, who takes a minute or two in deciding the state of the grass - down
grain, cross grain - tramps round the pin to see the putt from the wrong side,
squats, holds his putter out like a surveyor's rod (it's called plumb bobbing)
settles to the ball twice, tries three practice swings and misses every other
putt.

And then the best putter I ever saw - I mean the most consistent - who
approached the ball, arranged his feet, gave a single glance at the ball and
stroked it - easy back, if only a foot or so - and then through the ball a foot
or more. Never a tapper.

So remember the old poet, who says something like "who takes advice against his
will holds to his own opinion still".

Bobby Jones recommended the same: glance at the hole - your brain has already
told you the line - putt.

I hope there are enough golfer listeners who remember the most entertaining of
all golf writers and talkers (half his audience never knew a mid iron from a
midwife) the portly, wily, sly Henry Longhurst, who bore a remarkable
resemblance to every crook and con man in a French movie.

One time he was walking to the first tee with a companion, who mentioned that
he'd lately had an attack of the yips.

"Ever had them, Henry?" he asked.

Henry was about to say "no, fortunately" but he caught himself in time and he
thought of a stroke of gamesmanship that would have made the inventor of
gamesmanship, the late, great Stephen Potter, proud of him.

"Er, actually no, but I'm afraid I'm a carrier."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP