Loneliness, Male Companionship and the Hunt - 30 July 1999

Here are the opening sentences of two novels, both written 66 years ago. Here's
the first.

"They drove, uncertainly, along the avenue that led to the house. The navy blue
car was built high off the ground and the name on its bonnet recalled a
bankrupt, forgotten, firm of motor makers. Inside the car was done up in a
material like grey corduroy with folding seats in unexpected places,
constructed liberally to accommodate some Edwardian Swiss Family Robinson."

Here's the opening of the second novel written the same year, 1933.

"You know how it is there early in the morning in Havana with the bums still
asleep against the walls of the buildings, before even the ice wagons come by
with ice for the bars. Well we come across the square from the dock to the café
to get some coffee and there was only one beggar awake in the square and he was
getting a drink out of a fountain. But when we got inside the café and sat down
there were the three of them waiting for us."

The first passage is a piece of considered literary prose - it could have been
written in 1923 or in 1913, written for an audience rather like the writer - I
imagine - literary, sensitive, leisured. The second passage has all the leisure
of a ticking time bomb. And in 1933 it was a shocker. The reader is addressed
as an equal but there's no suggestion of a literary man anywhere. It's more
like an anecdote a travelling salesman is telling to a buddy sitting up at a
bar.

But what shocked most literary folk, both in Britain and America in 1933, was
the boldness of the writing. Not an adjective or an adverb anywhere, just plain
nouns hitting plainer verbs. And yet, as one or two critics reluctantly
admitted, in no more than a sentence or two a picture has been painted - vivid,
arresting - of a time and a feel for a place and there's a note of suspense
struck at once - "There were the three of them waiting for us."

Well it had taken most of 20 years for the writer to be able to fashion such a
sentence to his own satisfaction. The writer was Ernest Miller Hemingway who
was born 100 years ago this past week. Midwesterner - schoolboy in a Chicago
suburb - as a boy he went shooting in the woods with his father.

He already had the itch to write and he skipped college to work on a newspaper
in Kansas City, Missouri. He'd hardly got his hand in at reporting when America
was in the First War. And the 18-year-old Hemingway joined an ambulance unit
attached to the Italian Infantry.

He was badly wounded four months before the Armistice, and when that happened
he was still convalescing in a hospital in Milan.

In little more than a year a Toronto paper took him on as a foreign
correspondent - a dashing life he'd only dreamed would ever come his way, and
he travelled far and wide - in France, Italy, Spain, Switzerland, Germany.

Two years after the signing of the peace treaty he was on the road in and
around Greece following a surging population of refugees - much like the beaten
families we saw deserting Kosovo.

One despatch reported: "In a staggering march the Christian population of
Eastern Thrace is jamming the roads towards Macedonia ... An old man marches
bent under a young pig, a scythe and a gun, with a chicken tied to his scythe.
A husband spreads a blanket over a woman in labour in one of the carts to keep
off the driving rain - she is the only person making a sound. Then his little
daughter looks at her in horror and begins to cry and the procession keeps
moving."

Plainly what he had was a descriptive gift but the plainness, the simplicity,
was something he worked on consciously while he was still a newspaper man.
Based, in his early 20s, in a room over a sawmill in Paris he appeared to
belong to the circle of newly-arrived American ex-patriates. But, from the
start, he shrank from their dilettantism. He was a professional writer who was
going to achieve something new in the American language.

What moved him most, in those early days, were memories of shooting trips he'd
taken with his father into the Michigan woods.

It cannot have been simply an amazing coincidence - I think rather an impulse
welling up from his unconscious - that his very first stories about those
boyhood excursions contained the elements of the romantic situation to which,
for the rest of his life, he would be most susceptible - loneliness, male
companionship and the hunt.

Especially the hunt, whether in the infantryman's first experience of
hand-to-hand combat or in stalking game amid the green hills of Africa or in
the bullring with its tension between human mettle and an animal's courage.

Nobody, before or since - not in English anyway - has been so deeply stirred by
these three elements - loneliness, male companionship and the hunt.

However, it was not the themes that obsessed him so much as how they were to be
written about: "To put down what really happened in action, what the actual
things were which made the emotion and which would be valid in a year or 10
years."

He wrote hard and long every day, rarely more than 200 words a day, and spent
the next day paring them down. He'd already found out that, for him, adjectives
and adverbs when they were describing action or emotion were devices of delay,
of tapping the teeth while getting ready to find the right word.

His idol, Mark Twain, had had something to say about that. I have to throw in a
background note here that in America what in England is known as a firefly is
in America "a lightning bug." Mark Twain wrote: "The difference between the
right word and the nearly right word is the difference between lightning and a
lightning bug."

The critics did not take kindly to Hemingway's first books. They thought that
here was an author who'd created a self-conscious, tough-guy, no-nonsense
style. That's because most of the critics lived in London, New York - in a
metropolis - did not have in their childhood background the vernacular which
Hemingway distilled and refined into a personal style.

It was nothing more mysterious or synthetic than the ordinary speech of
ordinary people of the Mississippi Valley - as bare as the prairie and as
sinuous as the 54 rivers that feed it. Just the speech you will hear all around
you any day in the smallest spurts of conversation of farmers, garage
mechanics, salesmen, soldiers, gardeners, merchants, anywhere from Cairo,
Illinois, to Duluth, Minnesota.

But what the mass of Hemingway's readers - a new generation of young non
critics - what they recognised were themselves and their emotions nakedly and
truly expressed. And in time even some of the intelligentsia came to concede
that Hemingway had managed, in a very bare idiom, to show that the emotions of
ordinary, even illiterate, people were just as fine and complex as their very
own.

Like all true originals Hemingway was too often judged by people who didn't
know the difference between the true Middle Western vernacular and the crude
imitations of it which were being practised - thanks to Hemingway - everywhere
from Glasgow to Hollywood.

Striking proof that he had achieved "the real thing", transmuted that
Midwestern ore and passed on something original into literature, is suggested
by the fact that in the Nobel country itself, which gave him the Literature
Award, his example, they say, transformed Swedish fiction.

As for the English-speaking world, I think I ought to remind us, the main thing
about Hemingway is that as a narrator - a teller of tales - he more than anyone
in this century revolutionised the English sentence.

For myself I would add that he brings to relationships between the old and the
young a certain touch of tenderness and there's always that strain of suspense.
The best way I can express my own admiration for Hemingway is to do an
outrageous thing.

Years ago an American monthly magazine ran a competition for a parody of
Hemingway. I entered it and I did not win. I got a letter back from the judge
saying - "This is preposterous. This isn't a crude parody which our readers
would recognise as such, this is too true, this is essence of Hemingway - which
book did you steal it from? Sorry."

Well maybe it will say more in fewer words than I have used to convey what to
me is touching, dramatic, comically grave and suspenseful about his writing.
It's a very short story. I've called it A First Time For Everything, and it's
simply about an old man and his grandson in Florida stopping at a lunch counter
to get a hamburger.

The old man and the boy went in and sat down on the swivel stools and behind
the counter there were two of them waiting. One was a black man in a white
apron and the other was a big blonde with corn coloured locks. It was the boy's
first time down there in Florida and his hands showed up on the counter like
baby white fish against the brown arms of the old man that were blotched with
the benevolent skin cancer.

The old man nodded without speaking and the black man who knew all the signs
dropped on the shiny stove something that looked like a red coaster you would
put a drinking glass down on and later would look like a brown coaster. Then he
lifted his arm high and snatched from a shelf a fat white roll between his
splayed thumb and little finger the way he would receive a throw cleanly like
in the high school play-offs.

The boy looked up at the old man.

"They are the rolls," the old man said, "first baked by Macdonald of the Isles,
a Scottish chieftain who in the manner of the Scots called them baps with their
floury but crisp outsides. But these are closer to what the English call buns,
which are softer but not as soft and delicate as the good buns they made in the
old days in the Basque country - Basque buns are best."

"Will they come together to enclose it?" the boy asked.

"They will enclose it good," said the old man.

The black man had finished now and scooped the coaster between the two halves
of the bap and slid the whole onto a clean white plate. The big blonde extended
her right hand and whisked the plate with a single turn of her buttocks in
front of the boy. It reminded the old man of the way the great Manolete
performed a veronica in the forgotten afternoons when the sun went low in the
good times. The boy lifted the thing to his lips.

"Now," said the old man, "you are having your first Big Mac."

"Truly?" asked the boy.

"Truly," said the old man.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP