A Wonderful Work or a Rat Trap? - 16 June 2000

Every summer in mid-June for the past, oh I don't know, 100 years the ultimate
appeals court of this country - the United States Supreme Court - which appears
through the winter and spring to be cogitating and moving thoughtfully at the
pace of a majestic elephant suddenly puts on a turn of speed, darts into the
public eye by announcing a whole flock of decisions on the cases it has chosen
to review and always, of course, on matters of great concern to American life.

Thus one June the country heard that the Constitution gave nine-year-old
children the right to work 12 hours a day and sometimes through the night.

On a later appeal it was found that the Constitution absolutely forbids any
such practice.

One year we heard that the Constitution sets no limit on the length of a train
provided the safety of the crew is guaranteed.

One summer Americans learned, from the court, that you cannot run a cemetery
and also hold shares in an undertaker's firm.

And one famous year just a little less than 100 years ago it was declared by
the court that the rights of any and every individual American are imperilled
when an oil company gobbles up its competitors.

The question of whether Mr Bill Gates is a gobbler - a monopolist - or not has
not yet come to the court but it may Oscar, it may.

And this past week among the run of cases that the court decided there was one
- a heart-rending decision to some old folk - that grandparents do not have an
unrestricted right to visit their grandchildren.

"My goodness," said a visiting Englishman, who takes a lively interest in
American affairs - he was complimenting the court on the sudden flurry of
decisions it has published in this past week.

"Who'd ever think," he went on, "that of all American institutions the Supreme
Court would make such a rush to judgement."

It was necessary to point out, as politely as possible, that this sudden
eruption of eight or 10 decisions was normal Supreme Court practice at this
time of year and no rush to judgement.

"At this time of year" is the key. In mid-June the court is always at the end
of its current term which begins the previous September. And the procedure is
always the same.

The first week it meets in the fall the court sees that it has before it 10 or
20 times as many cases as it can possibly handle and it has to decide how many,
maybe 20 cases, are of supreme and widespread public interest. The rest the
Court will not choose to review which often, in effect, is the same as
upholding a lower court.

So suppose the court has decided that during the coming term it would look at
two dozen cases. It can spend anywhere from two months to nine months hearing
lawyers on these cases.

Sometimes during the year you may have noticed on something very pressing, like
a challenge to the federal abortion law, the Court publishes its decision as
soon as the arguments have been heard.

But whenever they are heard, when all the arguing lawyers have done the nine
justices - there are seven men and two women - argue among themselves and
eventually take a vote.

A unanimous decision is very rare and too often for many Americans the majority
is by five to four - which can mean that in matters of great political or
social significance one human being decides American policy. One person rides
herd over 100 senators and 435 members of Congress.

It is a majority rule that some people feel will one day have to be changed.

But now in the last fortnight of the court's term the justices are stirred by
the normal human urge to get home, so to speak, for the holidays.

And so it pulls together all the decisions that had been written maybe months
before and issues three or four judgements in a day.

Most judges, having heard the arguments, retire to their chambers and with the
help of their law clerks take weeks, even months, to write their opinion.

If you want to know what happens to anyone who performs "a rush to judgement"
let me tell you about the early days of Mr Justice Holmes.

Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, dead these 60 years, remains a towering figure
of Anglo-American law. He was appointed in 1902 by President Theodore Roosevelt
and served for 31 years.

Physically a striking, archetypal New Englander - tall, austere, ramrod
straight, an almost terrifying presence. A finely combed thatch of white hair
and long white moustaches.

On one of the first cases he was assigned to he heard all the arguments, he
went home, he sat down in his study and he wrote his opinion and a day or two
later he took it and read it to the court. The eight other justices were
bewitched, bothered and bewildered.

There was no denying the cogency, the thoughtfulness of his opinion but they
had to say private: "Surely it must be superficial if he wrote it in a day.
This is a dreadful precedent to set."

And of course it was a threat to their own leisurely habits. Holmes took the
hint.

Years later he told a friend that he had not changed his habits. Once he'd
heard a case argued his decision came quickly and he went home and wrote it up.
But, he said, he then put it in a bottom drawer and left it there for months.

"I learned," he said, "to let my opinions age in the wood."

Now to come down to the present week and a decision which, as I suggested is
true of all the cases the court decides to consider, a case of wide of national
or public concern, the case of Jennifer and Gary Troxel, grandparents, v
Granveille, a young woman, the mother of their two grandchildren.

It's possible, I think, likely that some listeners may suspect that I'm being
facetious in taking up the case of a grandparent's right to visit a grandchild
but this is a very good example of the way the Supreme Court works in dealing
with every aspect of ordinary peoples' lives.

I'm sure that the two grandparents - Mr and Mrs Troxel, 60-year-olds, living in
the far western state of Washington - take a passing interest, as we all do, in
the coming presidential battle between Governor Bush and Vice President Gore.

And living there on the Pacific coast they may even have been roused, if not
excited, by the news that the leaders of North and South Korea have vowed a
life together of peace and eventual unity.

But, like the rest of us, the most pressing concern in life is either one's
emotional relationship with somebody or the state of one's pocket book or
concern for a sick brother, father, friend.

In the Troxell's case, which they've pressed for the past seven years, the most
urgent concern in life is the right to visit their two grandchildren whenever
they feel like it - which is often. It's a pathetic and harrowing story.

The trouble between the grandparents and the mother of their two grandchildren
began in 1993 when the father of the two committed suicide.

That family disaster made the grandparents feel more protective of the
fatherless couple and apparently made their mother treasure their company
enough to resent the too frequent times the grandparents came to visit.

Think the first picture that comes to mind of this hapless family is of a
bereft single mother clinging to her only children and the grandparents feeling
possible excessive fondness for their only grandchildren. It's not like that at
all.

The mother has eight children, the grandparents have three other children and
in all 10 grandchildren.

Well the law of the state of Washington, which is what the mother has been
challenging and the grandparents claiming as their legal right, states that:
"Any person may petition the court for visiting rights at any time when such
visits may best serve the interest of the child."

Justice Sandra O'Connor wrote the majority opinion and she said: "This
provision was a breathtakingly broad invitation for state judges simply to
substitute their judgement for that of the parents."

In the end the justices voted six to three to strike down the Washington law
but no two justices of the nine agreed on what the law ought to be and each
wrote conflicting opinions because, as Justice Stevens, put it, "an almost
infinite variety of family relationships pervades our ever changing society."

All that six could agree on was that, all sorts of other things being equal,
the parent has a superior right to decide on a child's visitors. So the
Washington law is unconstitutional.

So long as Americans reverence the Constitution it will go on having an
enormous persisting influence on daily life. To be truthful I doubt that one
American in 100 - 1,000 - has ever read the Constitution.

I notice a guilty look steel over the faces of practically any company whenever
one party chooses to quote, accurately, a clause of the Constitution.

The reputation of the Constitution, in fact, is much like that of Shakespeare -
revered but unread. Quietly, guiltily, the mass of Americans take it for
granted.

Foreigners, though, never cease to marvel at the astonishing application to our
day-to-day living - to insurance, childbirth, the length of a train, grandpas'
rights - the relevance of an 18th Century document that one British prime
minister, Mr Gladstone, called "the most wonderful work ever struck off at a
given time by the brain and purpose of man" - and which a later prime minister,
Mr Churchill, called "a rat trap".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP