Health Matters - 13 February 2004

Here is a little exchange of dialogue from an English novel written in 1915.

"My dear, Mr Peters, I trust I'm not unpunctual. I've been lunching at my
club."

"I'd have asked you to lunch here," said Mr Peters, "but you know how it is
with me: I promised the doctor I'd give those nuts and grasses of his a fair
trial, and I can do it pretty well but only when I'm alone, not with someone
else eating real food."

1915 - that was during the First World War. And what with the Germans
practically submarining us into starvation - two years later it almost happened
- it was a good time for doctors to recommend rather frugal ways of losing
weight when the voluptuous eating habits of the Edwardians were a memory.

Mr Peters' reference to grasses meant salads - green salads - not then a
regular feature of the English diet of any class.

Necessity turned slimming into a fashion when the First World War was over.
Food was still rationed and the acrobatic steps required to dance to the new
American jazz could be done better by a girl as slim as a trout with a flat
chest and Eton crop.

Nobody knew for certain how you produced or defined this womanly ideal except
that it somehow involved two new elements people had heard about - proteins and
carbohydrates.

But then they discovered the new and exciting thing called a vitamin. Indeed a
small alphabet of vitamins.

The doctors, the scientists, were hard put to it to say exactly what a vitamin
was but they touted it far and wide as a great way of chasing away excess fat.

And there sprouted all over so-called health food shops, marketing strange new
elixirs like dried fruits, grated carrots and all sorts of nuts.

By the late 1920s dieting was practically a national hobby and the miracle
ingredient - the vitamin - was widely recommended both for taking off weight
and then, by the 1930s, for putting it on.

In 1927 the most authoritative British medical journal caused a stir when in a
learned piece it warned that the diet alone consisting of protein,
carbohydrates, I guess even the miraculous vitamins, was not enough if you did
not - how shall we put it delicately? - keep this food moving vigorously.

There was one essential, what we now call, additive - roughage. Roughage was
the word for at least a quarter of a century till it was redefined as bran, a
bran product. We all started eating bran cereals.

I suppose in my time I've watched the ecstatic leap and the weary collapse of -
oh maybe - 30, 40 miracle diets.

However, a year or two ago the whole field of diet for obesity and diet for
heart condition exploded under the impact of a medical doctor who in a
reputable journal told the profession that, in the matter of losing weight
safely and permanently and in its counselling for heart patients, it was 180
degrees wrong.

He turned their prescriptions upside down. Not only should you not avoid
saturated fats - butter, cream, luscious meat - you should indulge yourself in
those very foods.

What you should avoid was bread, potatoes, pasta - carbohydrates of all sorts.

Of course this was precious news to most people not already under a
specialist's care.

Well, the debate that became a feud will die down but what has alarmed the
Atkins people and is likely to go on doing so is something else - an official
report issued this week by the orange growers of Florida and California.

They are being buffeted right and left. They've already suffered from the
advice of many cardiologists to their heart patients to avoid orange and
grapefruit juice on the grounds that ascorbic acid tends to harden the
arteries.

But the burden of the orange growers' protest is that the Atkins dieters warn
you to lay off oranges because the sweet taste is the taste of - to the late Dr
Atkins - a dread carbohydrate.

This week the orange growers say the general demand for orange juice has made
their harvest receipts drop 17% - a depressing figure.

The orange growers' plight nudges me with the reminder that one listener wants
to know what I meant the other week with my offhand mention of one of the
assignments I covered during the Second World War, when in Florida I watched
the process of concentrating orange juice for shipping to British children. It
was certainly one of the happiest of wartime assignments.

In a very small town - Dunedin, on the west coast of Florida - the Department
of Agriculture had suggested I take a look at a man they called "our mad
scientist", a chemist from the mountains of upstate New York.

He was as true stereo of the fictional type - spiky hair, goggly glasses,
clothes like an unmade bed, high nervous enthusiasm.

He had cause for enthusiasm: he had just solved a nasty problem that Britain
had presented to the United States Department of Agriculture in America's early
days in the war.

The Nazi submarines had got well into their underwater stride and were sinking
Allied freighters and tankers even as far west as the Florida Keys.

Britain was already feeling the squeeze of tight food rationing, in particular
the children were short of sources of vitamin C.

Florida had all the oranges in the world but thousands of whole oranges would
take up too much room in ships' bottoms meant for war material and essential
goods.

Our Dr Spiky found a way: putting into very small cans the concentrated juice,
which could be watered down at the other end to make whole orange juice five
times the volume of the original.

Concentrate plus five cups of water - that was the formula. Hugely exploited
commercially right after the war to the credit but not the bank account of the
government's Dr Spiky.

During our earlier discussion of dieting and medicines I should have mentioned
the universal comical situation, long before proteins and vitamins and special
diets were ever heard of.

From the early 19th century on, self-treatment consisted of buying anything
that was advertised as a magic cure - a cure for anything and everything.

It would take the better part of a century for our countries to set up a
government authority to police the claims of patent and acclaimed magic
medicines.

Even as late as my boyhood I remember a famous bottle with a famous name -
let's say Witheringay's Lung Tonic. That's all, you had tuberculosis or lung
cancer, just take a good nip of the lung tonic and ah, that's better. Can you
believe it?

In the very middle of the 19th century - 1850 exactly - the empress of cure-all
tonics, one Miss Lydia Pinkham, brewed her first magical remedy in Lynn,
Massachusetts.

You'd have thought she'd got the ingredients from the witches in Macbeth:
fenugreek seed, pleurisy root, black cobosh, unicorn root, water - and a secret
ingredient.

It was sold and consumed by women young and old all around America - Lydia
Pinkham's vegetable compound - "made especially", one advertisement wrote, "for
the troubles which beset our sex".

Lydia wrote many of the advertisements herself and they had a unique dignity in
delicate matters.

"Have you ever had a feeling of fullness around the fundament? This is
efficacious and pleasant to the taste."

Lydia Pinkham was in her person and in the likeness which adorned all her
bottles a woman of impeccable respectability, and was endorsed by many public
figures, including the treasurer of the Women's Christian Temperance Union:

"Dear sister, let the doctors alone. Lydia Pinkham's compound is better than
any and all doctors, for it cures and they do not."

What was so bracing, so curative about the compound?

It just happened to be the secret ingredient, not remarked on especially by the
treasurer of the Women's Christian Temperance Union.

It was alcohol - 22% alcohol! Which is a couple of stiff snorts of the demon
itself.

The government eventually delicately required her to reduce the percentage to
13. Still!

Her vast success - especially 30 years after her death during the era of
prohibition - was due, an old friend of mine wrote, to her combining the morals
of a saint with the business practices of a bootlegger.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP