Treasure Hunt in Iraq - 7 February 2003

Like a death in the family, the loss of the men and women on the Columbia
shuttle brought a humble pause to all the noise of the public debate over the
ogre Saddam Hussein and his misdeeds.

So long as the funeral service was proceeding and we saw the astronauts'
families - stoic or broken or inert - we were spared the professional
television commentators, the men who know all there is to know about everything
and can't wait to tell us.

But they turned out anyway to be old astronauts, Nasa experts, aviation
consultants, and to a man they started to mention heat tiles.

When I first heard the words "the probable loss of a heat tile" I was looking
at a panning shot of the mourners who'd not yet risen to go home.

The camera stopped on the profile, the granitey profile of an old man.

It was the profile of John Glenn, former marine colonel, the first American to
orbit the Earth, the hero of a television audience in a hundred countries way
back there just 41 years ago.

The phrase "heat tile", "heat shield" must have hit him like the point of a
dagger.

It sent me directly back to my report of that February day and in particular to
the dread few minutes when Glenn, in a Mercury capsule called Friendship 7,
lost communication with Houston and Houston thought the worst had happened.

Let me tell you about the worst.

Houston Mercury control must have had an awful time throughout the whole three
orbits for during the first orbit a warning light flickered in Houston which
signalled the loosening or unlatching of the heat shield.

Now this was a six-foot-in-diameter plastic shield, fastened to the front end
of the capsule, against which Glenn's head lay.

The plastic shield was the astronaut's barrier against a fiery death indeed.

The shield was constructed to withstand the 3,000-degree heat that flares up
when the capsule rips back into our atmosphere at a speed, it could be, of
17,000 miles an hour.

Below that outer shield were three rockets in a linen bag or pack which, once
fired, brake his speed and fire him out of orbit and back to Earth, so to
speak.

When the time came to order the firing of the rockets, Mercury control told
Glenn to retain the package that held the rockets.

They might, if the shield was to vanish, provide a second line of defence - a
desperate remedy.

The most poignant exchange came when they told him to hold on to the package of
rockets.

Glenn: "Can you tell me the reason for this?"

Mercury control: "They'll tell you over the Cape."

And then they ordered him to fire.

If the heat shield flew off Glenn would be burned to a cinder in an instant.

No word. A crackle of static and the swishing of a carrier wave for two and a
half awful minutes.

Two men at Mercury control down in Houston fainted.

All around the world huge dumb crowds stood silently gaping at screens in
theatres, railroad stations, stadiums - and then two words came in loud and
clear and live: "Friendship 7".

Never did "friendship" carry a more blessed sound.

When they got him back on the ground both the controllers and the press were
eager to know what John Glenn had known and how he'd taken it.

To everyone's relief Glenn had no suspicion that the heat shield had come
loose.

But after the firing, when the capsule was hurling downward, he noticed bits of
fiery stuff, like shreds of a burning flag, going by the window - it was the
rocket package burning up and vaporising.

And then for a second or two, hurtling at 15,000 miles an hour, the chilling
thought occurred to him that maybe it was the heat shield beginning to break
up.

At which mind, very quickly, took over matter.

"I was suddenly," he said, "very supersensitive along my er ... backside."

Had it scared him?

"It had given me a moment of some concern."

I wonder how much of this went through the mind above the fixed, motionless
face of John Glenn the other sad afternoon?

Once the service was over, the various experts began to look for causes,
reasons and lapses in the launch, in the control of the capsule and in no time
at all of course there would be fidgeting muck-rakers poised to pounce on
everybody from the designers of the capsule system to the controllers of this
mission for dereliction of duty, if not criminal carelessness.

But the experts reported only that so far they knew something had fallen off
more or less on takeoff but that after several days into flight they'd stopped
worrying about it.

The prevailing belief is that the heat tiles - they are now - fell off or
otherwise failed.

A huge hunt for debris is on - it's more like an Antarctic exploration - for
debris that has been flung across many hundreds of miles.

The hunt, by the way, is expected to take possibly a year or more, since lots
of what might be significant bits could lie as deep in the soil of impenetrable
woods as most of Saddam's biochemical weapons are buried in Iraq.

Of course the towering political event of the week was the appearance of former
general, now Secretary of State, Colin Powell - to present what he called
irrefutable and undeniable evidence that since the beginning of the new round
of inspections Saddam has continued without a moment's repentance to develop
nuclear weapons and has hidden away, with no intention of uncovering, huge
stores of chemical and biological weapons.

Before General Powell gave his case for the prosecution the question among the
15 members of the Security Council and the attending inspectors, ambassadors,
representatives of the coalition - the question the listening delegates were
anxious to discover was, how much declassified information will he give us?

The question for the Secretary himself was, how much dare I declassify?

This has been the problem since the start of the new inspections, and the one
that has led to two different interpretations of the inspectors' job.

The countries that are most reluctant to go to war stick to the belief or the
theory that the inspectors' job is to track down hidden weapons and/or the
means to make them.

In simpler words this is a treasure hunt. And even the French admit that
looking for a small, torpedo-shaped object, let alone a test tube, in a
landscape the area of California, which is 850 miles long and about 200 miles
wide, is a testy, tedious business.

Hence some of the shrinkers, self-called peace-makers, would like to send more
and more inspectors.

This shows a fundamental misunderstanding of the Council resolution that
ordered the inspections.

A misunderstanding no longer shared, if ever, by the two leading men - Hans
Blix, the biochemical detective, and his associate, the nuclear prober.

They left this week after very little speech to the press to go to Baghdad to
make clear that they find Saddam not in compliance with the Council resolution
and declaring that he must perform a drastic change in his behaviour.

Secretary Powell played over intercepted conversations which are just about as
damning as such tapes could be, inquiring whether a vital object of the search
had been covered up or removed before the UN inspectors might stumble on it.

Indeed the watchword of the non-cooperating Iraqis seems to have been, as in
one tape: make sure there's nothing there, destroy evidence and documents,
cover up, cover up.

The Secretary also showed aerial photographs of many moving trucks. If they
were not carrying chemical munitions why were they all trailed by identifiable
decontamination trucks?

It was curious that in that interview last weekend Saddam said that a weapon of
mass destruction is a large and cumbersome object. It's not, he said, an
aspirin tablet you can carry in your pocket.

He's wrong or, shall I say, speaks falsely about that.

Eighteen months ago, shortly after 11 September, I had the honour of a visit
from a distinguished scientist, a world expert on building and maintaining the
foundations of tunnels.

He'd been called in to Ground Zero to see what could best be done with the
underground damage at the site - the damage to drains, electricity, cables, the
subway system, which had gone down the depth of nine storeys of a skyscraper.

Visiting me later he looked out my study window at the placid reservoir of
Central Park.

There was, as always, a jogger going round and my scientist said casually:
"Just to think, an envelope slipped into that reservoir and you might leave a
hundred thousand New Yorkers without any drinking water."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS
COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP