Secret of Eternal Youth - 24 May 2002

"And believing this to be an island and because it has a very beautiful view of
many woodlands and is level and uniform, and because moreover they discovered
it in the time of the Feast of Flowers, they named it La Florida."

"They" should be "he" and he was a Spanish explorer, Juan Ponce de León, a
friend of Columbus - in fact his companion on the second voyage to the New
World.

He was a professional soldier of a prominent family, had explored and conquered
what is now the island of Puerto Rico.

He became governor. He also became very rich through the gold he'd discovered,
the land he'd annexed and the slaves who worked it for him.

However, late in his life the Puerto Rico Indians told him a tantalising story.
Go north of us, they said, go north and west and you'll find an island even
richer than ours in gold but also possessing something unique - a fountain, a
magic fountain whose waters can restore you to your youth.

Now at that time Ponce de León was described by the Spanish royal historian as
"robust but 50 years old", which by today's reckoning would be like saying he
was still vigorous but crowding 80.

A fountain of youth! What a marvellous prospect.

Well he sailed away and he sighted the Florida peninsula at the end of March
1513 and followed its long coastline.

Like the explorers from any other European country, including the English,
Ponce de León had no scruples about what to do with any stretch of land or an
island not on the map. He annexed it.

He did not find the fountain. But having declared Florida Spanish he sailed
back to Puerto Rico.

As he approached 60 he must have pined again for that fountain and he got a
commission and a blessing from the King of Spain and he set up a crew fully
equipped to colonise Florida, to come on the fountain of youth and live happily
and young forever.

He came on, instead, a battling tribe of Florida Indians.

He was severely wounded and sailed back to Havana, just making port in time to
die.

No longer robust, youth unrestored - a very disappointed old man.

But his name has resonated down the centuries and is known to the average
American for just that one legend - he was the man who went looking for the
fountain of youth.

And according to today's Florida chambers of commerce he found it - in Florida!

And there today, all through the winter months, you can see along the white
beaches on both coasts old men and women in shorts in their 70s and 80s,
padding along in the blazing sun, adding a daily gloss to what they fancifully
believe to be a golden tan, but which to the onlooker is a dark purple,
coffee-coloured glaze, barely hiding the wrinkled face and the wriggling
varicose veins.

But, they swear, their youth is restored.

Hence in Miami the three recognised ages of man - youth, middle-aged and "gee
you look great!"

I suppose that after a certain age the secret yearning to look younger than you
are is universal.

But I do believe that in no other country has this urge, this yen, to restore
one's youth been so much of and for so long a national cult, if not a religion.

For centuries women have tried to erase the signs of ageing for perfumes and
powders and more effectively with various ointments, especially ointments from
countries you'd never heard of. There's something more exciting about the
essences and unguents from greener pastures.

And then, I guess it was because of the great advances in facial surgery that
were, you might say, compelled by the Second World War, it occurred first to
movie actresses and their promoters that the time had come to use the
techniques acquired by army surgeons to restore at least the appearance of
youth.

Cosmetic surgery came into its own.

I wanted to tell you about the latest thing - a new magic, without surgery,
that has been touted all across this country.

And I shall tell you - I will tell you - but next time, for I see head shakings
and I hear protesting sighs: surely he must talk about the frightful uproar in
Washington and, we hear, around America from the suspicion, the awful rumour,
that the president had forewarning of 11 September catastrophe and ignored it.

Well let me say at once there has been a frightful uproar, which is a disgrace
to the citizens and the political party that provoked it, and say even more
quickly that of course the president had nothing more to go on than you had,
whoever you are, on and before that tragic morning.

There is, however, a spreading web of rumour and fantasy. But the facts are
quite simple.

This is what is known as a mid-term year - a November election second only to
that of a presidential year in importance - when one third of the Senate and
the whole of the House of Representatives will be up for election or
re-election.

For over eight months the Democrats, the opposition, have found no big issue
with which to confront, to shame, or to fight the president.

Only about five months to election day and Mr Bush still has 70% of the nation
backing him.

Since the winter the Democrats have tried to mount various protest campaigns -
airport security isn't what it might be, the coastguard isn't competent to
check every merchant ship delivering on these shores, why has nobody solved the
anthrax problem? - the FBI and the CIA ought to be combined and share their
intelligence.

The response from the administration mostly has been "We quite agree with you".

So no Democrat dare question the vast sums of money being poured out in the
cause of tighter and ever tighter national security, by which is really meant
the guaranteed safety of its citizens.

But at no time since the fatal 11th has any public servant had the courage to
say publicly "There is and can be no guarantee of safety of any individual."

I suddenly recall a late evening in a Texas hotel with three, four aides
sitting shooting the breeze, as we say, with the president of the United
States.

Somehow the talk turned to the number - seven, eight, nine - of the
presidential assassinations and attempts.

And one aide said, "But I think today the way we've trained and held the secret
service always within physical reach of the president it would be a practical
impossibility."

At which the president said, "If a man is determined to kill the president of
the United States he'll do it."

Thereupon President Kennedy yawned and said, "Turn out the lights, I'm going to
bed."

Next day he was shot on the streets of Dallas.

Well: the glum electoral prospect of the Democrats.

I don't know how it happened but a very partisan Democrat congresswoman from
the South announced that the president had foreknowledge of the Twin Towers
attack and covered it up.

Whereupon the Senate's long-time Democrat leader, Congressman Richard Gephardt,
comes on the tube, very grim, very earnest, and says, "We want to know what did
the president know and when did he know it?"

Tough, blunt line of Churchillian simplicity.

It wasn't Congressman Gephardt's invention, it's as well known to two
generations of Americans as "England expects every man to do his duty" is known
to English schoolboys.

It was coined by a senator on the committee that first investigated Mr Nixon's
part in Watergate. And the answer to that question is what tumbled him.

And then Senator Feinstein of California was equally grim and implicitly
accusing.

The junior senator from New York, one Hillary Rodham Clinton, was more
forthright still, as forthright indeed as the tabloid whose wicked front page,
two-word, headline she quoted: "Bush Knew".

Could this, Senator Clinton wondered artlessly, could this possibly be true? We
ought to be told, ought we not?

When the president came on television and, manfully bottling his natural
outrage, said in one sentence that if he'd had a clue, known a thing about the
attack, he would have given his best to protect the people. Of course.

Congressman Gephardt came back and said he never, never for a minute thought of
imputing any blame to the president.

Senator Feinstein said, "Let's stop playing the blame game" - which she had
helped to start. Senator Clinton has not been heard from.

All we know from the subsequent research of the FBI, the CIA and now two Senate
committees is that an FBI agent in the Arizona desert had a warning in August
from somewhere that a known terrorist had said some big attack was coming to
the United States.

Lately - note the word lately - it has been almost proved that the man could
have been one of the September actual hijackers.

That warning from Phoenix, Arizona, last August is all we have to go on and I
wish the administration or somebody would point out that that was not, in the
intelligence community, the news of the day.

Both the FBI and the CIA and the counter-intelligence department of the
government - hundreds of agents - received then and are receiving today and
everyday thousands of warnings, rumours, classified hints and nudges and
threats.

But, the scandalous damage was done. People rose up and bawled, "Why weren't we
told and why don't you warn us?"

At which point the vice-president and the secretary of defence said, "OK: a new
attack is almost certain and terrorists may soon have nuclear weapons, and
that's what you have to live with."

In the meantime, erm, just, er, go about your lives normally - stay on the
alert of course - but, shop, work, umm, go to the movies, as Sir Rudolph
Giuliani used to say.

It all reminds me of the time 20-some years ago when on the divided motor
highway running alongside La Guardia Airport they put up, at intervals, for the
benefit of motorists, signs saying in block capitals: WARNING, LOW FLYING
AIRCRAFT.

What were we supposed to do? Duck?

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS
COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP