Nobody is Breathing Fire and Smoke

There was to us a sad sentence in the paper on Wednesday, buried deep in a huge
piece about the rift in Nato.

This was the sentence: "Sympathy for the United States over the September 11th
attacks has largely evaporated in a Europe troubled by the American drive to
oust Saddam Hussein."

It seems an age ago, though it was only 16, 17 months, when the president and
Mayor Giuliani - the hero of Ground Zero - went on the air time and again to
tell us, with becks and nods and brave smiles, to go about our lives as usual.

"Erm ... Go shopping, take the kids on a picnic, go to a movie."

This, it turned out, was naive advice, at best, contradicted within days by the
government's own caution - "But, be on the alert at all times, be ready for
another attack."

Nobody told us how to do that and the general effect was mainly comic, like
those newly-posted signs years ago on the highway running alongside La Guardia
airport which said: "Caution: low-flying planes."

What caution could you take?

A friend and I playing a variation of the old "spot a beard" game used to watch
cars drive by those signs and see how many people spontaneously ducked inside
their cars looking like a quick scene from an old Benny Hill Show.

However, time gallops on and changes drastically.

First item on the evening news on Monday was an announcement from the
government, the new homeland security department, with a personal appearance
from Mr Ashcroft, the Attorney General.

It is he who has probably had the most driven, anxiety-ridden life of anyone in
government, since the fatal 11th.

As boss of the FBI and every other federal officer of justice he's been in
charge first of the search for the suicide bombers and then their sponsors,
associates, for Guantanamo, for trying to find and identify the Arab immigrants
at large in the country who outstayed their visas.

The attorney general also sets the level of risk on the new colour scale that
the government has invented.

On Monday it went to orange, next to the highest.

Over last weekend the attorney general told us of imminent attacks from
al-Qaeda on Americans.

So on Monday the government's recommendation - which was delivered with all the
solemnity of an order - told us all, all 280 millions of us in the cities and
the deserts and the mountains - north, south, east, west - to begin now to take
precautions against an imminent attack by stocking the larder with four days of
food and buying reams of duct tape - that thick, grey adhesive tape, stickier
than Scotch tape.

For what purpose? To seal up your windows and doors against a biochemical
attack.

And much of the rest of the domestic news that followed was scenes of health
workers getting anthrax vaccine - but most poignantly to me, shots of young
mothers in the supermarkets from Florida to Alaska, piling the carts with
fruits and bread and packaged foods and bottled water, while the baby, clinging
to their necks, looked on, blinking, unimpressed, blessedly unknowing.

Pictures as pathetic and sympathetic as any since those of the begrimed young
nurses emerging from the inferno of 11 September.

It's the biochemical element that fuels nightmares in some people and disturbs
even the most placid.

As a kind of ghostly apology to this nightmare, two nights later we watched an
interview with a gentle, refined woman - the scientist in charge of Iraq's
biochemical arsenal.

A more diffident, reasonable poisoner it would be difficult to imagine.

Of course, she said, she was not ashamed of her trade, she was proud for her
country, to have helped devise these hideous instruments of death - but they
had been disposed of.

Anyway they would never be used except as retaliation against an American
attack.

But like all the other Iraqi scientists questioned, she didn't say where the
poison arsenals had been stored and when they'd been destroyed, in accordance
with the - 17 is it? - 17 resolutions passed by the Security Council since
1990.

That is the most exacting requirement of the pro-war case.

Now how about the anti-war case?

It began way back there with the invasion of Afghanistan.

That put the first logs on the anti-American fire. But I don't believe for
long.

The voices of people who'd never heard of the Taleban or al-Qaeda were loud in
protest.

America had hurled itself into Afghanistan with no motive, no real right,
bombed poor women and children and left the place in chaos.

I don't think even the most rabid anti-American believes that anymore.

In a brief and brilliant campaign, Secretary of Defence Rumsfeld destroyed the
governing Taleban, scattered al-Qaeda agents - and incidentally while it spent
a billion dollars a month fighting the war, is rebuilding a country which was
close to chaos to begin with but is now getting the help of the United States
Army, a thousand young American Peace Corps volunteers and medics, to build up
schools and schools for women especially, medical clinics, relief centres and
so on.

This effort is what President Bush has in mind for a post-war Iraq.

The manufactured picture of him as a bully, imperialist, blustering cowboy is
way off the mark.

His strength - and his weakness - is that he is a Christian idealist on the
Woodrow Wilson model.

He truly proposes what most of us find simply undoable - to depose tyrants and
introduce democracy everywhere.

The first European fear about him when he took office was that he would retreat
into the old, inter-war Republican isolationism.

Now he's accused of wanting to police the world. He believes it's America's
duty, as it once was Spain's, France's, Britain's.

I must say the last quality anyone claims for George Bush is prudence. Not
"ought it to be done?" but "can it possibly be done?" - and that is the heart
of the anti-war case.

I'm not considering for one moment the protest marches and student placards.
They're mostly simply anti-war - any war - and the bigger parades have taken
all the sting out of the Iraq debate by providing a circus for every sort of
dissenter to flock to - environmentalists, anti-abortionists, anti-farm
lobbyists, professional pacifists and masses of the simply scared.

I do not think we have any obligation to debate anyone who is for peace at any
price.

But in the past month of two thoughtful opponents - and they're very much on
the rise - have been mobilising powerful arguments against the president's
seeming determination to go it alone if the United Nations does not firmly and
clearly specify military action - not, as now, such wheedle-word punishments as
"serious consequences" or "grave developments".

The main case has lately been made by two distinguished political scientists.

1. Saddam is not irrational, he's never gone to war in the face of a deterrent
threat. Once he did it against Iran because its revolutionary government tried
to topple him with border raids and assassinations of high officials.

The second time was at the Gulf - a dispute about war debts and the price of
oil at a time when the United States embassy appeared to say that his invasion
of Kuwait was not an American concern.

2. Iraq's nuclear programme was destroyed by United Nations inspectors between
1991 and 1998 and Iraq has not rebuilt it. The evidence of using or
transporting plutonium and the processes of rebuilding the project are slight.
Slighter still, in spite of Herculean efforts on the part of the
administration, is evidence of a link between the secular Saddam and the
fundamentalist Bin Laden.

But suppose this estimate is wrong? Saddam knows that as Miss Rice, the
National Security Advisor, herself puts it: "Weapons of mass destruction are
unusable by Saddam because he knows that any attempt to use them would bring
national obliteration."

3. As for the nightmare of biochemical weapons, he's used it only against a
weak enemy that could not retaliate in kind. Saddam knows that the United
States, if it chose, could retaliate in kind with overwhelming force.

4. The toppling of Saddam would cost the limping American economy between $50bn
and $100bn - which it might not have. And the costs of occupying, policing and
stabilising the huge country would take years, many more billions and might in
fact become intolerable. As well as diverting the national energies from
al-Qaeda.

Which brings them back to the main point. That Saddam is already in a closed
box.

With inspectors there, his weapons work is being closely watched.

There is already a massive reserve of battle-trained American troops. Could not
these be gradually reduced and replaced by a large United Nations peacekeeping
force but one backed by an American reserve?

The conclusion is: "We should maintain vigilant containment" - the policy that
the rest of the world regards as preferable and effective.

Saddam Hussein needs to remain in his box but we don't need a war to keep him
there.

Contrary to the foreign tabloid obsession, nobody is breathing fire and smoke,
nobody wants to go to war.

The very latest polls show 65% of Americans willing to go to war if the United
Nations sanctions it. Only 37% if not.

But it has to be said that as the prospect darkens, no more than half the
American people want to go to war at all.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP