The Year of the Census - 14 April 2000

Just one year after the Constitution of the United States came into effect,
Congress decided it was time to discover how many human beings were alive in
the former colonial territory and could now call themselves Americans.

In simpler words: it was time to count the population. And Congress passed, in
1790, something called the Census Act.

And the first count taken in that year revealed there were 3,929,000 breathing
living people or as my old golf pro used to say when I asked him how he was:
"Above ground and mobile."

Well today there are 248 millions, or I should say were, at last count which
was for 1990. The Act required a census to be taken every 10 years and today
the guess is that the round figure is well over 260 millions.

So: this year's census. I don't believe that in more than half a century of
this correspondence I ever talked before about the American census because I
suppose there's never been much of a news or a social story in it.

The census was called, people filled in or, here, "filled out" the forms, sent
them back, many millions were called on by newly appointed counters who went
door to door doing for the sick, the disabled, the very old, the reluctant,
what most people had done willingly for themselves.

But this year, not to talk about the current census would be to miss a national
story that is hot, contentious, hilarious, absurd, comic and like so many other
recent debates in American society springs from a new or more widespread
popular concern for, not to say obsession with, rights - individual rights.

People who never in their lives pronounced the word "constitutional" now use it
everyday with much heat and spittle, claiming as "rights" many things which are
not even mentioned in the Constitution.

It used to be taken for granted that filling in - filling out - the census form
was a normal duty of citizenship. The word "duty", by the way, seems to have
vanished from public discourse.

But a tremendous hullabaloo has arisen over the question, not previously
shouted out loud, of whether being required to answer many questions on the
census forms isn't an invasion of individual privacy.

Now in debates, I mean actual debates in Congress and elsewhere, you'll often
hear law makers or lawyers in trials talk about the sacredness of the right to
privacy. This is a rhetorical device - an attempt to sway emotions. The
speakers don't usually go on about it because the Constitution does not mention
any right of privacy.

But came in the early 1970s the dreadful Watergate affair, when President Nixon
was able to cover up a criminal conspiracy for so long because for so long he
claimed time and again that he was not subject to the law which could make him
reveal the content of dialogue, conversations, about public business taped in
his presidential office.

And many of those conversations were exclusively about covering up a bungled
attempt to steal or tape confidential material from the files of the Democratic
- the opposition - Party.

It sounds like a simple petty criminal blunder but it came to entail paying out
enormous sums of hush money to the burglars and others in the conspiracy. And
where did those enormous monies come from? From a public fund that raised money
for the re-election of President Nixon.

Well the Supreme Court decided that the White House tapes were government files
and constituted therefore, on Mr Nixon's part, perjury, obstruction of justice
and criminal misuse of government documents. If only Mr Nixon had remembered
sometimes to shut off his recording machine he might be there still.

Anyway after the Watergate mess, which for the first time in history saw a
president resign in disgrace, that same year - 1974 - Congress passed an
Invasion of Privacy Act and ever since public men from the president down have
been very careful about using private papers, phone calls, tapes, whatever as
evidence to incriminate someone.

With this act in place and well publicised there has been, in the past 20 years
or more, growing awareness on the part of the public of how much some outsider
- an insurance company, a bank, a department store, real estate broker - has a
right or doesn't have a right to know about you.

And with the arrival of the internet this awareness has grown into a general
fear, almost a paranoia, that somebody somewhere is going to know too much and
take advantage of you.

Not least, and especially after President Reagan's successful if vague campaign
to, as he put it, to "get government off our backs", people are questioning how
much the government has a right to know about you and your private life,
resources, relationships and so on.

So suddenly what could more lustily feed this fear, this apprehension, than the
year of the census?

Ten years ago, maybe back to 1790, most people obediently answered the
questions on the census form and then went about their business without a
second thought.

But let it be noted, as a footnote to American history, that a fairly new
immigrant in, I believe, Pennsylvania - a refugee from a dictatorship -
received this year's census form and at once cried: "What is this - a police
state?"

The forms themselves vary, of course, from decade to decade.

This year the 2000 census forms ask many of the questions they've asked for
years, for centuries, but for the first time the census bureau reports: "There
is a growing segment of the population which seems to think that we're invading
people's privacy."

So much so that while the forms were supposed to be returned by last Tuesday
only 60% are so far in. The official date has therefore been moved on to the
end of April, by which time the bureau will send off 500,000 counters to go
begging from door to door and many of those people expect the door to be shut
in their faces.

I ought to say that this time there are two forms distributed arbitrarily - a
simple one with about eight questions and another form with pages and pages, 53
questions, and it takes an intelligent, educated, hard-concentrating responder
about 40 minutes to answer.

Most people who get the short form, I must say, are only too happy about it
when they hear that the other form pokes into everything from your health,
income, prosperity, to the number of flushing toilets in your home, to details
about family mental illness and other revealing clinical details.

Well, popular discontent on several grounds but mainly the invasion of privacy,
of fear of government harassment got so bad that last Friday the Senate of the
United States approved a resolution - the resolution has no binding force -
urging that "no American will be prosecuted, fined or in any way harassed by
the federal government."

This resolution is saying, in effect: 'Go ahead, tick everything off, don't be
afraid.' Yet the gorgeous irony in it is that the resolution gives any
respondent permission to skip - that's to refuse to answer - one of the three
or four most basic questions in any country's census, the question: "What is
your race?"

Indeed the first grumblings about this year's census forms started with what
has become, in the past 40-odd years ever since the end of racial segregation,
what's become perhaps the touchiest of social questions.

Once Negroes disliked being called Negroes we adopted "blacks" as acceptable.

Many, especially the more literate, preferred to call themselves or be called
African-Americans.

But then, after a flood of Asian immigrants on the West Coast from Vietnam and
Cambodia, Hong Kong, Korea - many of them wished to have a separate
identification.

The young golfing star Tiger Woods for instance does not like being called
black or Asian exclusively. He once described himself as
African-Asian-Thai-American. His father was a black soldier, his mother a Thai
- once Siamese.

Unlike the immigrants of a century ago exactly, whom President Teddy Roosevelt
urged to forget their hyphens - "Let's have," he said, "no more
Italian-Americans, German-Americans, Russian-Americans" - the last quarter
century's wave of immigrants, from the Caribbean especially, has wanted to
preserve their origins and be known as (for a violent example) Cuban-Americans.

So the census bureau, under pressure from the Senate and the politically
correct, has given up on asking people, perhaps, the most informative question
of all.

In one thing and only one has the bureau shown, of all things, a single flash
of common sense: they have abandoned the usage of "Native American" for
"American Indian" after a far-reaching tidal wave of protests from Americans
who, like my wife, insist that having been born here they are nothing but
native Americans.

I have to say that this first blow for common sense in this rigmarole about
race was struck by the current chieftain of an Indian tribe - the relic of an
Indian tribe - in New England.

He was invited to do the annual commencement speech at a famous college which
was founded in the 18th century for the education of local Indians. He accepted
on one condition: that the invitation forms to the accompanying banquet should
be changed and he should be described, not as a famous native American but as
simply the first American Indian to address the college.

PS the final twist to the story, which might have been added by Anatole France
or better Woody Allen, was given last week when a famous American was sued for
releasing to the public private letters of a woman who has accused him of
sexually groping her.

The man says the letters show a more amicable relationship. A federal judge
says that they are public papers since they were kept in the White House and
the man has violated the Privacy Act.

The man's name is William Jefferson Clinton.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (Â©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts Â©BBC. Letter from America
scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP