Separated by Language - 17 October 2003

An old friend of mine, an Englishman, was saying how close British English and
American English have become compared with the days, say, of my boyhood when
nobody in Britain except kings, statesmen, ambassadors and bankers had ever
heard an American speak.

I was 21 when sound - what we called talking pictures - came in. And I remember
the shock to all of us when we heard the weird sounds coming out of the mouths
of the people on the screen. And, of course, quite apart from becoming familiar
with the odd pronunciations of Americans of all sorts, we began to notice
differences in written American. In the usage of words, we become aware, for
the first time, of the great changes and unknown additions to the language that
had been made by Englishmen who had been settling in America for 300 years.

It occurred to most of us rather late that this was bound to happen when
Englishmen arrived on a new continent and saw a new landscape which had to be
described with different words - tide water, creek, dwyvil. New foods, new
habits of life and work. Not to mention the adoption, first from the Dutch, of
new words for objects new and old. Englishmen who'd eaten buns found themselves
eating crullers and sitting out on the stoops of their houses.

If you want to follow the impress of Spanish, Russian, German, Italian,
Hungarian, Czech and the other European languages on the English of America,
all you have to do is go to the library and take out the three volumes, 2400
finely printed pages of Mr H.L. Mencken's massive work The American Language -
and that will take you only as far as 1950.

The point my old friend was making was that since almost 70 years of talking
pictures and the radio and television now becoming universal media, nothing in
American speech or writing surprises us any more and the two languages have
rubbed together so closely for so long that they're practically
indistinguishable.

Well there's much in it but there are still many little signs, in any given
piece of American prose, that my friend would miss and that most Englishmen too
would miss.

Just last week there was printed in the New Yorker magazine a phrase about
"Californian wines", proving that the writer or the copy editor was English -
no American talks or writes about Californian wines. "California wines" yes,
California is the adjective, Californian is a noun - a native or resident of
California. Same with Texas: a Texas custom not a Texan.

The other most gross and most frequent trick, which not one Englishman in a
thousand ever seems to notice, is this - I say or write: "I have a friend in
England called Alan Owen" that is an immediate giveaway. No American could say
or write it unless they'd been corrupted by long association with the Brits.
Americans write and say, "I have a friend in England named Alan Owen". Maybe
he's called Al - "called" would refer to a nickname, right?

We went on to discussing American words, phrases - usually slang - that are
picked up in England - E.B. White said it usually took 15 years - and there go
wrong, quite often assuming an opposite meaning. A beauty close to home is the
word bomb. When a book, a play, a movie flops with a sickly thud, it's said to
have bombed - "It ran a year in London but bombed in New York". Inexplicably it
got to England and took on the opposite meaning.

I shall never, and you'll appreciate, forget a telephone call from my daughter
in England when a book of mine, a history of America, carrying the succinct
title of America had just come out. "Daddy," she shouted across the Atlantic,
"your book is a bomb". I very much prayed it wasn't so. Indeed the fact that it
wasn't is one reason why I'm sitting here talking to you at this late date, in
comfort.

Now all this amiable light talk sprang from a darker happening. The passing of
a great American writer who received a large worthy obituary in The New York
Times but to my surprise and dismay did not rate a mention in the news
magazines. I'm afraid because the writers of literary obituaries are too young
to have remembered the splendid prime and great popularity of the man.

His name was Jerome Weidman and if we were living in the 1930s, 40s or 50s and
he'd died you would no more have been ignorant of his name than today you would
say: "Who is John Updike? Who is Martin Amis?"

"Who," by the way, asked a contemporary of a grandson of mine, "Who was Ernest
Hemingway?" There you have it. The frailty, the treachery, of fame.

Jerome Weidman was not just a popular novelist in the sense that James Michener
or Dorothy Sayers were popular novelists. Jerome Weidman was a popular novelist
who greatly impressed the literary world of New York with his first novel. He
was 24 years old and earning $11 a week as an office boy, when, in the spring
of 1937, he published I Can Get It For You Wholesale. Here was a story mining a
new vein by a young man who, even at that tender age, knew the subject, the
terrain, the people inside out.

It was about Manhattan's garment centre, the hub and vortex or maybe half a
million New Yorkers who whirl every day around the making of suits and pants
and coats. A mainly Jewish industry because so many immigrant tailors
originally had set it up.

Jerome Weidman's mother was Hungarian and his father a young Austrian, who,
like George Gershwin's Russian father, was alerted to the prospect of America
and the immigrant ships by hearing the sound of a bugle - the call to fight for
the Austrian Emperor which didn't mean a year or two of military service but a
semi-life sentence.

He hopped it to New York city and went at once, on the Lower East Side, back to
his only trade. He made trousers - pants. His son Jerome maintained against all
comers that his father's unique genius was for making better pants pockets than
any other tailor on earth. Jerome was brought up on the Lower East Side to the
sights and sounds and idiom of the garment men and their families. And that
first book created a character, one Harry Bogen, a shrewd quicksilver scamp who
in several disguises was to appear in his later books.

All the best ones were about this life that he knew as well as Dickens knew the
East End of London. What was new and what liberated the American novel from
gentility or the Hemingway flat protest against gentility, was the running
talk, the exact sound and sense of these lowly characters. The first generation
immigrant sons striving to be free.

Now, you'll see why such a man, such a writer prompted our whole talk about the
American language. Jerome Weidman was the first American street smart novelist.
There, there's another one turned in England, often into "street wise" -
nobody's "wise" on the streets but Jerome Weidman and his swarming characters
are nothing if not street "smart".

He never adopted this language, it came so naturally that, when he chose titles
for his subsequent works, he fell as naturally as Ira and George Gershwin did
into simply taking over some prevailing bit of American idiom or slang. After I
Can Get It For You Wholesale came What's In It For Me? and The Price is Right,
marvellously constructed short novels that made guessing the next turn of
character as tense as tracking down a murderer.

His last book, written 11 years ago, was a memoir and the book editor of The
New Yorker magazine headed his review with the single, simple, word "Pro". And
so he was, the complete professional as Balzac was a pro and Dickens.

Indeed it's not reaching too far to say that Jerome Weidman was the Dickens of
the Lower East Side, throw in the Bronx too. He never started out with an
ambition to be a writer. He was going into the garment business then, he
thought, law school. Then he read Mark Twain and saw how he made literature out
of the humblest material. All you needed was insight into character and an ear
for the character's speech.

Weidman once wrote: "Life for me on East 4th Street, when I was a boy, was not
unlike what life on the banks of the Mississippi had been for young Sam Clemens
of Hannibal, Missouri. Guileless, untrained and un-selfconscious, I put the
stories down on paper the way I'd learned to walk".

After a fine rollicking success as a novelist, he wrote a musical play about
the incomparable, cocky, little Italianate reform mayor of New York City -
Fiorello La Guardia. It was called simply Fiorello.

Now, the most prestigious theatre prize in this country - as also for fiction,
history, whatever - is the Pulitzer prize. On a spring day in 1960, in his 48th
year, Jerome Weidman was deliciously thunderstruck to hear he'd won it with
Fiorello.

I should tell you that if another famous novelist had lived on a year or two
longer you may be sure that one of the first calls of congratulation would have
come from him - Jerome's old friend, the late W. Somerset Maugham.

As it was, the first call came from his mother. Neither Jerome's father nor
mother was comfortable with English, they were of that immigrant generation
that was forever wary of the outside world they'd moved into, the world of
America and Americans.

Jerome Weidman recalled with pride and typical exactness what his mother said
to him over that telephone call: "Mr Mawg-ham was right that a college like
Columbia University, when they decide to give you a prize like this, should go
pick a day and do it that it's the 12th anniversary of the founding of the
State of Israel. If you listened to me and became a lawyer, a wonderful thing
like this could never have happened."

He will be rediscovered and revived and read when many more famous and
fashionable American writers - big guns today - are dead and gone forever.
Jerome Weidman born Lower East Side New York City 1913, died Upper East Side
New York City, October 1998. RIP Jerome, Harry Bogen and Momma and Poppa
Weidman.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (Â©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts Â©BBC. Letter from America
scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP