A Villain of American History - 02 March 2001

I don't suppose the name Elbridge Gerry strikes a resounding chord.

Governor of Massachusetts? No? No need to blush. I doubt the name means a thing
to one American in a thousand.

There's just been a national poll published with a frankly shocking result. The
simple question was posed: Name the four greatest presidents in American
history.

There've been 41 of them. The 42nd is just come up to bat. So even an American
no older than, say, 30 should be able to make a plausible guess.

Two years ago 30 prominent historians picked their four. They were: Lincoln,
Franklin Roosevelt, George Washington, Theodore (Teddy) Roosevelt.

Like any other expert list it's disputable but a pretty impressive quartet, not
really requiring a vast knowledge of American history.

Well, listen to the result of today's national poll:

1. Ronald Reagan

2. John F Kennedy

3. President Bush the First

4. Bill Clinton.

What does this tell us? Possibly that very little American history is taught in
the schools or not much listened to.

More probably that for the past generation or two books and study - yes, even
on the internet - have left a far lighter impression on the public mind than
television and Hollywood dramatisations of the lives and works of the
presidents.

More than ever, I think, nations will live and draw their ideals - their
standards of behaviour - from the dramatisation of famous myths.

I read the other night that when Churchill was writing his History of the
English-Speaking Peoples, the historians who were helping him with the research
were dismayed when he overruled their suggestion that he cut out the tale of
King Alfred burning the housewife's cakes.

"No, no," he said, "it must stay. Myths are important, if not more than
important than facts in the memory of a people."

I must say, on second thought, he has 4,000 years of history on his side. The
plays of the ancient Greeks, through Shakespeare's histories, on to Oliver
Stone's grotesque account of Kennedy's assassination may be pulsating drama but
are mostly terrible history.

Still it hurts to know that most Americans' judgement of great presidents is
that they resemble movie stars and are to be admired most for fighting a war or
emerging unscathed from scrapes or scandals.

So back to Governor Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts - a signer of the
Declaration of Independence, a decent - notably conscientious - politician of
the late 18th Century.

Nevertheless by the entirely innocent association of his name with a shady
political practice he's been called an enduring "villain of American history".

This is how it came about. Since the invention of the American Republic a
number of congressmen any state could send to Washington was directly related
to the population - one congressman for one congressional district.

And a district was drawn on every map so as to enclose, as truly as possible,
approximately the same number of people.

So you can see that from the beginning states were eager to increase their
population and then claim that they would have to have two districts, so they'd
have two congressmen instead of one.

It's easy to see how much ingenuity, cunning and plain fraud could be exercised
in "re-districting", as it's called.

Well in 1811 a bill came before Governor Gerry - people pronounced it that way,
"Jerry" - which rather drastically redrew the congressional districts of
Massachusetts to favour the Democrats and rob the opposition of a seat or two.

The next election made the losers feel and sound like the Florida Democrats who
recently howled that they'd been robbed of the presidency. It became a national
scandal.

A drawing of the most shamelessly expanded congressional district was
circulated as an emblem of crookery. It was a very odd shape.

The new district appeared, to the famous painter Gilbert Stuart, like some
animal - a lizard perhaps. He looked at the map, he sketched in a few telling
lines with a pencil and what he produced was the drawing of a salamander.

He shouted to the editor of a Boston paper who promptly said: "Salamander? No,
no, no. Let's call it a Gerrymander."

The governor didn't really approve of the bill but reluctantly signed it,
setting up that example of a "Gerrymander" as a new congressional district.

Ever since, and to this day, gerrymandering the size and outline of a
congressional district in order to have one more congressman or woman is one of
the most ardently practised of political exercises, especially after a national
census.

Last year's census has just told us that we're now 280 millions. It also tells
us where we live, what we do, how many religionists - as we say - how many
heathens, loads of statistics on everything from the extent of divorce and the
relative popularity rating of various sports - basketball way ahead as number
one.

Whereas, to my deep dismay, it turns out only six Americans in a hundred have
ever played golf, watched golf or read about golf.

I don't know what's going to be done about this. I see no proposal in President
Bush's grand plan, which he unfolded the other night, for our emerging Utopia.

But the Bureau of the Census has many more fascinating statistics. Which group
has the largest voting lobby? The steelworkers or the hairstylists? The
hairstylists by an easy lap.

The most striking figure to come out of the report that follows on this 10-year
census and one that would seem finally to doom the illusion of the United
States as basically an Anglo-Saxon culture is the about the most populous state
in the union: California.

It used to be, at the turn of the last century, in fact and then in song and
story that the ethnic influence to deliver the first body blow to the dominance
in society and government of the English and North Europeans, that invasion
came from southern and eastern Europe - introducing into a land settled mainly
by English, Dutch, Germans, Irish, Scandinavians, immigrants from Italy and
Russia, Lithuania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania.

Many of them, an actual majority, being Jews fleeing pogroms, compulsory
military service or the unremitting ordeal of ghetto exclusion and poverty.

It's only now - a century later - that Californians can begin to feel as the
long-resident New Yorkers felt when 10 millions of central and southern
Europeans descended on Ellis Island.

Now the startling statistic is about the West Coast and the continuing invasion
of immigrants in the past 30 years, since - I suppose the main cause must be -
since Communism took over China and successfully threatened Korea and Vietnam
and Hong Kong.

It used to be New York City that beckoned the downtrodden European with its
mythical promise of streets paved with gold.

Now it's California that to desperate or enslaved Asians, and poor South and
Central Americans, California is, as the old Gold Rush song had it, the
promised land.

In short the report of the census bureau reveals that since the 1990 census the
population of California alone has increased by 10%, by more than three
million.

Certainly not only is it the state closest to Asia and Central America but it
has something for everybody.

Eight hundred miles long, an average of 150-200 miles wide, five climates -
everything from cold, dank lumber country to burning desert, to perpetually
snow-capped mountains, vast forest, millions of acres for every conceivable
temperate and sub-tropical crop - and since the Second War a steel and other
industries and it has become the centre of computer manufacture.

The projection of the census bureau is that by the end of this year California
will be the first state with the majority of the population - 51% - non-white.
The new majority is made up of Asians, Mexicans, Colombians, other Central and
Southern Americans and of course blacks.

The eventual political and social effects of this stunning figure can only be
guessed at. Not by me.

But I can guess, ominously, about another matter of high seriousness arising
from the fact that you need for an 18-hole golf course about 120-130 acres.

Another figure in the census bureau report is that among the Western industrial
countries the United States is the most fertile, just about doubling its
population in 50 years.

The Californian population bulged so alarmingly about 35 years ago that the
state thought of exercising the doctrine of "eminent domain" - of buying
private golf courses for what is known as "best possible use" - providing, for
instance, for poor children of the inner cities to desport themselves instead
of confining them to weedy plots in the slums.

The day may come when America will have to make up its mind whether it wants
golf for the few and planned parenthood or overturn the abortion law, have lots
of babies and the heck with golf and the spotted owl.

Why this sudden devotion of mine to the public interest over self-service? Oh I
forgot to tell you. Recently I wrote a letter to the president and secretary of
my own, beautiful San Francisco golf club.

It said: "On the passage of my 92nd birthday a strange feeling of peace has
come over me.

"It is the peace, the Reverend PG Wodehouse tells us, that 'passeth all
understanding. It is the peace of a man who has given up golf.' "

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP