Dramatic Turns of History - 13 June 2003

I wonder how many writers have, at one time or another, been struck by the
wonderful possibilities of a book called If...

Every politician, every soldier, certainly every historian has wondered what a
different and dramatic turn history might have taken "if only".

Years and years ago I put together six titles of "if onlys" before I found
there had been down one century at least a score of books bearing the title.

What if John Kennedy's hair's breadth presidential victory - what was it, a
bare 120,000 votes in 60 million - had gone the other way for Nixon?

If Hitler had invaded England a week or two after the retreat from Dunkirk,
would the whole country - as Churchill later believed - have been conquered in
two weeks?

My own researches when young made me take a frankly prurient interest in the
question: if Napoleon had kept his date with the Countess Waleska would he have
won the Battle of Austerlitz?

All these questions tumbled out when, the other morning, putting one and one
together, I dared to wonder where would we be with Iraq if President Clinton
had not run into Monica Lewinsky.

This, believe me, is an entirely serious question and it will do us no harm to
recall something that I think most people have forgotten - shall we say the
popular history of America's relations with Iraq, which for all but foreign
policy buffs began with Saddam's sudden invasion of Kuwait, a small state at
the head of the Persian Gulf.

It had been for a long time a British protectorate but Kuwaitis insisted on and
achieved their independence.

But the country's geography at the hub of the oil-rich Gulf was against its
continuing existence as a prosperous little neutral.

Saddam Hussein had ached for years to realise his claim that Kuwait was, always
had been and should be a province of Iraq.

But what is called negotiation got nowhere and, after Saddam had won his
eight-year war against Iran, his ambition to be king of Arabia and the nemesis
of the state of Israel was not to be foiled by this upstart rich little country
in the south.

At the beginning of August 1990 Saddam invaded and overran Kuwait and seized
its great cluster of precious oil fields.

Almost four months later, after Saddam had rejected the United Nations' order
to withdraw, the Security Council authorised the use of force and 29 member
nations formed a coalition and gathered in Saudi Arabia, with President Bush
the First praying that negotiations - again - would resolve the trouble. That
was in November.

For two months President Bush was hesitant to act but Mrs Thatcher happened to
be in this country at the time and was reported to have quoted Napoleon: "If
you're going to take Vienna, take Vienna."

In the middle of January 1991 President Bush jumped to it. The Americans,
British, French and Saudis started an air attack on Iraq and at the end of
February launched a ground war with half a million men.

Saddam was routed but burned hundreds of oil wells before retreating north.

There was a ceasefire and six weeks later a truce in which Saddam promised -
now the plot begins - to renounce all claims to Kuwait, to pay reparations and
to destroy all chemical, nuclear and biological weapons.

Why this new, strange prohibition? Because he'd used them in the Iranian war.

He must also allow a UN peacekeeping force for an indefinite stay. By that time
everybody close to the United Nations, except it seemed the foreign offices of
the western countries, knew that a UN peacekeeping force was so small, so
lightly armed, that they could do little but act as standby police, soon to be
brushed aside and shot at by the rebels they were supposed to be subduing.

Now we're at the spring of 1991 and people began to forget about Saddam in the
excitement of a new presidential election.

A year later, 1992, Iraq was not even a backburner issue to a new, young,
Democrat president - Clinton, who overthrew President Bush, even though he had
emerged from the Gulf War with a 90% approval rating.

Mr Clinton had his priorities - to reduce the nation's appalling deficit, which
he went on about eloquently in public.

And two concerns which were very much private matters to be shared only with
the FBI, the CIA and, in time, with Britain's comparable MI5 and MI6.

Mr Clinton had not been long in the White House before he began to pay special
attention to random bombings around the world, many directed at American
embassies and military bases and - most shockingly at the time - the bombing of
the World Trade Center in 1993, eight years before the suicide bombers
destroyed it.

President Clinton, the CIA and the Pentagon soon decided there was nothing
random about these accidents - bombings, suicides.

Eight years ago he set up, but of course he didn't publicise, a
counter-terrorist unit of the CIA and, for American matters, a branch of the
FBI.

While this intelligence probing was going on around the world and while,
incidentally, the CIA lost the lives of quite a few of its agents, there
appeared a character and an organisation you and I wouldn't hear about for
another eight, nine years. The character was Osama bin Laden and the outfit was
al-Qaeda.

These things constituted a private presidential burden of concern on top of all
the public, domestic and foreign issues of the day.

There was one other concern - the anxiety over which was well publicised and
more and more riled President Clinton. The issue was called Saddam Hussein.

The United Nations, starting in 1991, began to send into Iraq, according to the
terms of the truce, expert nuclear and biochemical scientists - eventually a
team of more than 200 - to see if Saddam was living up to the promise to
destroy biochemical weapons and materials and the makings of a nuclear bomb.

Iraq, as you've been told many times by now, is the size of California - it is
850 miles long and 200 miles wide.

And the inspectors had a rough time finding even the sites where such lethal
stuff might be hidden, let alone a test tube of hideous poison in a ship, a
truck, a mosque.

Perhaps it was a hopeless assignment from the beginning. Saddam cheerfully
maintained, and his foreign UN ambassador eloquently and patiently protested,
that they didn't have and never had had nuclear ambitions or biochemical
weapons.

However, though there was never positive tactile evidence of a finished bomb,
all the ingredients and the necessary warheads were found and reported.

And Secretary of State Powell memorably last February detailed the precise
quantities in kilos or whatever of four kinds of poison such as had been
sprayed on the Iranians and had come to cause the agonising death of the Kurds
in northern towns.

Well the UN went on passing resolutions, ordering Saddam to unlock the doors,
to lead us to the hidden material and he went on denying that any such
deception had been practised.

It was now up to President Clinton, as the super member of the United Nations,
to throw up his hands, say "OK, Saddam, you win" and do nothing.

That has always been the alternative to war or to continuous United Nations
inspection till doomsday.

So President Clinton and the Pentagon prepared to give Saddam an ultimatum and
threaten him with an invasion if he did not comply.

What forces, how many allies, when and where President Clinton was ready to
move we do not know. But President Clinton was about to anticipate the later
steps of George W Bush.

Then there emerged from the woodwork the awful news of the president's squalid
affair with Monica Lewinsky.

Then and throughout his impeachment trial, which he survived by a tiny margin
of votes, William Jefferson Clinton did not have the moral authority to shoot a
pop gun at Saddam or make a moral case against anybody foreign or domestic.

But if - IF - that had not happened and without all the preliminary graces of
the Congressional vote of approval and the concurrence of the UN Security
Council, IF he'd gone into Iraq after the abandoned goal of dethroning Saddam,
where would we be now?

It's anybody's guess. It's my own that, considering the state of military
technology, the actual war would have lasted no longer than the penetration
bomb made possible.

But I fear also that the huge expense and the military strength necessary to
restoring peace to an oppressed people who'd known nothing but tyrants would
have been as unforeseen and unplanned for as we see now.

Even so Baghdad today looks like a prosperous city compared with Berlin for two
or three years after the Second World War.

We never could see then the shell of a city, the encompassing misery of a whole
population living outdoors - for luckily there was no television in those days.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP