Iraq's Midsummer Nightmare - 15 November 2002

The day before the Congressional elections the papers and the tube resounded
with all the best known pundits having the last word.

The word is prediction - a word most of them would rather not have to speak in
view of the dim record of the human race in prophesying anything, including
presidential elections.

What their prophesies amounted to in the Congressional elections was -
everywhere a very tight race, maybe once again the stalemate of a 50/50 Senate.

So what happened? A comparative landslide for George W.

For the first time in 137 years, since the Civil War, no Republican president
and only one Democrat has ever actually gained seats in both houses in the mid
term, after his first two years in office.

I remember explaining this in a talk years and years ago by saying that once
every four years the people elect a president and think or pretend they've
found Moses, who is going to lead them into the promised land.

After two years they invariably discover that he's not Moses but yet another
president with flaws and frailties, just like you and me.

But now I'm pretty much obliged to talk about a much larger and even less
predictable victory for President Bush than the mid-term elections, which is
the unanimous 15-0 vote in the United Nations Security Council in favour of
what is substantially the Bush resolution of warning to Saddam Hussein.

Admittedly it took eight weeks and packs of lawyers from 15 delegations working
day and often into the night, before the resolution was finally expressed and
approved.

The administration had expected at best that there would be 12 approving votes
with Russia and France abstaining.

What Syria would do was always a mystery - Syria is and has been to previous
administrations a dire threat to peace in its region and to the interests of
the West and by only a last-minute change of mind was it not publicly branded
as a member of the evil empire.

Yet, Syria voted yes.

You'll be relieved, I hope, not to have me recite the text of the resolution
which to laymen - which means everybody who is not a graduate in international
law - is a march on stilts of gobbledegook, which the well-beloved Safire, the
language buff, defines as the stilted circumlocution of officialdom - an
official directive sometimes meant to be hard to understand but usually the
result of a lazy lapse into legalese.

The wonderful word gobbledegook was coined by a Texas congressman, long gone
but never to be forgotten, maybe because his father gave his name to an
unbranded calf and therefore by extension to a politician who is a loner - the
word was maverick.

His son, Maury Maverick, was once asked how come he thought up gobbledegook to
describe a particular sort of jargon.

He said: "I don't know, maybe it came to me in a vision.

"What I must have been thinking of was the old, bearded turkey gobbler, back in
Texas, who was always gobbledegobbling and strutting with ludicrous pomposity.

"At the end of this gobble there was a sort of, well, gook!

"So," Congressman Maverick went on, "it's a type of talk which is long, vague,
pompous, involved mostly with Latinised words."

Maury Maverick, whom I must say I had the honour of knowing, was a very rare
politician.

He knew all the professional lingo and deplored it. And in one marvellous
article he mocked the language of his colleagues - the lawyers and their
business advisers - by quoting first Alice in Wonderland and then the Bible.

From Alice: "'Speak English,' said the Eaglet, 'I don't know the meaning of
half these long words and what's more I don't believe you do either.'"

And from the Bible: "Except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood,
how shall it be known what is spoken?"

I hope and believe this warning prefaces a good idea because the United Nations
resolution looks like, and is to us, needlessly pompous Latin but it is to the
men who composed it a finely woven texture - of legalisms, to be sure - which
can be and will be interpreted differently by different delegates, different
people, different nations.

There's no need to go further than one phrase which I believe could make the
difference between war and peace or to be more precise, a United Nations war or
a war started by America, Britain and any other willing ally.

The phrase is "material breach".

The new resolution achieves a feat to have every member of the Security Council
agree that Saddam did not do what he promised to do when he signed the Gulf War
ceasefire agreement after he surrendered.

Which was mainly, among other things, to destroy chemical, nuclear and
biological weapons and accept a United Nations peacekeeping force.

Well, after one year it was made clear to the intelligence services of several
Western nations, not American alone, that Saddam was - can you believe it -
actually violating the surrender agreement.

So the United Nations worked out a Security Council resolution setting up
inspection teams.

They would go into Iraq and discover and destroy the weapons that Saddam had
started burying and hiding in many ways.

Saddam said "Oh my, I hadn't noticed but yes, here's a weapon, there's a lab" -
and he went on hiding and manufacturing more stuff just the same.

So the United Nations moved in with a resolution ordering him to do what he'd
promised and failed to do twice - allow inspectors to disclose and destroy any
weapons of mass destruction.

Same result - no effect on litmus.

More resolutions, saying the same thing, more dodging and pussy-footing and
evasion and violation going on with the helpless concurrence of the Western
Europeans, the secretary general and the chief executives of Western Europe,
including - name your prime minister - and President Clinton.

So after, what was it, 16 resolutions and 10 years? Saddam's still busy
increasing his arsenal of mass destructive weapons and by now throwing out the
UN inspectors, sometimes at actual gunpoint, the United States elected a
president who decided that 10 years of evasion, violation and nose-thumbing of
the United Nations was enough.

He's the first president to tell the United Nations itself that it was becoming
irrelevant to the maintenance of peace and that if the council members did not
come together to do what they'd been created for in the first place - to put
down aggressors - the United States would move into Iraq with whatever allies
it could recruit and disarm him itself.

The foreign offices of Western Europe were appalled, giving Mr Bush's
declaration a wonderful Gilbert and Sullivan translation into saying - this is
awful, here we've been at peace with that terrible Saddam all these years and
now along comes an American president who wants to make war.

President Bush's response was to demonstrate time and again that he meant what
he said.

There was now positive intelligence that Saddam's biological weapons and his
Scud missiles were at the ready, so that Saddam could, if he chose, overwhelm
Israel and maybe get to the Gulf and all the oil fields.

At last even the French have come to believe - half believe - that Saddam is a
very present threat to the peace of the Middle East.

The new resolution orders the head of the inspection teams to supervise a new
round of searching and destroying and if he finds that Saddam is still being
naughty - that is to say "in material breach" of the resolution - then what?

Then the Security Council meets again and will decide on "serious consequences"
- which, being translated, means the UN will be faced with sanctioning military
action or watching the United States and its allies go it alone.

Enough time is being allowed for Saddam to split hairs on what constitutes
material breach and to reveal this and hide that and delay the promised
business of searching the presidential sites or palaces - which constitute, by
the way, the area of the nation's capital city, Washington DC.

More than anybody President Bush will be watching these evasions on the
calendar, knowing that if the council dillies and dallies over a new
resolution, new temporising, the hideous midsummer would have descended on
Iraq, made drinking water scarce, generating a vast explosion of military flat
tyres and revealing the struggles of the invading military men to walk
successfully, let along fight, in their new chemical-resistant, enormously
cumbersome uniforms.

But by now the council must know this and knows that the president knows it.

Meanwhile Secretary General Kofi Annan has urged the president to exercise
patience.

Mr Bush is as capable as any leader in a crisis to stay patient but if patience
means another winter of United Nations debating, a performance of gobbledegook,
going into next spring then by that time Saddam would have achieved his great
triumph - to stretch the 15 nations' arguments into the season when any
punitive military campaign would be impossible in the blinding heat and the
far-reaching drought of Iraq's midsummer nightmare.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP