From Party Convention to Coronation - 28 July 2000

I'm off to Philadelphia in the morning. So ran the old song but, I quickly add,
maybe 2,000 maybe 10,000 Republicans are going there, but not I.

And only a much diminished press corps. And I'm told about a third of the usual
television crews because, what is still called a presidential nominating
convention has been totally transformed in the past quarter century or so into
a coronation.

The first sentence of an encyclopaedic piece on the subject says: "The business
of a political party's national convention is to choose its nominee for the
presidency of the United States."

But the party's presidential choice has already been picked in state primary
elections sworn to name and vote for one man.

We used to go to the nominating conventions, bright-eyed and bushy-tailed, as
keyed up with buzz and expectation as people going off to the cup final. We
were going to see the most exciting horserace in America.

I recall, with relish, a great day when my chief - the Washington correspondent
of the Times (of London, as we say in these parts) - mysteriously asked me to
lunch at the press club.

He was a slim, impeccably dapper man who stood as upright as a grenadier and
the pursed lips of a stage archbishop and he talked like one of those English
butlers in the movies of the 1930s and 40s: Sir Willmot Harsant Lewis.

When he was knighted he said to his buddies at the press club: "Call me Sir
Bill, or if you prefer, 'Hello there you old SOB.' "

A sly, alert, formidable Welshman whose prestige in Washington was such that he
was occasionally telephoned by the president of the United States and more or
less begged to report some presidential act the way the president saw it.

One time on the subject of the American loan to the victorious but impoverished
allies, Lewis flatly, in the presence of the most high, regretted that his
dispatch in the following morning's paper would report but not take the
presidential tack.

Forlornly the president said: "Bill what have you got to lose?"

Lewis intoned: "My virginity, Mr President."

This incomparable character, about whom I could go on and on, tipped me off
that our lunch would be a very special lunch.

We sat down and Sir Bill trailed a sort of regal hand through the air, by way
of calling the waiter, and when he appeared Lewis said bravely: "Henry this is
a very special occasion. The Martini must be specially dry - four parts gin
and, if you must, a sprinkle or two of the vermouth."

Well what was special about it was that my chief was about to announce to me
that he was quitting the daily coverage of events, from now on would write
mostly think pieces and might soon, on his 70th birthday, retire.

I don't know how old he was then, I'd already been to three or four of his 70th
birthday parties.

Anyway he reached in an inside pocket. He pulled out a black leather wallet,
tilted it and out on the table slid four or five cards, not playing cards but
privileged passes - his press pass - to the Senate, to the House, to the White
House.

He flattened his hand over what might have been, were for me, two aces,
chuckled and he flipped them over, they were his press invitations to the two
conventions.

"All yours dear boy, all yours."

It was 1940, it was my first convention and of all the conventions I've
covered, until the system was replaced, it was the most thrilling. And it was
in Philadelphia. Maybe we'll come to it later on.

The history, the structure, of the convention system is slightly more
complicated than the history of the procedures for splitting the atom and
you'll be relieved to hear that we're not going into it. Instead I'll try a
couple of large generalisations and hope they're true.

For the longest time the two presidential candidates - when there were three
parties, three - were chosen by the party chieftains in Congress.

Now take a big jump to the choice being made by voters in each state. But they
didn't vote for a president, they voted to form the delegation that would
represent their party at its convention.

When this system spread there were many variations. In most states the men who
ran to be delegates announced which national figure they were for and the
people voted accordingly - some for this man, some for another.

So the normal procedure at the convention, when the balloting started, would go
like this: the clerk, usually a man with a powerful basso profundo, would start
the roll call by chanting "Alabama" and the chairman of the Alabama delegation
would get up and declare: "The great state of Alabama gives 12 votes for John Q
Smith, six votes for Patrick Jones and four votes for Leroy Robinson" - that
was the routine.

In a few states they have what was called the unit rule or closed primary,
that's to say the primary election picked one man as the winner and when the
delegation went off to the convention city it was sworn to vote for that man -
until it might be plain after so many ballots that some other candidate was
sweeping all before him. In which case the chairman of the committee state
delegation would announce he'd release his delegates to go where they chose,
preferably on the coming winner's bandwagon.

Today, in most states if not all, the chosen delegation is unanimous for one
man.

What about those states whose Republican primary gave a majority vote for John
McCain? Well it's theoretically possible they might in Philadelphia vote for
him, assuming that he allowed his name to be put in nomination, which would be,
at this point, some sort of scandal. There's no sign now that that will happen.

So this business of having all the delegations committed to one figure has
meant no horse race, even if a few courtesy nominations were allowed.

At all the conventions there used to be a tedious half day when states
nominated their governor as a favourite son, just for fun, just for show.

I think if anybody was responsible for our arriving at a party convention with
the absolute certainty that there was only one candidate I'd say the Kennedy
brothers did it or maybe Bobby Kennedy on his own.

In the year before the 1960 election he visited most of the 3,000 and some
counties of the United States and he talked to and he flattered the Democratic
Party bosses in counties both huge and tiny.

He told them, he convinced them, that there would be no other electable
candidate than his brother - the senator from Massachusetts.

And on his way out of town: "Oh" - like Columbo - "there's just one other
thing. Come Inauguration Day we won't forget you."

Robert Kennedy's safari took him thousands and thousands of miles and thousands
of plastic chicken sandwiches and cokes and coffees.

So at Los Angeles, in mid summer 1960, no other name than John F Kennedy was
put in nomination.

Outside the auditorium there was a pathetic little parade, hired at $2 a
parader, by the unbowed supporters of Adlai Stevenson. But they picked up their
$2 and they went home.

Since then, thanks to the committed primary, I think it's now in 40-odd states,
we've known way ahead of time the presidential candidate of both parties.

It's as if you went to the Derby to watch an exhibition trot by the winner who
had become the winner by beating all comers in several preliminary run-off
races.

Since the 1960s the only fun, well curiosity left, was guessing whom the chosen
one might pick as his vice president.

That was always announced to rapturous applause on the next of the last evening
of the convention.

Would it be a geographical choice, a Midwesterner to balance an Easterner, a
Californian to offset a New Yorker, would it be an old hand or new blood?

Frankly either way it wasn't terrifically exciting. But now even this magic has
been taken from us. Now - never happened before - the candidate announces his
vice presidential choice before the convention.

So for this simple drastic reason the triumph everywhere of the closed primary,
the television networks, this year, have drastically reduced their coverage.

They used to broadcast the whole show from the keynote welcoming speech on
Monday morning, through the days and into the nights of the balloting, right
down to the final exhibition of the happy couple.

For 125 years the voting could run to 10 ballots, 35 ballots - once to 103
ballots through 10 days and nights before the demigod was chosen.

They could save an awful lot of money by abolishing conventions altogether.

And talking of golf - which the whole non-golfing world was doing last weekend
for the first time since the late 1920s - I don't think we should end without
saluting a new shining star with an unprecedented record.

It used to be during the past 20, 30 years or so that the golfer, the player,
of the year had won three or four tournaments.

Now we have a player who in the past 15 starts, as they say in racing, has won
10 times - has won three of the last four majors and last weekend rounded off
this amazing record by winning the Open for the first time.

So let's give a cheer and raise a glass to - the pride of Australia, the first
lady of golf: Karrie Webb.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP