Tackling the Looters - 16 May 2003

"To save succeeding generations from the scourge of war" - that was the
original vow of the United Nations which alas it has failed to keep throughout
58 years of its existence.

Today the post-war burden of the United States, having come through the scourge
of a war, is not, as was first imagined, to reorganise a civil society and put
in place what they call a transitional government, the immediate, urgent task
is to prevent Iraq's descending from chaos into anarchy.

I must say that whatever was allowed for in the very careful planning of the
liberation of Iraq I don't believe even Secretary Rumsfeld had any conception
of how huge and wildly ungovernable the looting would be.

The sheer wickedness of robbing a hospital, not only of its beds and blankets
but of medical equipment, including life-saving devices for which the witless
looters had no imaginable use.

I think the tolerable limit was reached last Monday when American marines
responding to fire from an asylum broke the outer wall and plunged in, along
with an army of looters, while at least 500 of the 800 incarcerated psychotics,
rapists, murderers, dangerous schizophrenics and so on, tumbled out and are now
at large in the city.

Why was all this allowed to happen? Because all the American forces had been
ordered from the start not to shoot anyone but an obvious combatant.

Here's a definition: "looting - the pillage of valuables in time of war,
according to the rules of war a crime punishable by instant execution but not
universally followed".

I recall that in Basra, in the first days, British soldiers fired on some
looters but then, for no given reason that I read about, they stopped.

Certainly the Americans were forbidden to perform instant execution, it was an
element of administration policy, which in the early days of the war bent over
backwards to avoid the appearance of conquerors.

You may have noticed that months before the war started a theory had been
advanced by some Western intellectuals and very quickly was crudified into a
popular protest among ordinary people, it was the theory that the United States
was now launched on a new imperial crusade, that empire was a truer slogan than
liberation.

Sympathetic intellectuals elaborated a programme much like that with which
British liberals, throughout the 19th Century, looked on the development of
their empire as a humane social undertaking.

Prince Albert's passionate belief that Britons had a duty to lift the peoples
of the dark continent out of abject poverty and exploitation by unscrupulous
traders, to build railroads, a civil service, medical stations, create a
merchant class.

This idea of empire as a huge peace corps is, I should say, practically unheard
of in the United States where the vast majority of people think of empire as a
very wicked form of exploiting primitive peoples which the British, the French,
the Dutch, the Belgians and the Portuguese eventually shed themselves of and
none too soon.

By this 21st Century I'm sure most Americans have forgotten, if they ever knew,
that President Theodore Roosevelt had the great ambition, partially fulfilled,
in Central America and the Pacific to found an American empire.

The remaining bits of the American empire are remote islands officially
designated inland territories.

But I have to say that at the first outcry about a new American empire the
administration did everything it could to obliterate the picture of an
imperialism on the march. However, I'm afraid to people who are normally
anti-American it has been food and drink.

Reluctantly last Tuesday, President Bush officially recognised that before you
could have an interim government there must be an interim police force.

That's been the trouble since the day Saddam's statue was toppled and we
breathed relief at the end of the war. The war with the civilian population had
just begun.

So last Tuesday President Bush, through Mr Paul Bremer - who's the new civilian
with the unenviable job of creating a new Iraq - the president issued an order
that from now on United States military forces are authorised to shoot looters
on sight.

This has been done with full knowledge of the risk entailed in shooting young
people, the unemployed, family heads desperate for food and electricity. The
administration has spoken with all its fingers crossed.

Until the cities can somehow acquire workable police forces it seemed the only
thing to do. The administration is well aware it will not necessarily make the
occupying Americans any more popular.

Once again I think I'd better say that about a third of the population of the
United States, up from the Deep South, through Missouri and the Midwest, the
people there are equally concerned for their own lack of power - which means
light, heat, air conditioning, flushing toilets - after, we hope, the end of a
plague of tornadoes. In two weeks more than a hundred that have damaged or
destroyed more than 80 small towns.

Talking of natural disasters I must take note of a study that was published
last week, at the end of a meeting of seismologists - earthquake specialists -
producing a big surprise.

Namely that there is an inland geological vein or fault running more or less
parallel with the New England seaboard that could cause a deal of trouble.

Earthquakes in New England? When? When? They aren't saying, though the meeting
added of course that California can expect earthquakes till the end of time.

And of course they have happened in that state since the days of the early
Spanish conquest.

A famous conquistador, Portola - an 18th Century governor of what was called
New Spain - camped by a river whose surrounding land one night trembled in a
frightening fashion.

When he moved on Portola did what all explorers do, he gave a name to his last
resting place. he called it Santa Ana de los Temblores - of the "temblores", of
the quakes.

An old historian writes: "In later usage the name was shortened to Santa Ana -
out of deference to local feelings, the appendage was dropped."

There are three main faults that wriggle deep underground through central and
southern California.

In deference to local feeling their names are not often mentioned, just as in
deference to wishful feeling San Franciscans for the past three generations
make a point of referring to the 1906 earthquake as "the fire".

We have a friend, indeed my wife's oldest friend whom she's known since their
teens, let's call her Bea for Beatrice. For, by a happy coincidence, that is
her name.

About 20 years ago she decided to go and live in California to be with the
daughter who'd settled there.

Bea, when she left the east, didn't know much about California but she
certainly had heard about the earthquakes.

She lived down the peninsula from San Francisco, close by the big, thriving
city of San Jose, which has had its share of quakes, so recently as 1989.

Ever since then she's harboured a secret dread of earthquakes. Now understand
she's not a nervous type - she's tall, handsome, very intelligent and sensible
and - I almost said - down to earth.

But one time she confessed to this secret dread, so ever-present that she got
into the habit, just before she went to bed, of taking all the upstanding
earthenware - plates, cups, saucers, whatever - and putting them securely in a
drawer.

Well about 10 years ago I was out in San Francisco and I covered a conference
of seismologists which had met to estimate the likely timing and scale of the
next big one that would arise from the California faults, especially the one
that starts out in the ocean in the north and runs in under Napa County and
through San Francisco and on south.

The conclusion of the conference was that this region of the country was likely
to get the big one sometime in the next 30 or 40 years.

But the big, and for Californians joyful news was, that the truly big one was
likely to arrive sometime in the following 10 years by odds of five to one and
it wouldn't be in California at all but in a fault - long unreported - that
runs from about Hartford, Connecticut down through the New York suburbs and on
to and through Philadelphia.

We'd never heard of it. It also came out, incidentally, that the busiest little
seismological station in America, perhaps in the world, is a village just
across Long Island sound there, in Connecticut, that records three or four
earthquakes every day of the year.

The Connecticut Chamber of Commerce has never told us about it.

But once the news was out several officials in the state of Connecticut
hastened to publish the truth. Which is that these quakes are minute, barely
registering on the Richter scale.

But I did a talk about that conference and being close by I rushed a fair copy
of it to our friend Bea.

And she stopped, she said she stopped from then on packing up the crockery
every evening. She just heaved a happy sigh that she doesn't live in
Connecticut.

I felt at the time I'd done my good deed for the year.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS
COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP