Heaven on the Half Shell - 18 October 2002

From time to time an old acquaintance will call me just before I'm about to do
my talk and say "Well, I think we all know what you're going to talk about this
time".

I tend to say "That's right" or "You've got it" - because I know in my bones,
from years of such calls, that they haven't got it.

It's always about some natural disaster - a fire, an earthquake, perhaps the
assassination of a foreign statesman.

In any case I find no occasion for intelligent comment about the lamentable
snipings in the Virginia/Maryland country or even about the appalling nightclub
bombing on the once island paradise of Bali.

The only reaction must be: isn't it awful.

But now there is a topic which is not to be guessed at and was dictated quite
simply by my looking at the calendar and reflecting, "Ah yes, the third week in
October" - which has meant for so many years San Francisco time.

Certainly for the past 30 years or so I used to go four times a year to my
favourite city to see how America - its life and affairs - looked from the
Pacific coast.

Visually the first thing that struck me from the start was the Oriental
connection.

It's been there since the first Chinese labourers were brought in by the
Central Pacific Company to work their way east and meet the Irish working west
together to create the first transatlantic railroad.

By the time I first came into San Francisco - which is just on 70 years ago -
the California Oriental connection was strong and civilised and detectable
everywhere - from the old Chinese in the early morning on Nob Hill doing their
slow motion graceful exercises, to the furniture, the porcelain, the murals and
other Chinese decorations in friends' houses and hotels.

Just along the block from the first hotel I ever stayed in was a glittering
metallic stature of Sun Yat Sen, for many decades a cult figure among
Californians.

He'd been a revolutionary who overthrew the last dynasty and was the first
president of a Chinese republic.

By the late 1930s China, overrun by the Japanese in Manchuria, had become
California's favourite victim state.

However, at that time the ranking villain, to Californians as well as to all
other Americans, was Adolf Hitler.

Only experts at the State Department worried about Japan. Only experts.

And one Californian - William Randolph Hearst, a national newspaper tycoon, who
sat in his castle overlooking the Pacific and rang editorial alarm bells,
warning about the "Yellow Peril", about an actual threat of the Japanese to the
security to the shores of his beloved California.

To visiting Easterners and Europeans these foaming outbursts were always
thought fanciful to the point of absurdity.

Until 7 December 1941 when the Japanese destroyed half the United States
Pacific fleet and its air arm, at its base in the Pacific, which most
Americans, or for that matter ranking members of the British embassy and yours
truly, had never heard of. It was called Pearl Harbour.

By now, of course, everything has gone into reverse.

Japan is, has been, the great modern trading partner and China, though vilified
and warily watched since it went Communist, is being wooed to be the second
largest Pacific trader.

But in San Francisco the Oriental, or as we must now say, the Asian presence is
as triumphant as anywhere in the country.

A medical office building I know which 20, 30 years ago was inhabited by
doctors with American European names now has a third of its tenants Asian.

They are refugees from the Communist takeover of Vietnam, or Hong Kong Chinese
who came to this country say 25 years ago without a word of English. Today they
are young medical specialists.

These things I shall miss but most the daily sights and sounds that are San
Francisco and nowhere else.

First of course the nine tumbling hills and how remarkably the people bent over
troop up and down them like one of the great race migrations of the Middle
Ages.

The white city seen from across the bay as a vast pyramid of confetti.

The genial sun - most of the year. The bafflement, verging on outrage, of the
summer tourists, shivering atop a hilly street, not having been told that July
and August are the coldest months.

But also memorable for the arrival from the Pacific in the late afternoon are
vast plumes of white fog moving in on the city with the motion of a slow
freight train.

The double moan of the fog horn at night.

The deceptively blue waters under the Golden Gate Bridge, from whose icy,
thrashing currents no Alcatraz escapee has ever been known to survive.

Over and again I recall a short piece of Mark Twain's which says so much about
San Francisco in so little.

It was written, by the way, only 10 years after a bloodletting massacre in Utah
between the two opposing crews building the railroad.

In it Mark Twain reports his arrival in San Francisco after he'd been thrown
out of the silver mining town of Virginia city, Nevada, for having written that
"in the noble city there are two churches and 76 saloons, which is just about
the right proportion."

This line aroused such fury in the local church matrons that Mark Twain thought
it was time "to get lost - so I absquatulated." Here it is:

"After the sage brush and the alkali desert of Nevada, San Francisco was heaven
on the half shell.

"I lived at the best hotel, I exhibited my clothes in the most conspicuous
places, I infested the opera.

"I enjoyed my first earthquake. It was just after noon on a bright Sunday in
October and I was coming down Third Street. As I turned a corner there came a
terrific shock - the entire front of a four-storey brick building sprung
outward like a door and fell sprawling across the street.

"The ground rolled under me in waves. The street cars stopped - their horses
were rearing and plunging. Every door of every house was vomiting a stream of
human beings.

"The first shock brought down three or four organ pipes in one of the churches
and the next instant in the atmosphere where the minister had stood there was a
vacancy. In another church, after the first shock, the minister said: 'Brethren
keep your seats, there is no better place to die than here.'

"After the third shock he waved his flock goodbye and added: 'But outside is
good enough for me.'

"After a time I had to cease being an onlooker at the peculiar life of San
Francisco and get down to earning a livelihood. My first job was with the
Enquirer and my first assignment was accidental. A set-to between a Chinaman
and some Irish.

"Now the Chinese are a harmless race when white men let them alone or treat
them no worse than dogs. Their chief employment is to wash clothes, which they
do at low prices with their usual patience and industry.

"One day I saw a bunch of Irish toughs descend on an old Chinaman on his way
home after laundering the clothes of his Christian clientele. They sat on him
and beat him up.

"I went back to the office in a state of high indignation and I wrote my fill
of this miserable incident. But the editor refused to print it. 'Our paper,' he
said, 'was printed for the poor and in San Francisco the Irish were the poor.'
In time I cooled off. I was lofty in those days. I have survived."

More poignantly I recall and miss most a contemporary writer, long gone - a
columnist for the San Francisco daily paper.

I often wonder if San Franciscans deserve him, for he never received any
special tribute as the best writer ever to come out of that city.

His name was Charles McCabe, a funny, beautiful writer of great simplicity, by
which I mean he felt deeply and he thought clearly.

He was never syndicated outside that one city, that one paper.

"Why not?" I once asked the editor.

"Well," he said, "who's going to buy a man who's more of a meditator than a
columnist?"

It's true. One day he wrote about the pain of being jilted, next day on Cicero,
next a dangerously funny swipe at the women's libbers, next day the life of St
Thomas Aquinas.

McCabe looked like a giant, dignified WC Fields, with a similarly glowing nose,
it came at you like a beacon. But before you sighted it your nostrils picked up
the unmistakable odour of "the poteen".

At the end of his life Charlie McCabe became aware of the one thing that makes
any life worth living.

"These days," he wrote, "the love I give and the love I get seems spread around
rather thin.

"I'm often lonely but seldom bored anymore. There's a lot of peace and quiet
but I now know it would not be possible without friends. Without friends! I can
hardly bare to think about it."

Nor can I. They're the San Franciscans it will hurt to miss.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP