Park Avenue's Colourful Christmas - 24 December 1999

A curious thing about a city which boasts so extravagantly about its best
features - and even some of its worst - is it has a never-mentioned little
miracle: the railed-off plots of grass that for almost three miles run down the
middle of Park Avenue and divide the uptown and downtown traffic.

Along the whole stretch - 54 blocks, from 96th to 42nd Street - what is a
constant delight and surprise is the regularly changing character of these more
than 50 little gardens - and not so little - each one city block long and about
15 feet wide.

You drive down the Avenue one season of the year through a great ripple of
crocuses. Next time tulips from here to infinity. Sometimes you notice that at
each end of each garden there is a new young tree - a hundred or so of them
from the 96th Street entrance down to where the Avenue ends at Grand Central
Station.

Or maybe next time they're locusts, or London plane trees. At Christmas time,
as now, they've been replaced by small firs.

I suppose we take it so easily for granted, and thousands of the true city
types never notice the changes at all because the very large workforce that
performs these magical transformations works by night and by stealth.

In 50 years of living round the corner from the long divide of Park Avenue I
have never seen any of them at their remarkable labour of creating, along three
miles, complete variations of miniature landscapes about, it seems, once every
few weeks.

I know they're at it because I once tactfully guessed at the fortune it
requires to employ them and maintain this city perquisite.

I happen to know the possessor of the fortune, a lady named Mary Lasker,
heiress of an advertising multimillionaire, a self-effacing, absolutely
non-socialite doer of many unadvertised good works, of which the Park Avenue
divider is the only conspicuous one.

At Christmas time especially it makes me think again with gratitude of the late
Mary Lasker for now each tree is lit at twilight and by Mrs Lasker's request
and, thank God, the confirming dictate of the Park Avenue property owners, the
trees are not gaily decorated with red bulbs and green bulbs and purple bulbs
and yellow bulbs - illuminations that make so many city squares and streets
look like amusement arcades gone berserk.

Each of the Park Avenue firs is decorated with about 500-600 tiny oyster white
bulbs. So at twilight you look down from the small eminence of 96th Street
along the three-mile stretch of small fountains of light. All the way down the
only colours are the alternating reds and greens of the traffic lights at
50-odd corners.

Now by day it used to be that the long canyon of Park Avenue was majestically
closed at the southern end by the great gold dome of Grand Central Station, and
then they built behind it a towering flat monolith of a skyscraper which
blotted out the dome or indeed the outline of Grand Central.

This defiling obstacle has been ingeniously made to evaporate by night at
Christmas time. As the dark comes on and both Grand Central and the monolith
behind it fade into the black sky there appears by magic a great white cross.

This is achieved by leaving on the lights of so many offices on one floor to
form the horizontal bar and many more offices to form the vertical bar. Simple
and sublime.

But in the past year or two I'm afraid it's been an object of sporadic
controversy.

Controversy? From whom? From that fervent band of First Amendment protesters
who sometimes sound as if there were no other clause in the Bill of Rights:
"Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion" - which
has been taken, in many court appeals in many states to forbid every expression
of any religion by word, decoration, symbol, on public property.

This argument has been going on for years and years and is effectively won
mainly in places where agnostics or atheists speak louder and longer than the
true believers in any religion popular in a given town.

So far, by the way, there have been no protests against the dozen performances
of the Messiah and half dozen of Bach's Christmas Oratorio even done in public
auditoriums or theatres. The board of Aclu - the American Civil Liberties Union
- appears to be slipping.

There are some states, however, that can afford to be more blasé or
unintimidated by the First Amendment fanatics for an interesting new reason.

What is it that Florida, Texas, California have in common that favourably
affects the practice of the Christian religion and, say, tends to discourage
the march of an army of atheists with banners?

The answer? They are the states - south western states - into which more South
and Central American immigrants have arrived in the past quarter century than
in the rest of the country put together - a great population of what we now
call Latinos or Hispanics, the vast majority of them practising Roman
Catholics.

What they have brought to Christmas is the colourful and quite different
tradition of Christmas decoration.

Whereas most of the United States picked up the English 19th century trimmings
- Prince Albert's Christmas tree, holly and ivy, green and red so forth - while
Britain, by the way, picked up from New York via the Dutch settlers, the idea
of the well known figure of Santa Claus.

The Mexicans, especially, have given us the most colourful and original
variations: this week the Governor of Texas, one George W Bush, gave a little
television tour of the governor's mansion and showed off a marvellous array of
Christmas trees and cactuses hung with orange and pink flowers.

And, home-made creches that looked as if they'd been imported from that first
Christian Coptic chapel outside Cairo which has those primitive comic strip
figures of Adam and Eve and a jolly snake.

But here in Austin, Texas, were all the nativity figures - the wise men, Joseph
and Mary, the shepherds - as marvellous little painted wooden figures which we,
the civilised Anglo-European types who couldn't draw a broomstick, call
primitives.

Governor Bush, you may have heard is running for president and running very
hard - the election is only nine months away. And he showed off the delightful
Mexican decorations with understandable effusiveness, stopping from time to
time to talk in Spanish to a passing child.

The public, of course, could visit the governor's mansion just as the public
makes daily tours of the White House.

Incidentally I ought to throw in that anyone running for public office - a
state office anyway - in Florida, Texas, Nevada, Southern California, nowadays
had better talk Spanish as well as English if he/she holds any hope of being
elected.

But whatever variations different immigrant groups may bring in there's one
symbol - one expression of Christmas - that dependably returns every year
throughout the country to appear in theatrical form in city theatres, centres,
on television in half a dozen versions and is, at the moment, dazzling nightly
audiences in New York City's vast Radio City Music Hall.

It is Charles Dickens's A Christmas Carol. And the booksellers, including the
titans online, indicate that every year the sales of A Christmas Carol go
smartly up.

Poor Dickens. He lost £200 on the book, sued an outrageous couple that pirated
his work and sold it cheap. He was awarded £1,500 damages, so the couple
promptly declared bankruptcy and Dickens got nothing but had to pay out £700
for his own court fees.

I suppose that we, for most of this century, have thought of the carol as the
most vivid representation of an old English tradition of Christmas - the
feasting and the caroling and the Christmas cards and the parties, with their
particular customs - the tree, the pudding, the kissings and dancings and
general merriment.

Nothing could be more untrue.

For centuries Christmas was an annual street brawl with a reputation for
debauchery and general rowdiness. The Church of England and the puritans here
prohibited it as a religious ceremony - or a celebration of Christ's birth -
until well into the 18th century.

When Dickens published the Carol in 1843 nobody had ever seen a Christmas card
or a Christmas tree - except at Windsor.

The street brawl was still a fact and deplored by respectable people who, by
then, had got to the point of taking a half day off on Christmas Day and
holding a special mid-afternoon dinner.

The turkey had long established himself after his long journey from America.
The great thing was fowl - I mean game - and pastries and many, many jellies
and Christmas punch.

When the Carol appeared what delighted everybody was the entertaining,
suspenseful plot.

But William Makepeace Thackeray said it defied literary criticism, it was a
work whose central idea was that Christmas was the paradox of a merry time that
entailed duties and obligations especially to the poor and added the
astonishing new notion that Christmas was a special time of the year for
redemption - for everybody to take stock and begin to lead a better life.

I think it's impossible today to appreciate the shock of this idea, disguised
as brilliant entertainment. It's at the root of the custom of New Year's
resolutions.

But the wish to make amends for the flaws in one's character is something that
some people - a few - become conscious of as they grow old.

One was the late, the recently late, actor George C. Scott. Not too long before
he died he gave an engaging, vibrant, television interview. He was an engaging,
vibrant man.

There was much talk about his towering portrayal of General George Patton.

When he was asked what was his favourite role of all he did not hesitate:
George C. Scott was, in private life, a violent man. It was a surprising and
happy thing to hear him say that his favourite role of all was Ebenezer
Scrooge.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP