An Embarrassing Relic of Authoritarianism - 15 December 2000

If through some happy time warp you could appear in Philadelphia in the spring
of 1787 and walk in on those 55 men who were undertaking the preposterous task
of inventing a system of government, what answer would you expect to the
question: Who is to have the main say in choosing a president?

As a modern man or woman you'd rightly anticipate the answer: A majority of the
popular vote in a national election.

Well if you'd suggested that answer then the general response would have been a
spasm of horror.

That is the obvious democratic answer. But in the first days of those hard
fought, hard thought, 17 weeks, they'd agreed very quickly that of all the
forms of government they were considering democracy was the one they most
wanted to avoid.

Said George Washington: "Accounted by civil societies it is the worst and
nastiest kind of government."

So two of the brightest men who wrote much of the Constitution - James Madison
and Alexander Hamilton - devised an institution that would act, as they put it,
as a precaution against the worst of democracy's threats - the tyranny of
majority rule.

By all means let every qualified man vote, vote a favourite for president and
of course they'd constitute the popular majority.

But the president would be chosen by special men to be known as electors, and
they must be men of substance - wealthy enough to be unbribable - well informed
about affairs outside their own state, they must hold no public office of any
kind, they must be independent men, as Hamilton prescribed, "of virtue and
merit."

There would be as many of them in each state as the number of congressmen plus
their two senators.

And they should send their individual votes to Washington by mid-December.

And on 5 January the results would be announced, and the president proclaimed,
by the existing vice-president - this coming January, by irony's child, Al
Gore.

A bare majority of the total electoral votes dictates the winner.

In all the frantic debate in and out of the courts this past five weeks I have
seen or heard only one piece which mentions this crucial fact: That the
electoral college was invented as a buffer, one said, or a refining chamber
against the main peril of democracy.

And not even one of the justices of the Supreme Court ever dared mention it in
passing.

Because, plainly, it goes against all the democratic principles and slogans:
"Count every vote", "One man one vote", "The people's choice".

The historical fact is that within 30-some years of the invention of the
electoral college the United States was a fast blooming democracy which
nevertheless retained the electoral college.

And the excuse for keeping it has survived to this day, which is: Well anyway
the electors always faithfully follow the guidance of the popular vote in their
state.

And so they do, but note they're not absolutely legally bound to.

If a couple of rebellious Floridians - two men or women of virtue and merit -
are so disposed they could vote for Gore next 5 January, leaving Governor Bush
one vote short of the required 270.

And on 6 January we could say, with Othello: "Chaos is come again." Let's not
even bring it up.

The constitutional convention was driven by another motive: To set up
safeguards against the tyranny of a too-powerful executive - a king or a
president or a national congress.

James Madison, a 36-year-old with an astonishing knowledge of forms of
government, drew on examples from republics, syndics, communes, monarchies,
examples ancient and modern, to show that when a national government can
override, when it wishes, the powers of provincial governments, very soon the
provincial governments become impotent - mere lackeys.

The best preventive of a central tyranny is provincial power.

So Madison urged, with great eloquence and conviction, that the states be given
the widest possible powers - their own control of education, banking, their own
criminal code, their own courts and in some things, like choosing electors, the
state legislatures would be superior to any federal legislature or court.

By the way there was a big todo in the first US Supreme Court hearing this time
whether that court ought to intervene in this thing at all.

Looking and thinking back over the hundreds of pleas and oral arguments and
legally knowledgeable comments of scores of journalists I find most memorable
and most apt to the whole shebang a single sentence by an old Southern judge
and a short sharp speech from an assemblywoman - that's to say a member of the
lower house of the Florida legislature.

First, Judge Saul, you remember the small bald headed mock ferocious character
right out of Mark Twain?

Ready to deny the recount, which the Florida Supreme Court subsequently
ordered, he was going over what had become the well-worn bone of contention:
The difficulty of telling from those famous butterfly ballots and their little
chads whether a machine had been faulty, a hand too casual, but either way how
to be sure that they'd been properly punched to indicate a vote.

Before 7 November I imagine few of us thought we'd ever have to puzzle over
hanging chads, pregnant chads or any other chad than the Republic of Chad.

After listening to hours of legalese from the Bush side and the Gore side we
were left with the impression that one pack of ballots had been falsely
disallowed by politically biased counters or that the counters were variously
incompetent or that several recounts had turned too many ballots into
bedraggled, indecipherable scraps of paper.

Nobody said aloud in the courtrooms what millions of Americans were thinking -
namely, that this form of ballot, used in many other states, is a dreadful
invention liable from birth to work badly.

The other thought was that when you receive a set of instructions for using
this very ballot ought not some responsibility attach to the voter?

Judge Saul said it all in nine words: "The voter has an obligation to do it
right."

One general hope that has come out of all this is that the new Congress will
make a law abolishing the chad ballot or, better, requiring a uniform national
ballot.

As it is the chad itself violated the Constitutional 14th Amendment - the
clause which guarantees to all citizens the equal protection of the laws.

The second most memorable happening for me came from this lady speaking as a
member of the Florida lower house.

The speaker of the house said he recognised Mrs Argenziano for a minute and a
half.

She didn't need it. She started at once.

"I am not a psychic. I am not a lawyer. I do not slice baloney for a living.

"There is a Florida statute which specifies: A ballot is valid only when it
shows 'the clear intent' of the voter.

"Well haven't you seen the boards? - Four people with judges looking on, trying
to guess at a voter's intent. Holding paper up to the light, going to the
window, using a magnifying lens, going through all sorts of optical acrobatics
to discover what the statute says ought to be made clear."

As Justice Sandra O'Connor insisted on asking, in one late exchange on the
United States Supreme Court: "But doesn't the standard of recognising validity
vary from county to county?"

The Gore lawyer was about to nod assent, then she said: "But it varies, does it
not, from board to board, table to table?"

And of course it did, from human to human, and not as both opposing lawyers
constantly tried to imply through casual fraudulence or deliberate malice or
political bias.

The fault, dear Brutus, did not lie in human mischief but in the failure of
that sort of ballot to reveal anything that four honest citizens could
recognise as clear intent.

Therefore, since the last session of the United States Supreme Court was called
with a stated challenge to the Constitution to the 14th Amendment, it was the
conclusion of seven of the justices that there was no new standard of counting
to be found that could show clear intent.

Clearly then many Floridian voters had suffered from the unequal protection of
the laws.

Five said positively no recount therefore should take place. And so their No
was decisive.

It turned out that in its second session the court had no more misgivings about
taking the case since this time a constitutional violation of an individual's
rights was the plea.

The court didn't order the recount to stop or begin again. It didn't order
anything.

It threw up its hands and said there was no time to devise a fair system and so
the result certified by the Florida secretary of state way back there on 8
November should stand. The original calendar should be the judge.

In sad fact, after 16 hours debate the Supreme Court just gave up, leaving the
first, hair's breadth count to stay.

Only Thomas Jefferson, off in Paris, as a distant observer was possessed, at
the time, by an odd, not to say morbid fear, about the new government.

That one day, as democracy came in and advanced, the single instrument of
government most to be feared was not the legislatures, not the presidency, but
a tyrannical supreme court going beyond its brief and getting into things only
the state legislators should decide.

I'm afraid the idea that the electoral college is, in a modern democracy, a
freak, an embarrassing relic of authoritarianism, is such an uncomfortable and
unfamiliar truth that it's unlikely, for some time, to replace the universal
legend that America broke with a tyrannical English king and lit the fires of a
roaring democracy.

But surely sooner than later it will have to be abolished or radically
reformed.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP