Patriotism, Thanksgiving - and Apple Sauce - 29 November 2002

Last Saturday afternoon, skimming the airwaves and impatient for the last golf
tournament of this year, I came in on the end of a sentence which sounded more
like a proclamation.

A professionally resonant television baritone declared: "And this day and this
ceremony will become an annual national event."

From the tone of the announcer and the sight of a little girl with pigtails and
a toothy grin I was afraid I was in on the initiation of yet one more so-called
national day - as in Mother's Day, Father's Day, Love a Dog Day or any one of a
score of other festivals concocted by enterprising businessmen well aware of
the money value of popular sentiment or sentimentality.

Which made me give thanks for my late, beloved mother-in-law, a Southern lady
of elegance and no-nonsense character who actually forbade her daughters to
send Mother's Day greetings because she didn't want them to be the victims of
what she called "a racket", started, as it was, by florists and the telegraph
companies.

Well to much relief last Saturday's ceremony was not commercially inspired, or
dictated, it was a legal ceremony started in California, which has, by now,
spread to over 30 states.

What the tele was showing was a panorama of married couples, of every station
and colour, sitting at a table in front of a judge to watch him sign and
therefore legalise their adoption of the tot they were holding or kissing or
shushing.

"From now on," announced the invisible baritone - on whose authority I don't
know - "from now on this day will be known as National Adoption Day."

There are about a quarter of a million couples who are desperate to adopt a
child.

But it can take years, the obstacles are many and for every honest couple there
are wily people eager to exploit the immigration laws with fake passports, fake
marriage certificates.

Anyway this scene was often hilarious due to the bored urbanity or the snoring
or the protesting howls of the adoptee.

But one cameo I shall not forget. A large, bosomy black woman glowing with
anticipation and the judge saying: "So I do now pronounce you the one and only
legal parents of this child."

The woman collapsed in a flood of tears, buried her face, then came up and
raised both arms to heaven.

But I am now talking to you about this past Thursday and the most sacrosanct of
all American secular festivals and the most embracing since it doesn't matter
whether you're a Christian, Muslim, Shinto or a heathen - a day which everybody
takes off by order of the President of the United States no less, which cannot
be said of Christmas Day, Yom Kippur, Ramadan or even the first day of the
World Series baseball championship.

A Thanksgiving ceremony goes back to 1622 when it was proclaimed by a
33-year-old Yorkshireman, William Bradford, who was then the governor of the
colony which had been set up at Plymouth, on Cape Cod, a sand spit curling off
the coast of Massachusetts.

The colony was two years old when it had a good harvest and Bradford said they
should all celebrate by falling on their knees and "blessing the God of Heaven
who had brought us over the vast and furious ocean, delivered us from the
perils and miseries thereof to set our feet on the firm and stable earth".

This was no colourful rhetoric.

They'd meant to follow the first settlers to Virginia - which a poet who'd
never been there, said was Earth's only paradise, but storms held them off its
coast and with some deliberation they tacked about and hoped to find some place
about Hudson's River.

But that prospect was worse.

"We fell amongst dangerous shoals and roaring breakers and got entangled in
great danger."

They outrode the storm, hugged the coast north and finally about 400 miles
north of their object, landed on Cape Cod.

The first Thanksgiving was no feast. The Puritans were against feasting of any
kind.

But one has to imagine them singing hymns, bent in prayer and thanking God for
the two novelties they had never seen which would sustain them.

One was a clucking animal that came leaping out of the cranberry bogs that
spread over the Cape.

The turkey was new, so was the cranberry. What better then than to slaughter
and roast one, make a sauce of the other, and serve them together.

And that indeed is the base of - I should say - 90% of the Thanksgiving family
dinners served last Thursday - I allow 10% for vegetarians.

Soon was added another novelty - the potato, and the more familiar plump orange
sphere, about which an early colonist wrote: "Let no man make jest of pumpkins,
since for with this fruit the Lord was pleased to feed his people till came
corn and cattle."

Well about a decade later most of the New England colonies took up the practice
of an annual Thanksgiving after harvest but the idea did not catch on in the
expanding nation until Lincoln, with the end of the Civil War in sight,
proclaimed a national day of Thanksgiving - with no binding powers however, on
any state that cared to skip it.

But Thanksgiving as we know it today, a festival to celebrate the pilgrims'
first harvest and all the blessings that have flown from it, did not really
take on until Franklin Roosevelt, after the anxiety-ridden late summer of 1938
- Hitler had taken Austria and was about to conquer Czechoslovakia, then came
the Munich false peace, cheered throughout Britain as an act of salvation,
while the solitary figure of Churchill in the House of Commons barked: "We have
suffered an unmitigated defeat."

Those unhappy days were green in the memory of Europeans and Americans alike
when, on 19 November 1938, President Roosevelt took to the radio, as he did on
all occasions he considered of national gravity.

It's hard now to recall before television the emotional impact of Roosevelt,
who was, more than any president before or since, a superb - that is to say - a
proud, commanding broadcaster.

And on 19 November he began: "I Franklin D Roosevelt, President of the United
States, do hereby designate Thursday 24 November 1938 as a day of general
Thanksgiving."

He at once set the annual tone with this: "Our fathers set aside such a day as
they hued a nation from the primeval forest."

Well never mind that there was hardly a gorse bush on the barren sand strip of
Cape Cod, there were lots of forests across 3,000 miles of the mainland.

"From our earliest recorded history Americans have thanked God for their
blessings. We have cherished and preserved our democracy.

"In the time of our fortune it is fitting we offer prayer for the unfortunate
people in other lands who are in dire distress.

"We offer our thanks to Almighty God. May we, by our way of living, merit the
continuance of his goodness."

And ever since the last Thursday in November has been the day - the president
usually putting out a written, very rarely spoken, proclamation giving thanks
for the special blessings of the year and recalling the original - the first
harvest - and whetting the appetite for the now traditional symbols - pumpkin
pie and the sweet potatoes, most dependably the turkey and the other fixings,
including the inevitable cranberry sauce.

Cranberry sauce is, I fear, an acquired taste for non-native Americans, as say
mint sauce is an acquired taste outside Britain.

My French gastronomic encyclopaedia has a tart note in its thousand pages of
recipes.

"The idea of combining finely shredded mint leaves with a cup of vinegar and
water as an adjunct to hot or cold lamb is considered indispensable in English
cookery only."

But I have to say that the idea of adding a sharp fruit sauce to the unique
flavour of turkey, smoked turkey especially, is to me an equal crime.

However, I'm happy to tell you about one wonderful foul-up to the American
cranberry crop which on one Thanksgiving just 43 years ago deprived practically
the entire nation of its favourite turkey sauce.

When the general shipment of cranberries was underway - seven million pounds
had been kept for Thanksgiving - the secretary of health, education and
welfare's men discovered that two bags - two pounds - contained an acrid
element, a weedkiller called aminotriazole.

It was fed to rats. Guess what? - they died.

Panic in Washington. The Food and Drug Administration put out a national
warning.

And their men went through the whole shipment and reported that the dreaded
weedkiller was absent in the remaining 6,990,098 pounds.

Safe, they declared, for human consumption. Universal relaxation.

Well not quite. No count was kept of the families who decided to forego the
delicious goo just in case - it ran into the millions.

Two White House reporters wondered if President Eisenhower had had it as usual.

His press secretary said it was none of their business.

A day or two later it came out: the Eisenhowers served apple sauce.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS
COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP