Renewed Concern Over Secondhand Smoke - 10 December 1999

Before we move on to more cheerful or entertaining things I think a postscript
to the battle of Seattle is not only in order but compulsory - since the
problems and the protests that infested the World Trade meeting will be with us
well into the foreseeable future.

The comment here from the White House to the nearest pub is so wide-ranging
that practically anything you care to say about the collapse of the talks is
being said by somebody.

From the phrase used by the strongest critics - "an unmitigated disaster" - all
the way across to the official White House view which is almost pathetically
modest - "Well at least," one official said, "we made the World Trade
Organisation better known."

Better known as what, was not answered.

My own fear is that what became better known was the view of the WTO by the
most violent and most ignorant of the protesters, not just the way out
anarchists but a great number of crusading groups.

A random survey of the 40 or 50,000 protests disclosed that as many as a half
of them had never heard of the World Trade Organisation before they arrived in
Seattle. But by the time they left they had settled for a definition which went
something like this:

A new and dangerous kind of global bureaucracy, an international bully, an
unelected government of rich corporations dedicated to cutting down all of the
rainforests, defiling rivers and forcing the poor populations of Asia to make
things for a pittance and so put millions of American workers out of
high-paying jobs.

And where did they pick up this piece of learning? On the Internet, that's
where.

One militant group that claimed to speak for many more reported that their own
independent websites had received hundreds of thousands of visits from people
who wanted to know - and the strong implication was to support - whatever they
were protesting about.

So you could say that thousands of small-time crusaders you never heard of got
their message over by means of the globalism they were meant to oppose.

The other more bitter irony which most of the protesters will either ignore or
refuse to believe is that the most powerful protesting movement - the American
labour unions that want Western standards of labour and pay to be enforced on
the manufacturers using Asian labour - they were defeated, not by the
corporations, but by the delegates of the poorest nations.

It was the delegates from Asia who matched the righteous anger of these labour
standard protesters by declaring that what Asia needs first and above all is
economic growth.

All that the pious American legislation would do would be, of course, to
protect the American workers, but would further impoverish the very poor, who
if they did not make these shoes at those prices would be earning a 10th as
much in a rice field or cleaning out middens.

In other words you could say that the people who made the talks collapse were
the Far Eastern delegates who begged to differ from the high-minded American
labour unions and their demand for a universal standard of work and pay.

One writer from the so-called Third World put it with brutal crispness:

"Citizens of the poorest countries have only one possible path out of the
horrifying levels of poverty, malnutrition and disease in which they live and
that is economic growth and every country in history that has raised its living
standards - including the United States - has done so by hitching its wagon to
the world economy."

To help as many nations as possible do this is what the World Trade
Organisation is all about. Not to impose trade barriers on international trade
but to break them down.

The struggling, baffled WTO is a sort of world appeals court, except that its
decisions are not binding but mean to be helpful.

An Indian writer who runs a think tank in New Delhi - a man plainly beside
himself to see and hear the gross ignorance of global trade shown by most of
the protesters, especially the ecological protesters - wrote that "the burden
of restrictive regulation borne by the farmers of the poor Asian countries is
imposed by their own sovereign governments.

"It is their own governments that force them to sell their produce domestically
at below-market prices, so they have little incentive to grow more.

"The bullies, the people who want a world government of trade, are the
protesters themselves who demonise technology and wish to impose their own
Luddite vision on the rest of the human race."

I think the saddest scene at Seattle was the last one. Mobs of ecstatic young
people dancing in the streets shouting: "We won, we won." While one loud voice
proclaimed the mantra that makes a ludicrous comparison and confirms their
wholly false view of the failed Seattle effort: "We stopped Vietnam, we'll stop
WTO."

A headline of recent days seems, at first glance, a harmless item but it
suggests if not proposes in this country anyway, a new federal law which would
in time come to cost the Republic and its citizens a great deal in money and
grief.

The headline: "Renewed concern over secondhand smoke."

Before we look into whose concern let me remind of the early concern amounting
in some Americans to near hysteria. The early concern over what was first
called "passive smoking" - the simple situation of being a non-smoker in the
presence of a smoker. You were said to be the victim of "passive smoking".

My liveliest memory of those early, scary days happened a block - a street -
away from me, on one of the four corners of Madison Avenue and 96th Street -
it's a crosstown street - which means it has crosstown traffic both ways - and
also up town along the avenue. So there are five streams - rushes - of traffic.

And about every minute or so the roaring traffic's boom is punctuated by the
moan or squeal of an ambulance siren.

My point is not that it's deafeningly noisy, which it is, but that the
atmosphere - however clean and bright it might appear - is dense with
innumerable toxins emitted by the hurling cars, trucks, vans and cabs.

There's a famous hospital nearby, and on the corner of Madison and 96th Street
there is a coffee shop - a restaurant - much favoured by the nurses and the
resident doctors.

One luncheon time about, I guess, 10 years ago, an old doctor was in there
finishing his meal and - oh it must have been 15 years ago, before smoking in
restaurants was banned - before, I might add, every doctor in sight had stopped
smoking.

Well this one ordered his coffee and lit up a cigarette. He'd taken no more
than a single puff when a young, bearded apostle of something or other jumped
up from the neighbouring booth and said sharply to my old doc: "Would you stop
doing that at once?"

The doctor, who was not wearing any identifying professional gear - a
stethoscope or white coat - the doctor looked up in a kindly way.

"Surely," he said, "if you promise before you go out to cross Madison Avenue to
wear a mask or handkerchief and rush home before the dozen or so poisonous
emissions from the traffic get to you."

The doctor snuffed out his cigarette, the young beard was - abashed, I suppose
is what the Victorians would have said. Actually he was petrified. He had a new
menace to consider, not only the cancer he'd pick up from the man smoking in
the next booth but Lord knows what disease from just crossing Madison Avenue.

The whole passive smoking scare started some 20-odd years ago when a stewardess
on one of our chief airlines acquired emphysema and sued the airline since she
attributed her complaint to the passenger cabin in which she was daily confined
- a cabin which in those days contained smokers.

I don't know if the attribution was ever proved but the stewardess got some
financial compensation and the airline quickly banished all smoking.

So did the other lines and in no time the Congress passed a law, and before you
could say "Got a match?" smoking became illegal on all American domestic
flights.

The stewardess's triumph led the medicos to start considering people with lung
disease who did not smoke but who lived in a house or flat with a smoker or
smokers, and once this research got under way the surgeon general was not the
only medical authority to find or declare that it was possible to pick up a
respiratory or a lung disease from somebody else's smoke.

The alarm bells rang, the media clanged with warnings and came the day when the
courts were receiving not only suits from smokers against the tobacco companies
but suits from wives, girlfriends, brothers - all sorts of non-smokers who had
probably lost their fancy for their smoker room mate.

Many doctors have joined the chase on behalf of non-smokers. Many doctors think
much too much has been made of either close or remote contact with smoky air.

But now this new story will stimulate more sufferers and, you may be sure, a
plague of lawsuits.

Quote: "Secondhand cigarette smoke may be more dangerous than previously
believed according to researchers at a Los Angeles medical centre who report
that some women with a common gene mutation who live with smokers are two to
six times as likely to develop lung cancer as women with the mutation who do
not live with smokers."

This will add more fuel to an ex-surgeon general and more influential doctors
who want to bring tobacco under the control of the Food and Drug Administration
and thereby make smoking a criminal activity.

The Food and Drug Administration is the government body that approves and
licences new drugs of all kinds, allows them to be put on or taken off
prescription, certifies the purity and safety of foods and in many other ways
is an admirable public institution.

But there is strong opposition outside the tobacco companies to having tobacco
declared illegal. Why? Because by now, surely, the only people licking their
lips over the prospect of a national prohibition of tobacco must be the rising
generation of Al Capones and Dutch Schultzes and Lucky Lucianos who for 13 long
years ruled over the huge underground criminal empire of bootleggers, created
to satisfy the appetite for alcohol in people who formerly had never had any
taste or desire for it.

I've not heard of any government medical official looking at this prospect and
shuddering.

Maybe somebody should paste up at the entrance to the Food and Drug
Administration's headquarters a large sign saying simply: "Been there, done
that."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.