A Universal Shout

This is not the most cheerful week in which to write a letter from America.

Everywhere I look - in the paper, on the screen - I hear angry statesmen, I
read long bilious dispatches from American correspondents in Europe and Asia
reporting what Alexander Pope called "an universal shout" of anti-Americanism.

An epidemic of head shaking from Beijing to Paris over American policy as
announced or sanctioned by President Bush, with the French, as usual, the chief
European deplorer of American policy, if not of American civilisation in
general.

Many of the headlines in European papers are more pugnacious than almost any I
can remember.

Some typically bellicose ones however reflect more than the underlying stories
themselves how little attention the writers - the European papers in particular
- have been paying through the past decade to American policy and continuing
concerns in two parts of the world.

Here's one headline: "Bush throws his weight around in the Pacific". This has
to do with the sale of weapons to Taiwan.

A writer of such an ignorant headline might well be reminded that for many
years, after the triumph of Communism, Taiwan was the representative of China
in the United Nations. And President Truman and his secretary of state told the
Soviet Union over and over that there was no way mainland China could ever
displace Taiwan as the UN's official China.

"No nation," declared Secretary Acheson, "can shoot its way into the United
Nations."

Well it did and so did others. And I remember a day when an old United Nations
watcher, marvelling at Mr Yasser Arafat's addressing the General Assembly in
New York, said: "The best way to become president of the General Assembly is to
have been a guerrilla leader somewhere bombing the buildings of the colonial
power in residence and in a few years your likeness will have gone from a
photograph in police stations over a reward for your capture, to a photograph
of the newest ambassador of his country to the United Nations."

I can think of six countries to which this has happened.

Nobody ever reported President Kennedy or Johnson or Carter or Bush or Clinton
throwing his weight around in the Pacific on the evidence, simply, of mainline
American policy - which was to keep China warned that the United States would
not stand by if Communist China attempted to invade and conquer Taiwan.

President Bush, asked a month ago: What would it take to counter a Chinese
invasion? replied: "Everything it takes."

He pronounced quietly what all previous presidents since 1947 have said more
strongly. Taiwan may be news to European editorial writers but 10 presidents
have taken special pride in Taiwan as a shining Asian example of how one small
country could stay independent of the enswirling Communist tide and become a
prosperous democracy.

Here's another headline with which the French especially sorrowfully concur:
"Iraq: Bombing Instead of Diplomacy".

Could that have been written by a veteran reporter of the Gulf War? I believe
another short history lesson is in order.

In August 1990 Saddam Hussein (remember him?) on his first step towards the
Persian Gulf and the ownership of the oil business, overran Kuwait and annexed
it as a province of Iraq.

The UN imposed a ban on all trade with Iraq. The UN Security Council commanded
Saddam to withdraw from Kuwait. This order fell, I'm sorry to say, on the list
of scores of other United Nations demands - it was ignored.

And in January 1991 the United States led a United Nations coalition army.
After a month of exchanging missiles - some fell from Iraq on Israel - the
coalition launched a ground attack which defeated the Iraqi forces in four
days.

Under the cease fire treaty Saddam agreed to scrap all poison gas and germ
weapons and allow full UN inspection of silos and all possible sites of nuclear
weapons production.

That's not the end but the beginning of the story. For 10 years the UN was
denied inspection of most suspect sites and material. It kept ordering Saddam
to stop, to reveal.

The grapefruit of diplomacy was wrung dry over and over. The beggings, the
urgings, the compromises were endlessly practised.

One man - the Australian Ambassador Butler - gave about three years of his life
to practising diplomacy in Iraq and it still goes on but now reinforced by
bombing patrols of American and British planes.

The rest of the United Nations, including France, long ago gave up taking any
interest in Iraq. But now the present French ambassador to the UN regrets that
the Americans don't follow the example of France with belligerent nations -
"French foreign policy," sighs Monsieur Jean David Levitee, "is not conducted
with bombs but with dialogue and respect."

In a marvellously Orwellian echo of Monsieur Levitee the Chinese representative
in the UN sighed his agreement. Yes, alas, the behaviour of the United States
"has undermined the atmosphere for dialogue".

The Chinese were sermonising on the reason why the United States, the creator
of the UN's human rights commission, had been ousted from it in the latest
election of members - a secret vote, by the way. Why? No explanation.

The Commission was conceived by Mrs Franklin Roosevelt who in late middle age
and early old age wore herself out in identifying and publicising and
protesting around the world such abuses as the oppression of women in the Third
World, the unequal rights in our world, international prostitution, child
slavery, sweated labour everywhere, always to the embarrassment of her
countrymen admitting the existence of sweat shops in some American cities.

Perhaps Mrs Roosevelt's crusade was too Utopian, too all-embracing of the
gross, the slight and the accidental. And her belittlers in Europe loved to
point out the automatic American condemnation of rights abuses in Communist
dictatorships but its frequent tolerance of the same sins in dictatorships of
the right. The French have tolerated everybody.

Still the United States has made more noise, more steadily, than any other
Western country about the suppression of dissent - the labour camps, the
torture practices of famous countries which Europeans don't care to recognise
as tyrannous.

The United States will go on as before monitoring the nations it has found
delinquent in the practice of human rights.

It's impossible to see how the United Nations commission on human rights has
any positive future since it has achieved a triumph even George Orwell could
not in his most cynical moments have predicted. The nations that elected the
commission to smell out tyranny and oppression are themselves the most notable
tyrants and oppressors.

They include Communist China, Cuba, Algeria, Libya, Sudan - and there was solid
representation of the 22 countries of the Middle East, none of which is a
democracy.

This tragedy could conceivably mark the end of the United Nations. As Western
Europe's refusal to do anything about the rape of Ethiopia except indulge in
"dialogue with Mussolini" marked the end of the League of Nations.

Well talking as we've been doing of the moral reputation of nations I've come
across the result of a fascinating experiment - an experiment in the honesty of
the average citizen in your country and mine and a score of others.

This clinical trial, if you like, was organised by the magazine Readers Digest.
Over five years it scattered more than a thousand wallets, personal wallets, in
117 cities in the USA, Europe, Australasia, to see and count how many were
returned.

Each wallet had $50 worth of local currency and the name and a phone number of
the owner.

Since in moral behaviour the United States is currently the miscreant, the
offender, and continental Europe the chief judge, perhaps they will furnish for
us the results most eagerly awaited.

Very well: In the United States 7 out of 10 wallets were returned. In middle
and southern Europe less than half the wallets went back to their owners.

In two countries, and in two only of all the continents, every single wallet
was returned. An astonishing result.

And which two countries could they possibly be? England and Scotland? No. They
came under the 50% honest group - one in two returned.

No. Norway and Denmark. They alone, I should think, having no beam in their own
eyes can, without hypocrisy, condemn the mote in the eye of their brother - the
poor bald eagle, the pathetic emblem of the United States, a slow-moving,
half-blind creature, not even, in spite of the universal rumour, a bird of
prey.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP