No Schadenfreude on Nato's Birthday - 30 April 1999

The Germans have a word, "schadenfreude" - pleasure in other people's pain.
Surely an unworthy emotion, which may be why we don't admit to it by having a
word in English.

Last weekend there were many of us who felt a tinge of it as the delegates from
19 nations came together in Washington for what was intended to be a joyful, a
triumphant, anniversary of the founding of the Nato alliance 50 years ago.

So against all expectations and the prevailing sour, sad mood it was not a
thumping success but it was a heartening one, in a way that nobody had
predicted. We were all overcome, as the 19 allies were, by Kosovo and our
evident inability to cripple, even to dent, Milosevic's forces or stop the
campaign of ceaseless cruelty that triggered this, the first Nato war.

We expected to see a parade in Washington of rather embarrassed, apologetic
nationals. Not so. From the day of their arrival and from the first speech by
the secretary general to the last, what was surprising and heartening was the
strong sense that the Europeans had of their own unity, their belief in their
mission, and far more positively than the Americans that tenaciously held vow
to give what they had to win.

I think also the point was made by a few relative oldsters present - I wish
there'd been more - that the 1500 delegates there and the millions looking on
at the opening ceremony are alive and well and free men and women because Nato
was born.

The 50-year general peace has been kept by Nato, and by what Churchill called
"the American umbrella" - the early American possession of the bomb.

Perhaps there was nobody there old enough to have been present at the birth 50
years ago. You must forgive me if it stays green and very vivid to me.

It was an April day and April in Washington is the joyfullest month - jetting
cascades of cherry blossom against clear blue skies.

On such a day, glimpsed through the high windows of the government's Department
of Labour auditorium, there walked briskly to a shining table a tall, dapper
character with a bristling moustache. You'd have sworn he was the colonel of
the regiment.

He was, in fact, the American Secretary of State, one Dean Acheson. He sat down
and signed, for the United States, the treaty which bound, in the beginning, 12
nations to go to each other's aid in case of attack on any of them or clear
threat of invasion.

To any student of American history this was an incredible day. It was the first
time the United States had ever signed a treaty of alliance with any European
state since George Washington, in one seemingly doomed winter of the
Revolution, begged the French to come in and save the new-born nation. Which,
by the way, they did.

Acheson was to be the point man when the treaty came up for ratification in the
Senate. The president cannot make treaties without the consent of the Senate.

But such was the eloquence and tough persuasiveness of Secretary Acheson,
before a key committee of the Senate during a month's debate in that summer of
1949, the threatened Republican boycott wilted and died. Eighty-two Senators
voted aye to ratify, only 13 said nay.

Back on that April day of the treaty's signing there then stepped forward not
another colonel but a small powder blue-suited man who looked like the
regimental sergeant major in his best Sunday civvies. One Harry S. Truman -
President of the United States.

He it was, never a ringing orator, who nevertheless found a simple, telling,
phrase to say what the treaty embodied.

"It is," he said, "an act of neighbourliness by a group of householders who
have decided they have so much in common that they had better, for their mutual
advantage, set up a formal association."

I find it hard now to convey to you the enormous sense of relief we then felt,
and flowed from that April ceremony.

By the spring of 1949 we, the United States and Western Europe, had come
through a tumultuous and terrifying time.

The peace, so-called, had descended on devastated Europe in 1945. Within the
next three years the Soviet Union had set up a puppet government in Poland,
threatened Greece and Turkey with Communist guerrillas, imposed Communist
regimes on Hungary and Czechoslovakia, and stopped all food and all transport
from the West into the island of Berlin.

The Americans and the British responded with what seemed at the time like the
well-meaning crazy device of an airlift, dropping food and goods - blankets,
heaters, coal - in from the air. It's one of the marvels of our time that 132
planes made a round trip every day, took in, on an average, 3,500 tonnes a day
- all sorts of weather - for a whole year, at the end of which time Stalin gave
in.

Well apart from those pressing immediate crises there was always, haunting the
back of our minds, the awful knowledge that while Britain had disarmed
considerably since 1945 and the United States even more radically, the Russians
had just under half a million men-at-arms at the ready.

That was the atmosphere - the sort of world we lived and fretted in - when the
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation was born.

Who, somebody asked me a week ago, then was the father of Nato? A tricky
question. But after much digging in the parental archives I think I've found
the man.

A quiet, unassuming man, not apt to claim the authorship of anything. He had
been the Prime Minister of Belgium, and when the US Congress was signing an
agreement of help to Greece with money and arms the Belgians suggested:
Wouldn't it be a good idea to abandon these piecemeal agreements and subsidies
to single nations? Why not, as the United Nations Charter allowed, a regional
European alliance for collective self-defence?

The suggestion was taken up and the grim 12-month experience of Russia's Berlin
blockade quickened American's conviction that a general transatlantic defence
alliance was essential - which led to 4 April 1949.

Now I can identify without fear or favour or shame the Belgian father. He was
Paul Henri Spaak - a totally forgotten hero I think you ought to hear more
about. The meekest war monger you'd ever want to meet and the mildest socialist
who ever became Prime Minister of Belgium or any other country.

When Belgium was invaded in 1940 he made his way to London and became the
foreign minister of the Belgian government in exile.

After the war he was back again as prime minister and the most insistent
advocate of some sort of Council of Europe. He encouraged 10 nations to join,
most of whom were to be the nucleus of the emerging Nato.

Monsieur Spaak became Secretary General of Nato for four years and then, in his
mid-60s, he retired from politics.

During the rest of that decade I was on the advisory board of an encyclopaedia
with him. Once a year nine of us met with the encyclopaedia staff in very
pleasant places for four days and nights, and in the mornings we spouted or
meditated about our speciality.

Monsieur Spaak was our expert on international affairs and each year he gave a
lucid, quiet, all-embracing survey of some sort of progress and many sorts of
trouble around the world - always in a slightly regretful tone, as of a man
who'd had too much experience of sudden pain to dare to predict anything.

One year we met in Puerto Rico, which in September can be and was an inferno.
We were all in light slacks, sports shirts, except the small, diffident
Monsieur Spaak. He was in faded dark grey winter suit, a rumpled white shirt
and neck tie, and he stayed that way for all four days. His luggage had never
arrived from Europe.

The following year we were in Pebble Beach on California's magnificent Monterey
peninsula. Once again Monsieur Spaak appeared and stayed in a faded dark grey
suit, rumpled shirt, nondescript tie. He looked, once again, like an
impoverished bank clerk. I couldn't believe what he told me. His luggage never
arrived.

"What?" I shouted. "Not again?"

As mildly as Mr Toots hearing that Florence Dombey was not going to marry him
he said: "It's of no matter thankee, thankee no matter."

The following year the board thought it only fair to meet closer to Monsieur
Spaak's home which was on the French Riviera. Indeed we met in an elegant hotel
close by his village.

This time we all of us were in our usual summer slacks and sports shirts. Enter
Monsieur Spaak, ex-prime minister, ex-Secretary General of Nato, ablaze in an
outsized floppy shirt, a riot of flowers and leaping animals and sky blue
trousers. A card, an ageing playboy, very nearly a jock. He knew what he was
doing and he asked, nervously, if our luggage had arrived.

I wish I could end this comparatively happy talk with a rousing report that the
wobbling Congress had stiffened and acted to brace the president beyond his
rather cautious rhetoric. Alas, swifter than anyone expected on Wednesday
evening, the House voted overwhelmingly to refuse the president's use of ground
troops without the approval of Congress.

Then the president's loyal Democrats offered a resolution, which doesn't have
the force of law, that would give the president symbolic support in Nato's
aerial campaign. The vote, astoundingly, was tied - 213 to 213. The White House
comment: "The House voted today No, on going forward, No, on going back, and
tied on standing still."

The Republican war hero Senator John McCain then offered his own resolution
authorising the president to use "all necessary force". But the Republican
Senate Leader, Mr Lott, wouldn't even let it come to the floor.

In retrospect the consensus is there are two heroes of the Nato summit - Prime
Minister Blair and Senator John McCain - about whom, however, it had better be
said that, at the moment, the number of Americans who want him to be president
- he's running - is 6%.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (Â©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts Â©BBC. Letter from America
scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP