The Scandal of Pardons and White House Furniture - 23 February 2001

"The president shall have power to grant reprieves and pardons for offences
against the United States."

This little-regarded and rarely-quoted sentence in the Constitution defines a
topic that has been shocking our senses during the past few weeks to the
exclusion, to put it brutally, of much public interest and the doings and
proposed policies of the new president - a situation I've never ever known
before.

Well even though the shock hit us a month ago about the manner of the Clintons'
departure from the White House - the scandal of several pardons, the looting of
the White House furniture - I had been reluctant to talk about it, walking
around it, in the hope, which the Democrats, indeed the Democratic Party as a
whole share, the hope that it would go away.

My reluctance to talk about it springs honestly from a fact that very rarely
confronts a reporter who tries to tell a story that's fair to all sides. The
trouble with this story is that there doesn't seem to be more than one side.

You must have guessed by now that I'm talking about what has variously been
called "the squalid Clinton exit", "the shrieking ex-presidency", and about
which the Washington Post, which has been a steady admirer of Mr Clinton for
most of eight years, wrote, regretfully, last week: "The defining
characteristic of the Clintons is their incapacity to feel embarrassment."

Before we go into what it is so shocking or bizarre about the Clintons' exit it
might be useful to look at the normal procedure, the normal behaviour of a
president leaving the White House on the day of the inauguration of his
successor.

I've looked through the comings and going of the presidents for the past
hundred years, for the 20th Century only.

Briefly then, in that time, during that century, there were 17 presidents
before Clinton. Looking for the norm you have to discount quite a few of them.

Two were assassinated, two died in office, three - Coolidge, Truman, Lyndon
Johnson - announced early on that they would not seek another term, so they had
no further ambition to nurse or promote.

One was impeached and resigned, rather than face a trial he knew he would lose.

Two retired to their homes but remained the titular leaders of their party
until a new one would emerge.

Two had served the maximum terms under the new two-term rule and so joined the
remaining five, who went home to a dignified or unpublicised retirement.

They, I believe, established the norm. And they include in our time Presidents
Eisenhower, Carter and Ford.

What they did on the election of the incoming man was to do what had been done
since the middle 19th Century: They accompanied the new man to the Capitol -
until 30, 40 years ago, in an open car - saw him sworn in and quietly left with
their wives and went back to the homes they had left.

So really the normal behaviour comes down to what the majority of the people
expect or have come to expect about how a president leaves the White House.

The best thing I can do is to recall a memory of the most typical presidential
exit I can remember.

A bright, mild day in 1953 in Washington. The usual date: 20 January. The day
of the inauguration of the former general, Dwight D Eisenhower. The departing
president was Harry Truman.

It was a simple story. By the afternoon about a hundred people of every sort
had gathered on a street in Georgetown - the old Georgian suburb - where the
departing president was the guest of Truman's secretary of state, Mr Dean
Acheson.

The small crowd simply waited till the lunch was over in order to watch Mr
Truman and his wife come out of Mr Acheson's house and leave for the last time.

He came out, his large glasses glinting in the sun. He shaded his eyes, saw the
small crowd, put his hand up for quiet and said two sentences.

He said: "Your coming out here means more to me than many enthusiastic meetings
I had as president. Now I'm Mr Truman private citizen."

He got in a car with is wife and he left for the railroad station and there he
stood on the observation platform of the train and waved and smiled, and the
train pulled out.

Next thing we learn from his diary. After he arrived in Independence, Missouri,
where he was born, he went to the only house he'd ever owned - a modest,
two-storey house on a side street - and he wrote: "First thing I did was to
take the suitcases upstairs, like the old days." And that was it.

The first misgiving, shall we say, about Mr Clinton was that when he left
President Bush to the inaugural luncheon in the White House and the following
parade, he went to the airport and spent two hours with a crowd of friends and
supporters, complete with microphones and television cameras.

He flew to New York - a White House plane for the last time - where it turned
out he'd invited 10,000 people to see him land at Kennedy. The weather was
atrocious, only about a thousand came to hear him but mainly to hear the new
senator - Mrs Clinton - make a political speech.

What Mr Clinton was doing was swiping the limelight, not only from the new
president, but from the forgotten Vice-President Gore and proclaiming himself
still leader of the Democratic Party.

Next day he appointed a friend and big money raiser as chairman of the
Democratic National Committee - not by custom the privilege of an ex-president.

There was a pervasive mutter in the media that this performance was immodest.
Well, not in the best of taste.

And then only days later we heard that the Clintons had walked off with
something like $190,000-worth of White House furniture.

At first this was not to be believed but then came the stupefying, the more
incredible story, of the pardoning of Mr Marc Rich.

All presidents, in the last days of their term, exercise this constitutional
privilege of pardoning people who, one way or another, have committed offences
against the United States - usually who violated ethics rules of Congress,
prisoners whose guilt is dubious - rarely if ever I believe men indicted, as Mr
Rich was, or convicted of trading with the enemy or, as other Clinton-pardoned
felons, of drug dealing or money laundering.

Presidents routinely check with the Department of Justice to see the
seriousness of the offence.

Mr Clinton did not. But he said that three lawyers approved Mr Rich's pardon.

Next day all three said they had never approved any pardon for Mr Rich and all
three, it turned out, had been Mr Clinton's defence lawyers in his previous
troubles.

So what had Mr Rich done? He'd been indicted for a raft of criminal charges
here in New York 17 years ago by Mr Giuliani - New York's mayor - who was then
the United States Attorney.

Mr Rich, apart from charges of massive tax evasion and money laundering, traded
with Libya in defiance of the embargo, with Iran while the American hostages
were held there, with Iraq through the Gulf War and with South Africa in
defiance of the United States embargo against the apartheid government.

Then came out the news that Mr Rich's former wife had given $450,000 to the
coming Clinton Library, three millions to Democrat fundraising lunches, 10,000
to Mr Clinton's legal defence fund.

Well there once was a time in the long ago when even civil servants, in several
Western countries, were not only expected to do not wrong, they could be fired
for giving the appearance of doing wrong.

Today a great majority of Americans, including many Democrats in and out of
Congress, and a host of liberal commentators, believe that Mr Clinton has given
the appearance of doing wrong.

Stronger language has been used most recently. Even an ex-president and
Democrat - Mr Jimmy Carter - has called the Clinton behaviour "simply
disgraceful".

Every day it gets worse. The United States attorney in New York has instituted
a criminal investigation into the history and circumstances of Mrs Rich's gifts
and that is where I think, for the moment, we ought to leave it.

A public question which was asked almost two years ago and comes up again is:
Did Mr Clinton degrade the presidency? Well certainly we can say now he
degraded his presidency.

But we should remember that during the long, Roman decadence, there was from
time to time the interruption of a virtuous emperor. The presidency is there
and new and decent men will come to inhabit it.

And then there is the curious evidence of the polls that still about 40% of the
people can see no fault or flaw in Mr Clinton as president.

How about as a man? Ah well the polls say almost 70% now agree he is - and this
was put to them - "dishonest and untrustworthy".

But doesn't this affect his standing as president? To many people, apparently
not. Such people certainly don't believe, with Franklin Roosevelt, that: "The
president is assumed to be the moral leader of the nation."

There's finally the fatalist view that Mr Clinton is not a noticeable sinner
but merely reflects the morality of our time.

Such a fatalist was Edward Gibbon who could write about Rome in decay what
might well have been is epitaph on the Clinton presidency:

"The people became insensitive or indifferent to the debauches of the emperor
provided he repaired the roads and remitted taxes."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS
COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP