Healthy Eating - 28 November 2003

"Being thus arrived and in good harbour in safety they fell upon their knees
and blessed the God of Heaven who had brought them over the vast and furious
ocean and delivered them from the perils and miseries thereof, again to set
their feet on the firm and stable earth, their proper element."

How often I wonder in the past half century have I warmed to this talk about
the last Thursday in November, which since a proclamation by Lincoln has been
celebrated as a day of national thanksgiving.

The first proclamation came from the Yorkshireman I've quoted - William
Bradford - who had led that storm-battered voyage from Southampton to Cape Cod.

After losing half his 100 settlers to a winter of starvation, misery and
violent cold, the following November produced a first harvest and Bradford
decreed it should be celebrated every year by a ceremony of thanksgiving and
prayer for the colony that was now pretty sure to survive.

When they landed in 1620, their rejoicing was short-lived for Bradford goes
grimly on: "They had no friends to welcome them, nor inns to entertain and
refresh their weather-beaten bodies, no houses much less towns to seek for
succour, and ahead of them a desolate wilderness with wild beasts and wild men.

Some of them petitioned to go back over the "vast and furious ocean".

But the tougher ones foraged among the grasses of the Cape and came on patches
of three crops: a crop of maize - later throughout the Americas known as corn -
and bogs of cranberries, and the potato.

And by the following spring the resident Indians had become sufficiently
friendly to show them the use as high cuisine of a wild animal that was not in
fact wild in action but easily taken, quietly slaughtered and cooked into a
delicious dish: the turkey.

Last Thursday, the staple meal throughout the United States of this family
feast (and Thanksgiving is, more than any other day, the day of the family) is
roast turkey or smoked turkey, corn - maize - pudding, cranberry sauce and
pumpkin pie.

Incidentally, grace is recited in more than 75% of all families sitting down,
usually at about two in the afternoon.

Most of them will have seen on television the president's brave, if alarming,
speech in Iraq.

But this year it would not be surprising to learn that very many Americans
wonder what they have to be thankful for.

And just to spoil even the Thanksgiving dinner itself, here at home there is a
new compassionate campaign being mounted by greens - or you might better say
animal lovers - a campaign to banish the Thanksgiving turkey itself from the
board.

It's the same argument which is certainly hard to meet or ignore as the one
advanced by people who've been put off by the knowledge of how cattle and pigs
are bred for human consumption.

The cramped, medicinal lives of calves has been lamented for generations but
even lovers of birds who campaign passionately to stop shooting them tend to
look the other way when delicious veal is mentioned.

The protest is not against the family farmer - a type that is, by the way,
beginning to vanish - but against the big corporation farms and what is
deplored as the industrial production of turkeys that is fast, cruel and leaves
little time in a turkey's life to trot around and take the air.

I doubt it will have any more long-term success than similar, brave campaigns
against beef cattle and pigs.

But there was held last week in New York city a conference, a protest
conference, by an unlikely group, practically a summit meeting of - wait for it
- bread bakers protesting against a recently-revealed fact of American life
among the young.

During the past year, a government survey was published revealing an appalling
statistic: 40% of all American children, teenagers most of all, suffer from
obesity.

"A national disease of epidemic proportions" is the sort of headline that has
entitled surveys and laments in every sort of publication through the medical
journals, parents' magazines, newspapers and down to the tabloids, finally
being deemed so serious a national problem that many, very serious papers have
abandoned the national love of Greek and Latin and come out in plain English:
"Our children are too fat!"

Well, the result of this study has been a far-reaching government campaign, not
to change its long-standing recommendations for healthy eating - little
saturated fat, less fried food, fewer carbohydrates, lots of fruit and
vegetables - but to try to arrest the landslide of junk food, that constitutes
in life, the actual diet of too many children.

The insistence on eating less saturated fats has already affected the big, fast
food chains, so as to cause them to promise to reduce the fat content of their
burgers.

But the recommendation that hurts a much larger industry is the urge to reduce
carbohydrates.

The charge that set off the bread bakers' summit was the advice of government
health men, the medicos, the parents' groups, to have their children eat less
bread, less pasta. Less pasta? - what an outrageous demand!

For the past decade, maybe two decades or more, if there's been a national
obsession, it has been pasta.

In a national popular food guide, which lists every sort of restaurant from the
most expensive French to a chain of coffee shops there are three Afghan
restaurants, 35 Indian, 250 French, four English - and 600 Italian.

And along comes a blithe doctor and says: "Hey, gumba - cut out the pasta, cut
out the pizza." If those bakers ever catch him, his life won't be worth an
angel's hair.

But the bakers had a right to be alarmed. The message of the government and the
medicos and the parents has got across, and at this conference, ominous figures
were quoted about the number of bread bakers who have gone, or are about to go,
out of business.

The dread sentence was not, in my report, ever spoken. But behind the loud
assertions that bread is the stuff of life, was a still small voice saying:
"Perhaps at last the craze for pasta is going the way of the previous fad for
croissants - remember?"

I've not mentioned for some time our old bugbear, another and a continuing
national obsession - cholesterol - a very complex alcohol that is known about
and controlled and worried about by everybody as a perilous cause, not of
obesity, but of heart disease.

Some time in the last year, I took not a galloping poll but a stealthy
questioning of friends and acquaintances.

I asked guilelessly how long ago, when do you suppose, did this popular
obsession with cholesterol get started? Most everybody thought - oh I'd say 10,
15 years maybe.

Well, I've now discovered the text of a lecture I gave to the American Heart
Association in Boston over 40 years ago when I remarked: "The word cholesterol
gibbers through the land as the word 'unclean' used to herald the approach of a
leper."

At the time there was a tremendous to-do about the lethal snags created in the
bloodstream by carbohydrates and animal fats.

But then the medical profession had decided that cholesterol was as fatal as
silt along a riverbed.

Since then nothing has changed about the cholesterol warnings except the public
awareness that there are two kinds: the low-density lipoproteins, known as the
bad cholesterol, and the high-density lipos, known as the good.

This is too complicated for most people and what they fear is that their total
count of good and bad will go, by our scale, much over 200 points.

This seems to be a fear of all types of all ages. Every American, from a bishop
to a truck driver, knows his cholesterol count. Every woman from a cleaning
lady to a psychoanalyst, knows hers.

Americans are astonished to discover when they go abroad that the French don't
bother with the cholesterol count. And in Britain, in the code they print on
packaged foods, protein is big, but often no mention is made of the deadly
cholesterol.

So many other chemicals have come to be identified as having an effect on the
heart that I heard myself a month or so ago saying to my cardiologist: "I won't
be here to see it but I'll bet 10 years from now some other bugbear will have
replaced cholesterol."

"I shouldn't," he said, "wonder."

He felt even more sceptical when I told him the true story of a friend of mine
in San Francisco who's in his mid 80s and follows no diet.

His combined cholesterol count - now remember 200 is safe, normal - his count
varies between 625 and 650.

Two doctors have warned him that he's a walking time bomb.

My friend's secret, it seems, is that his grandfather came from an ancient
village in Greece where some gene in the tribe produced men with huge
cholesterol who all lived to be about 100.

My friend gives every sign of continuing the family tradition.

Meanwhile, as for the two doctors who warned him he was a walking time bomb:
both are dead.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP