California Dreaming

I'm not particularly devoted to travel advertisements. I discovered very early
in my roving years that the beauty spot the travel ads hope to ensnare you to
was very different from the beguiling picture they painted of it.

The charming but modest hotel in the romantic country painted by Manet or Monet
was usually on a street where buses clattered and motorbikes ripped through at
two-minute intervals through the night.

The nearby ocean, only minutes away, would have tested the best form of a long
distance Olympic runner. And so on.

But I saw an ad the other day that tugged at me: "Come with us," it said, "down
memory lane."

It was designed for old folks. It offered to accommodate a party of 12 or 20
and let them together decide on foreign spots they'd loved in their youth. The
company then arrange the deal.

Well, 20 years ago I might have nibbled at this juicy bait, though I believe
I'd have backed out at the last minute and chosen not only my own landscapes
but my remembered hotels, restaurants, swimming coves, jai alai stadiums, not
to mention what the song calls "all the girls I loved before".

Well now before this thing gets out of hand I'd better get down to the matter
in hand. Come with me down memory lane.

You are, or imagine yourself to be, in the passenger seat of a 1933 model A
Ford. In the driver's seat would be me, the lucky recipient of a lavish
American university fellowship which required you, in the long summer vacation,
to drive around as many of the 48 - as they then were - 48 states as possible.

The memory you're about to share puts us deep in the heart of Texas and about
30 miles to the north of the small town of Dallas - a place I was already fond
of because it was the theme of a 12-bar blues sung by Fats Waller.

"I've got the Dallas blues," he sang, "the main street heart disease. That
Texas town that never seen ice or snow."

It certainly wasn't seeing any ice or snow on that June evening. The outside
temperature was well over 90 at twilight, the car was hotter still - we were
about 20 more years away from air conditioning - but eventually we came up and
over a hill and down there, ahead of us, was Dallas. The most shattering sight
of my first trip around the United States.

The sky light had not quite faded from the horizon but across the whole width
of it the land was roaring on fire - great, leaping, scarlet flames tearing
round the whole curve of the horizon.

It was like - what's his name? - Gustave Dore's illustrations to Dante's
inferno. The immediate thought was that I was present at surely one of the most
devastating city fires in American history. Surely Chicago's famous blaze could
not have done better.

We drove on and closer and curiously there were no screams, no sirens, no
recognisable hullabaloo. The scene more and more resembled the faked-up, fiery
backcloth of a scene at the Metropolitan opera. The fact is the fire was
deliberate, was planned and contained - a regular show.

And when we sat down in a diner in Dallas the fire was still far off - out of
town but still flaming away. It seemed best to ask the waitress what it was all
about.

She pardoned herself for stifling a small yawn and said: "Natural gas, burning
off as usual."

Natural gas, so-called, because it's found in the Earth's crust, not
manufactured. And it says here in the dictionary: "Used for heating, lighting
and cooking." Which only shows that this edition of the Oxford was printed long
after our dive into flaming Dallas 68 years ago.

What the girl waitress said was nothing but the truth: "Natural gas. Burning it
off as usual".

I didn't stay to wonder why.

About 10 years later during the Second War I was in Texas on a story and I
asked a big oil man about this odd feature of the Texas landscape - the spears
of flames stabbing the horizon.

He simply said: "Well it just escapes wherever drilling is being done. It's a
useless by-product of oil production, so nothing to do but burn it off."

The evening after I'd bedded down in Dallas I drove 500 miles west to the last
town in Texas before you go briefly through a corner of New Mexico and on into
Arizona.

El Paso, in 1933, was a raffish, small town on the Mexican border, what they
called a one horse town. Much of its business was caring for overnight tourists
driving down for a day's visit over to Mexico.

You may get a sharp, painful sense of what California's sudden desperate need
of electricity means over its 800-mile stretch when I tell you that many
Californians blame the whole crisis on El Paso. On a natural gas company there
which is, to be modest but frank about it, the biggest natural gas company in
the world.

I ought to say at the beginning that the California power or energy crisis has
more causes, more conflicting solutions, more good guys than bad guys than the
competing theories that eventually led to Einstein's discovery of the formula e
= mcÂ².

In public debate it's been simplified into something very much cruder than the
truth by exponents of the two main ideologies:

The free-market Republicans who complain that the discovered shortage of oil
refineries is due to the crippling anti-pollution regulations built up during
the past eight years by the Democrats.

At the other end of this national shouting match are the green conservationists
who concentrate on one, and to be truthful very minor part of the quarrel, the
Alaska wildlife refuge into which the Bush administration wishes to begin oil
drilling on 8% of this vast reserve.

In between these extremes are citizen opponents of the Bush plan to rig up a
thousand power plants and transmission towers on the general NIMBY principle -
not in my back yard.

Opposed to them also are the Democrats who think the federal government should
move in and re-regulate an industry that was clumsily de-regulated.

And against them of course is the whole Republican Party, which since the
morning of Ronald Reagan's inauguration, has sworn to reduce Washington's
interference in most everything.

As for California's crisis Vice-President Cheney, who's in charge of the
president's energy plan, said: "The best solution is to let the free market
prevail."

Natural gas was known to the ancients who thought it a supernatural phenomenon.
Probably they just stayed at a safe distance and prayed. It was taken to be a
warning symbol of the displeasure of one or another god.

Leap from the ancients to the 1950s. With the Second War over but the Soviet
Union glaring across the borders of Western Europe, the Eisenhower
administration began to worry, in abounding post-war prosperity, about the huge
consumption of oil, the soaring demand for electricity with the nationwide
spread of air conditioning, and a little more nervously, the need for a
strategic reserve of oil in case of war, since America had to depend - as we
all do - on Middle Eastern oil.

There was a lot of work done on synthetic fuels but it was very expensive, and
offshore drilling was in its infancy.

Then somebody, I don't know who, remembered the flaming horizons of Texas. It
was a sign of huge reserves of natural gas in this country. In Texas more than
anywhere.

How to get it across the continent? The government at the dictate of Roosevelt
had ordered an enormous pipeline called Big Inch to transmit oil from the Gulf
of Mexico to the California coast for the needs of the Navy in the Pacific War.

Well Big Inch was eventually sold to a Texas transmission company and the
longest part of it converted to a natural gas pipeline reaching to Los Angeles
from - you've guessed - the little town of El Paso, Texas 700 miles to the
east.

That pipeline was owned by El Paso Natural Gas Company. El Paso signed a
long-term contract with a Pacific gas and electric company and El Paso
prospered exceedingly.

Came the boom of the mid-90s, the deregulation of oil, and the fears of the
Pacific electric votes that the price of natural gas would sink beyond trace.
So one day the Pacific company dumped the El Paso contract.

Since two thirds of all El Paso's natural gas flowed to make electricity for
California El Paso went, overnight, from riches to rags, losing close to $200m
a year on the California feed alone. And began to look into bankruptcy
proceedings.

California revelled in cheap petrol. But El Paso saved itself by expanding into
states north, midwest, east - with everything from gas drilling to electric
generation plants. In two or three years in the late 90s it had 60,000 miles of
pipe from Arizona to the coast of New England - it didn't need California any
more.

But the economy waned and only in the past year did California come to realise
the huge increase in demand for electricity in industry and homes by the
bounding 90s prosperity and the arrival of computers and the internet which
suck up electricity like a famished schoolboy with an ice cream soda.

California wanted El Paso's natural gas again urgently. El Paso responded by
quadrupling the price.

"It was as if," one California legislator said, "they'd shut off most of their
pipeline to us."

So now El Paso says: California never gave a second thought to the idea of our
bankruptcy. And California says: El Paso is an outrageous price gouger. The
whole hassle is up before a state commission of inquiry.

That's only one story but it points like no other to the root cause of the
California energy crisis - characteristic not only of California but of the
country at large.

The tendency in good times to convert luxuries into necessities, to loot a
cornucopia of CDs, VCRs, extra air conditioners, to build a second house, tear
down a fine old house and build a 30-room monster, to make better, bigger
gas-guzzling cars - everybody trying out the feel of being one of the new rich,
buying more than ever - on credit if you have no cash.

This has happened about every 20 years since the 1890s. The 1990s were the
biggest splurge, the longest day of sunshine.

For the pleasure of which, as my old Scottish caddy said, setting out on a
beautiful day at St Andrews: "Aye, but we'll soon be paying a price for it."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (Â©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts Â©BBC. Letter from America
scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP