Getting Away From It All - 24 January 2003

I've often wondered at but rarely questioned fellow journalists as to what they
do for a break from the daily grind.

I myself have one rule which is never to talk shop in the evenings.

Shop, for me, being American government and politics. For the past year or more
it's been the history of Afghanistan, Iraq, Saddam and more lately still the
history of al-Qaeda.

Need I say that over the Scottish twilight I'd rather not bring it all up.

I have in mind a colleague who for the past, I should guess, five, six years
has spent his days and nights in the jungle of Middle Eastern politics, which
must be rather like having to write a daily piece from the Tower of Babel.

Several times a week, through these tumultuous and murderous years his
datelines alone produce a shudder - Tel Aviv, Baghdad, Kabul, the West Bank,
Bethlehem - you have to acquire the cold blood of a surgeon to write every day
about such things.

One day the man confessed that he too had a rule to keep him sane.

Once a month when he's home in Washington he takes a whole day off and plays
golf.

If he can only manage once a month his golf must not be, shall we say, down to
scratch.

But I know what he means. When I think back to times of fret and anxiety how
impossible it is to stay upset when the cypresses are swaying slightly and you
face a choice between a knock-down five iron or a hooded three.

However, just over two years ago, on my 92nd birthday, I found I could stay on
my feet and produce a fairly smooth swing only if I had an ambulance standing
by.

So as it must to all golfers the day came when, as a fine old amateur golfer
and friend of mine just wrote to me: "My game has gone south and left no
forwarding address!"

With the actual physical getaway no longer possible, what to do?

For the past three weeks I had spent my days mentally jogging back and forth
between the Security Council and President Bush, between Mr Blix and President
Bush, between Secretary Powell and Baghdad's senior scientist - "There is
absolutely no truth in the rumour that we ever used poisoned gas on the Kurds."

I hope you'll agree that I and you deserve a rest from such preoccupations.

But what to do when the actual physical release is no longer possible?

Go to the image, to the box, the tube, which last week beautifully revealed a
choice at a flick of the wrist: either the lush tropical landscape and the blue
green sea of Hawaii or the favourite tennis centre of all the professionals -
the leafy, spacious grounds in Melbourne, which contain a centre court with a
retractable roof that can be pulled over in dire heat or rain.

By the way I hear a secret rumour that Wimbledon - after, what is it, 120, 30
years of meditation - might consider the bold idea of copying the Australians
and having a moveable roof over its centre court, surely a brilliant response
to the interminable on- and off-again rain breaks at the height of an English
summer.

So in great relief from the dark age of the past month - there's been no
television tennis or golf - a new season is on us and the first of the tennis
grand slams arrived: as usual, the Australian Open, which, over the continuous
protest of many players, is always played at the height of the Australian
summer, which is a very different experience from the English summer.

Last year's women's final, I'm sure, will remain a painful memory to all who
saw it.

Martina Hingis, three points away from winning the match, was also about 20
seconds away from a serious collapse in a court temperature of 105.

Instead of crumbling she lost the points and the match.

So the hope keeps rising and dying down that one day soon the Aussies will take
the big decision and re-plan their Open for some time in their spring or
autumn.

And one day perhaps the All England Lawn Tennis Club will produce a Napoleon or
a Churchill who will ram through the bold idea of a retractable roof.

But before that there are many players from Spain, Central and South America
especially, who will never cease urging an even bolder reform at Wimbledon.

For a couple of decades at least the Latinos have been urging, "Join the rest
of the world and give up grass."

Well apart from these perennial topics, problems, the tennis story at the
beginning of a new season is, as usual, the continuing dominance of the
Williams sisters. The mounting stature of Serena.

But the prospect, the possibility, of not their early toppling but eventual
succession by the two young Belgian terriers, Clijsters and Henin.

As I speak, days before the women's final, it looks very much as if it'll be
the sisters again with Serena again serenely the champ.

The saddest story to come out of Australia, or perhaps I mean Switzerland, is
that Martina Hingis, the youngest number one in history when she was 16, is not
only giving that injured ankle an indefinite rest but is thinking to quit the
game at the ripe age of 21.

Whether she does now or not the decision is bound to come sooner than later.

I think the arrival on the scene of the power game, of Lindsey Davenport and
then of the sisters, heralded the early dethronement of Hingis with her touch
and subtlety and easy serve and volleying.

And the bellicose arrival of even more power on the male side, even more
positively turned tennis into a game of baseline thumping at 120 miles an hour.

This is due, as Rod Laver is the first to testify, to the radical change -
improvement if you like - in the equipment, especially of the racket.

It seems incredible now to believe that as late as Bjorn Borg they played with
wooden rackets.

But the other deciding factor is that the life, the daily routine, of the top
players - or those who want to be among the top - has been drastically amended
towards the notion of a tennis player as an athlete who must, to acquire any
standing, devote 24 hours a day to the rigours and discipline of a boxer
training for the world championship.

Early rising, a four-mile jog, breakfast, work with heavy weights and
stretching exercises, two or three hours tennis practice, lunch, more
exercises, tennis, some of them into the twilight, showers, possibly a session
with the sports psychologist that many of them travel with, early bed, repeat.

I see that the balding Las Vegas victor, Agassi - a marvellous survivor, in his
early 30s, number two in the world - who, after four or five years of strenuous
what we used to call "physical jerks" is probably the fittest man on the
planet.

The old champs shake their heads, as the old do over anything that invites
comparison with them when young.

But they can sheepishly admit that if in their day the unbelievable money had
been there they too might have consented to jog and sweat and lift weights all
day long.

But to us the onlookers it means, I'm afraid, that pretty soon the old,
graceful, cunning game will have gone forever.

Neither Martina Hingis nor Tim Henman are going to put on a needed extra 10
pounds of muscle and perhaps they'd prefer to play some tennis and otherwise
lead a human life.

That is what is being lost to professional athletes around the world and
nowhere more than in the United States.

When you hear the impressive statistics about the enormous number of young
Americans who go to college here, compared with the young of any other
continent ,it's worth a moment's look into the greatly rising numbers of young
people who are spotted in high school by college athletic agents and given
football or basketball scholarships.

There are well-known universities in the Middle West that are famous for their
football alone, where the chancellor or president earns, say, $175,000 a year
and the football coach two million.

It has been recalled that just 70 years ago the young, 30-year-old president of
Chicago University, Robert Maynard Hutchins, caused a national sensation when
he announced that there was to be no more football at Chicago. Chicago
University was to exist as an institution of higher learning.

There were loud cries for his impeachment. There were smaller, but more
enthusiastic cries, for him to run for president.

Well in time the hullabaloo died down.

Today, 70 years later, it has been remarked Chicago is one of the half dozen
great American universities, with international standing in nuclear physics and
in linguistics. It is the world leader in the history of the languages of that
troubled region, the Middle East.

Perhaps they could help.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS
COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP