Fortress America and Beloved Symbols of Britain - 19 November 1999

One of the most touching and generally unreported incidents of the month was
the decision of the Norwegian government to invite Israeli and Palestinian
leaders to Oslo for a memorial service in honour of Mr Rabin, the assassinated
Israeli prime minister.

It was, I think, an inspired idea to use this service as an overture to a
meeting that might walk an inch or two nearer the dishearteningly receding goal
of a Middle Eastern peace.

The memorial service set a tone of gravity and the place was a guarantee of
neutrality - something very difficult to promise when these two sides get
together in the Middle East or in the United States.

And then the president of the United States had an idea. Acting on an impulse
he decided it might help things along if he went too. He signified, probably a
fast e-mail - "Dear Prexy, I'm coming too."

Mr Clinton had in mind his own bit of diplomacy. He heard that the Russian
prime minister was visiting Oslo and Mr Clinton thought it might offer a useful
opportunity to beg Mr Yeltsin's man to stop the war in Chechnya.

As it turned out Mr Clinton's impulse, his decision, effectively gagged any
hope of agreement or even useful negotiations between the two principal actors,
who, like minor characters opening an opera, were scuttled into the wings while
the footlights soared, the trumpets sounded and the star - the ruler of the
universe - took centre stage.

That, I hope, is a vivid image but it was literally true. The overwhelming of a
sub-plot - peace talks between Prime Minister Barak and Yasser Arafat - by the
appearance of the big hero who was not supposed to be there. A promising
diplomatic meeting was hustled out of sight with the arrival of a
suddenly-alerted press circus accompanying the president of the United States.

Before coming to the main point I'd better say that Mr Barak and Mr Arafat were
in no mood to conduct serious discussions and retired into their prepared
positions.

But the truly disheartening story about Mr Clinton's visit to Norway is the
effect of the presidential entourage on the Norwegian establishment and the
Norwegian people. Only one reporter I've come across, one Alex Vardamis, put
the thing in its social context - the effect on the ordinary Norwegians.

And to appreciate the kind of shock that they suffered you have to understand
the social tone of their own monarchy and here Mr Vardamis put it with
praiseworthy if gruesome simplicity - "Norway is a country in which the king
skis on public trails and the prime minister rides the bus to work. Citizens
pride themselves on an unpretentious lifestyle."

What shocked the Norwegians was the imperial nature of the American delegation.
The president arrived with an official entourage of - guess what? - in
Roosevelt's time it might be 15 - 20 say at the most. The president arrived
with an official entourage of more than 700. Seven hundred courtiers and sundry
retainers, who appropriated an entire hotel in down town Oslo. Six hundred and
seventy four rooms were set aside as "fortress America".

Mr Clinton was assigned three bedrooms, each with cheerful fireplace and three
baths, jacuzzis, gold fixings. The Norwegians plainly realised that other heads
of democratic states do not choose to boast about their unpretentious
lifestyle.

I do not believe there was extensive or perhaps any coverage of this imperial
take-over on American television, in fact what shocked the Norwegians is
something that probably never crosses the mind of Americans who know one thing
for sure - that they belong to the greatest, most democratic democracy on
earth.

I used to notice, when I went around colleges and universities and sat in on
history classes, I don't ever remember any classes comparing the American
system with other democratic systems.

I've always wished that one faculty could be established in every American
university - better one weekly class in every high school - that should study,
what you might call, comparative democracy.

Every country on earth with strong pretensions to democracy, including the
United States, could learn something from discovering where, in some things,
other countries are more democratic than the United States, in other things
less so.

The Norwegian trip was alarmingly notable for other expressions of Norwegian
sentiment, which, to put it mildly, did not monopolise the evening news tele
coverage.

I think we'd better not go into the appalling emergency the Oslo government and
the police were thrown into by Mr Clinton's sudden impulse. Oslo is a quiet,
easily disciplined capital, suddenly - suddenly, imagine, they had to fetch in
hundreds of concrete barriers against terrorist car bombs.

Highways were barricaded, commercial traffic suspended, every manhole sealed
along the route of the 700 royal - I mean presidential - arrivals. Better not
report it at all are the fortunes lost by the shops, cafes, restaurants and so
on.

But much of the frantic security precautions were well taken. There, at least,
half a dozen large and powerful groups of protesters - all anti-American for
one cause or another - from people condemning the existence in America of the
death penalty to Arab groups who know every terrorist agent kept in an American
jail.

Think of any anti-American slogan and there were angry people there to chant
it. But they did more than chant.

A great mob descended on the hotel housing the American delegation. There were
cars smashed. It took police with tear gas and dogs - mounted police, shielded
police, a two-hour battle, many wounded, over 80 arrests, before the mob broke
up and stormed or sulked off. And Oslo returned to mime again its reputation as
the most orderly city in Europe.

President Clinton in Oslo will be remembered by the Scandinavian countries long
after some more lurid and riotous world events are long forgotten.

Well while all this was shattering the general quiet and the Scandinavian
picture of America there was a dispatch from London that, both in the papers
and on the tele, received, on the contrary, ample and marvelling coverage.

It was the daring act of Mr Tony Blair in banishing all the hereditary peers
from the House of Lords - all except 92.

"Why 92?" an inquisitive youngster asked me. I saw much trouble ahead.

"Offhand," I said, "I can't tell you."

Explaining the 92 to an American audience, in fact, whether in print or over
the tube proved impossible - even for the understanding of people who cared.

"What's it mean," the youngster piped up again, "666 hereditaries have to go
but 92 allowed to stay were elected by their peers - I thought they were all
unelected."

Well it was explained in the New York Times that - "For most of the century the
House of Lords has held little real political power."

("I thought it had none," squeaked my complainer.)

Little real political power except as a delaying, modifying influence.

("Why delaying? How modifying?")

The reporter's explanation wasn't helped by a quotation from Lord Strathclyde -
the Tory leader in the Lords - "There are already some very substantive powers
in the Lords."

("No powers? Substantive powers?")

I believe that this historic move to dispossess the possessors of great lands,
as somebody put it -

("But it says here they keep their lands.")

"Oh please would you be quiet."

I suppose that this purge is simply the most grandiose, the most daring item in
Mr Blair's long announced programme to remove the thatched cottages, the
parading guardees, the pomp and circumstance - all the tourists' beloved
symbols of Britain - from the legacy of Britain.

We talked about this when Mr Blair first announced he was going to de-thatch
Britain's picture in the eyes of the world and substitute for it a picture of
the present day true Britain.

Forget those stuffy old magnificent cathedrals and let's have buildings like
the French or the new tennis stadium in New York - lots of visible indoor
plumbing only partially covered with broken, as if bombed, red brick.

How about a power station twice the height of the Blackpool Tower? Not
historic, mellow, graceful or quaint England but new, vibrant, inventive,
modern, post-post modern, contemporary England.

Well I've said it before and I will say it again - people - tourists - are no
different from everybody else in living by stereotypes and every minute
television re-impresses them on us. Tourists feel at home when they get to
Paris and see the Eiffel Tower and sit in a café where an old man is playing a
piano accordion.

When they have scones and thick cream sitting in a garden alongside a thatched
cottage and see a boy slip an envelope into a scarlet, round-bellied mail box
they know they're in England and they love it.

As for Mr Blair's act of daring in firing most of the hereditaries - he would
have done more to please Republican prejudices if he'd gone the whole hog and
followed the lead of the politician who, in the year of my birth, campaigned up
and down the land to get rid of the whole lot - to abolish the House of Lords.

"This second chamber, as it is, irresponsible, hereditary, absentee."

This reformer who dared - 91 years ago - to be a good deal more radical than Mr
Blair was the Right Honourable Winston S Churchill. He didn't make it.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP