The Next Step for the USA - 15 February 2002

Some time ago - it must be two months ago - a cold, brilliant morning was
darkened by an alarming newspaper piece by a former assistant secretary, an
expert on the Middle East, a very steady, pragmatic fellow, whose analysis of
any subject was always so thoughtful that his partisanship, if any, was hard to
discover - the very best type of civil servant.

But the piece was an earnest plea to the administration, to the Bush team, to
mount an attack - and I don't mean in Washington rhetoric - a military attack
at once on Saddam Hussein.

Mr Perle, the writer, had not changed his character, he'd not turned into an
hysteric. What indeed was so impressive about his piece was the deadly quiet,
the tone, in which he recited a catalogue of blood-curdling facts about
Saddam's readiness for either a nuclear attack, a germ, a chemical attack on
the United States or on one of its outposts.

"The time," he said, "is now."

Disappointment

Well, after a careful thought or two of my own I decided to not to talk about
it.

It stirred only a small rumpus in the foreign offices of Europe which anyway,
once the Afghan war was won, were beginning to draw on the old venom of
anti-Americanism on other matters.

And an American, anyway, did not have to read very closely between the lines of
liberal editorials to sense that there was a secret disappointment that the
United States had not followed the path and followed the fate we all feared it
would, namely the long years of frustration and final retreat of the British in
the 19th Century, the Russians in the 20th.

And if that sounds mean let me say at once that's what I feared in the
beginning and was as mightily relieved as anybody when we discovered the
formidable gifts of Secretary Rumsfeld for waging and winning a war.

No allies

It was just when we were all asking - Where next? - that Secretary Perle's
piece appeared and filled me, for one, with dread.

Dread of, this time, the whole Arab world being mobilised against America.
Dread of the thought that since Saddam was in the habit of burying his
biochemical and other lethal items underneath hospitals, in the basement of
children's schools, dread therefore of the inevitable pile of civilian
casualties.

And the most discouraging thing - what seemed to me the inevitable denunciation
of most, if not all, European governments, of whatever political stripe. In
blunter words: No allies.

I kept these unpleasant thoughts to myself believing the president had
apparently silenced the flapping wing of the Pentagon that was ready to give
the answer to where next - Baghdad.

Frustration

So we talked in the meantime of many things, some of them cheerful, and then
suddenly the president gave his State of the Union address and all anyone will
ever recall from it will be the grim phrase "an axis of evil".

Not only had the president revived Mr Perle's menace of Saddam Hussein but
linked him, as a partner in criminal intent, with Iran, which had lately been
mooching towards official relations with the United States.

But also North Korea, thus disheartening the president of South Korea, who's
been hoping that the long and rough history of post-war rumbles with North
Korea might be coming to an end.

It is true that few Europeans know much about North Korea or can even guess at
the maddening frustration successive American presidents have suffered.

Split

America, in recent years, has paid off, bribed if you like, North Korea to the
tune of over $1bn in exchange for a promise to build no nuclear arsenal.

The North Koreans have taken the money and instead of using it to alleviate the
starvation of their own people have devoted the gift to the making of advanced
nuclear weapons and along the way becoming the world's main exporter of
missiles - selling to Iran in particular a missile capable of striking Turkey,
Israel and Saudi Arabia.

Nevertheless there remains a split in the strategical beliefs inside the
Pentagon. The sceptical faction doubting very much whether even the one and
only super power has the resources - military, naval, aerial, manpower, let
alone morale - to wage two wars in Arabia and one in Asia.

But the foreign ministers of Europe it seems are not ready to contemplate even
one war, however swift and short, against Saddam.

Melancholy

At this low point in our meditations the telephone rang. It was my oldest
English friend.

"Please," he begged, "is there any good news?"

"Yes," I said, "I think there is."

"What, what?"

"Gently, take it easy and pay attention," I said.

I hope some of you remember some of my New Year's talk about the Russian
orthodox cathedral round my corner and the bell that for 51 years has given out
at eventide two melancholy tollings, bemoaning, I liked to think, the
enslavement of the church under Bolshevism and its stern dictate that religion
is the opiate of the masses.

Well I told you how a week or two earlier the bells had rung merrily, a
defiance of some sort that was explained only a few hours later when there on
the tube was a small, slim, dapper man, slipping into the church - no retinue,
perhaps a friend - and suddenly it was Mr Putin going to his devotions.

Spiritual

I've hardly recovered from the shock of seeing the president of Mother Russia
reverting, shall we say, to the service of holy Russia.

Last week two American journalists - the proprietor of the Wall Street Journal
and a senior reporter colleague - sat down with that man, that same Vladimir
Putin, for an interview of such directness and candour as I don't ever remember
with any previous Russian or Soviet chief.

Miss Karen House put the question which I'm sure no one, no foreigner, had ever
put before: "Are you a religious man?"

Mr Putin paused for the first time, dropped his soft voice still lower and
gravely remarked that everybody should have within a moral, spiritual basis and
there was none better than religion which the communist ideology had replaced.

And now I quote him directly: "If there is a God, he, it, must be in the heart
of a person.

President or Pope

"Religion is very important for a country like Russia for nothing can express
universal human values in a human soul as effectively as religion can. Religion
makes a person spiritually richer."

He said he'd leave it at that, leaving his two stunned journalists wondering
whether they were interviewing the president of Russia or the Pope.

Well I have no way of knowing if my old friend will be impressed, let alone
gladdened, by this shock. Throughout 35-40 years I've never put to him the
question Miss House put to Putin. I suspect he's a heathen.

But there is, I think, very good secular news from the same source.

Once Mr Putin in that Moscow interview had said "we'll leave it there" they got
on to topics that are worrying both Americans and Europeans, especially topic A
- Iraq, Saddam.

Merciless defiance

Simply and directly with no fudging jargon Mr Putin said the problem with Iraq
is completely different from Afghanistan and the very last thing that should
happen is unilateral military action by the United States.

He implied that no single country can solve the problem of Saddam's flagrant
violation of the treaty accords he signed - oh what? - 10 years ago, and
throughout all the time his unyielding expulsion of every United Nations team
that went to track down his nuclear, chemical, germ labs materials, hidden
resources.

Mr Putin is surely well aware of this merciless defiance and the frightful
demoralising effect it had on the United Nations inspectors, yet Mr Putin says
he's perfectly willing to help the United States but only under the auspices of
the United Nations. Start again, is what he's saying.

There will be a tidal wave of relieved sighs in Europe but not, I fear, in the
United Nations.

Oh yes, "Let's go to the UN and impose sanctions" has been the automatic
peace-making slogan for years and years.

Co-operation

But quite apart from the steady ineffectiveness of sanctions - you easily get
what you want through giving a false recipient nation on the manifest - the
United Nations loves to be appealed to and activate yet another committee.

But what is never recalled by eager supplicants to the UN is that in spite of
the grandeur of its charter - "in order to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war" - and the promise of successful arbitration, the UN is
powerless. The United Nations doesn't own even a water pistol.

Consequently though it has advertised sneaky aggressors often enough to make
them publicly withdraw, it has not been able to prevent, since its founding in
1945, over 240 wars.

Mr Putin says the best hope of a stable world is the continuing co-operation of
Russia and the United States and, through what he called his close and warm
relationship with President Bush, there has developed a new and very high level
of trust.

Months

Well the practical effect of this remarkable interview in Moscow - though it
could be just a case of "post hoc, propter hoc" - is that President Bush and
Secretary Rumsfeld and Secretary of State Powell have declared that they're not
going to attack anybody for some months, that they have a plan, a sequence of
actions, and that the United Nations and another bang on the inspection gate is
an early one.

So, old friend, there you are. Maybe the words from Moscow are just what the
doctor ordered - or could be another Munich.

We must take a deep breath and wait and see.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP