Greed, Liquor, Jingoism and Bad Taste - 8 October 1999

My sermon last week on the sinful exuberance of the American Ryder Cup team and
their wives to the accompaniment of cheers and boos from - something new in
golf - a raucous crowd provoked so many approving notes and letters and
telephone calls that I ought to feel as happy as a cat bumping up against a
carton of milk.

But two calls made me realise that much of this praise was based on an
unwarranted national complacency and the second call reminded me of an element
of sports, namely the fact of television, which I had not considered.

First I ought to repeat my gratitude to Mr Frank Hannigan, the former director
of the United States Golf Association, for tracing the source of the
spectators' rowdiness - the crossing of the line of civility, as he put it - to
a poisonous mixture of greed, liquor, jingoism and bad taste.

That's correct. But why, suddenly, should these vices intrude into a sport that
has been watched, on the ground, for centuries by people of every sort and
class all of whom, until a few years ago, clapped good play, stayed silent
whenever a player just missed a putt or produced a bad shot?

Indeed not one of those causes but all four, it seems to me, are new - greed,
liquor, jingoism and bad taste.

Jingoism, in a more or less mild form, will always be present at international
competitions. And, as we've seen in soccer, bad taste is a very mild
description of the outrages committed in Europe by hipped-up soccer fans.

I'm afraid the record of travelling English soccer fans has forever, in this
country certainly, transformed the standard image of what it is to be an
Englishman. Just as, I fear, the Ryder Cup horror has tainted the symbolic
American.

But greed and liquor - a couple of puzzling exotic vices to connect with golf
surely.

Mr Hannigan is right. He puts it down to what I call the transformation of big
golf tournaments into trade fairs and he identifies as the institution of the
hospitality tent.

Most people who watch golf casually on television would, I think, be amazed to
visit in the flesh any of the big professional tournaments. Not the big four
only, the so-called Grand Slam tournaments.

You at first wonder where the course is. You find yourself in an outdoor
bargain basement, if, as Bertie Wooster used to say, you know what I mean. A
place devoted exclusively to stands that display and sell sports goods and
products and flags and souvenirs and buttons and bows but are all overshadowed
by these great white tents.

Possibly, I first thought, they were filming the Battle of Agincourt. These are
the hospitality tents set up by a single firm. What's the firm doing there? Ah,
now we're down to the nerve of the whole enterprise.

The firm is a bank, or a liquor manufacturer, or a manufacturer of sporting
equipment and they are sponsoring the event and usually they are stressing
their love of the game and your love of their product by buying time on
television and, on television, repeating the uniqueness of the thing they make.

In the hospitality tents there flows champagne for the toffs. Toffs for a day.
And beer for the plebs flows freely - and free.

The reminder I forgot was that this institution, the transformation of a
sporting event into a trade fair, started - wait for it - in England.

I'd hate to think it started in Scotland, though it was there that I first saw
a famous course disguised as an advertising circus. And I'm still appalled to
see the players in a Scottish national tournament address the ball on a tee
where the splendid skyscape and the mountains beyond are more or less blotted
out by a huge liquor advertisement right behind the man teeing off.

I'm much relieved to tell you that advertising billboards do not appear on
American golf courses. And, I hardly dare to mention it since it may give some
movie distributor an idea, we have never had advertising motion picture shorts
in cinemas.

Another English friend called to warn me that if I managed to come to England
again and thought I'd like, which I might well, watch my first cricket match in
about 40 years, I'd discover that money and entertainment and so-called
hospitality have taken over that hallowed game too. In fact he couldn't think
of a sport that had not been seduced into the plump and wealthy arms of
advertisers.

Another gloomy Englishman called me up just to announce, what I'm sure is true
- you're never going to stop the flow of beer.

But apart from rowdiness produced by the demon rum, beer, or champagne or
whatever, the existence of television itself as an incomparable medium for
covering sports, which it is, has vastly increased the audience and combine the
medium with its power to hype and glorify individual athletes.

When I say glorifying individual athletes I don't mean just showing them being
heroic at their sport. I'm thinking of the need, the pressing need, of an
advertiser to keep on about him as a wearer or user of their product.

In fact we've all become more familiar with the faces of many athletes than
with the faces of movie stars. Not from seeing them in performance but because
several times a day we see them extolling the unique merits of this golf ball,
that racket, the breathtaking superiority of this shoe over that.

Now no one is more of a victim and the hero of this treatment than a young man
known three years ago to nobody outside Stanford University in California and
the minority of golfing grey beards who follow international amateur golf.
After turning pro and winning a major tournament with four dazzling rounds I
doubt he will ever repeat in his life, a youngster named Tiger Woods found
within a month or two that he had a $50m contract with a shoe company - golf
shoes are very much alike no matter who makes them - and 10 or whatever more
millions from a credit card company, whereupon young Mr Woods fell back among a
small pack of the best players and in the next 18 months won two tournaments.

Meanwhile David Duvall won 11 tournaments but he's not pretty, he's not the
offshoot of a black soldier and a Siamese Thai mother - and whoever heard of
David Duvall except the American army of marvelling golf fans?

But we had to see Tiger Woods every day and every evening in advertisements for
those shoes, for that card and those two sponsors, thinking of the 60-odd
million dollars they'd sunk in him, must have had some sleepless nights for a
year or more when he didn't seem to be winning anything and was number 130 on
the American tour in putting.

They must be immensely relieved that finally, into his third year as a
professional, he strikingly improved his putting, began to fulfil the promise
of his youth and won a second major tournament.

At his age Jack Niclaus had won four but comparisons, I know, comparisons
between generations are odious and unfair. Let's wait.

On second thought I think you'd better wait and see if throughout the next four
years Tiger can match the immortal Bobby Jones's record of entering only 20
majors in seven years - winning 13 and coming second in four and retiring at
the age of 28.

I must say Tiger Woods, to his great credit, has started at least one
foundation for the rescue, through golf, rescue from the slums of black
children and he gives to this foundation not just a big slab of money but time,
all the spare time he can squeeze in from his compulsory appearances in
exhibitions and sponsoring companies' outings and making endless commercials
for his backers.

He must, at the age of 23, spend some nights of dazed incomprehension of his
plight - the calendar of duties and tensions that have become his life - for
which, I doubt, even $60m is any balm or blessing.

More than anyone in golf he is unwittingly, it's not his fault, responsible for
tripling the size of the crowds for tournaments. The tripling force being
people who know nothing about golf, hear he's the best there is, expect him to
win every week - not even the greatest golfers have won every year - and thanks
to the daily dinning repetition of his image on television attracts people from
football, hockey, wherever, to give golf a go, to go and cheer and boo and
behave the way circus crowds behaved in old Cecil B DeMille pictures of ancient
Rome.

I think the final word is the brief, blunt, reminder of my old English friend -
"You won't put a stop to the beer."

I should add that since the lamentable end of the Ryder Cup every American I've
spoken to agrees in lamenting the awful episode innocently provoked by the
delirious Justin Leonard - poor fellow he was desperate with his apologies
later.

The New York Times too was running over with letters all echoing the same
laments and fears for what it had done to the notion abroad of American
golfers.

But there was one writer - weirdly it is the Times's chief sports writer, a man
I know to be a genial expert writer on many sports - and he, I have one good
friend in California who seconds him, he applauds the whole performance - not
the obscenities or the spitting of course, I imagine he too deplored the drunks
- but he welcomes the arrival of the common man or what Mr Hannigan called the
new breed - the golf hooligan.

Enough, he implies, of the old fuddy duddies in blue blazers, the Eastern
preppies, the stiff-necked, class-ridden Wimbledon types - that is still an
American cliché about the nicer people who run tennis. Enough, he cries, bring
on Bully Bottom and the buddies from his pub and the jolly guys who normally
scream at ice hockey players bruising each other.

What other game with an international audience no less requires absolute
silence from 25,000 onlookers? Ridiculous. The more the merrier. This is the
great age of democracy isn't it?

So it is.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP