Were We Misled into War? - 27 June 2003

It's not often that I cast around wondering through the day what I might talk
about this time.

I dismissed, as least likely to excite any listener, the appalling tumult in
Congo and the touted threat to our security which is now said to be posed by
Iran.

I'm touched by the death of an actor friend and a charming anecdote about him.

And what about the largest first printing of any work in the history of
literature and the consequent enthronement of Harry Potter as the universal,
all-time children's literary hero?

Never was such a week for seeking distraction from the continuing anarchy of
Iraq.

By Wednesday morning however I woke to the frank admission that what I'd been
doing was dreaming up as many odd stories as possible so as to shirk, to evade,
avoid, to shun the one looming question already a thunderous sound in Britain,
but here only just rising to a general protest.

And it's a question that must be answered. It is this: were we misled into war,
by whom and for what motives?

On the eve of the invasion of Iraq more than half the American population
thought that it was a terrible but necessary act and that what the
administration was saying was, better a short war - we hope short - now than a
long war very likely involving nuclear and chemical weapons next year or the
year after.

Most moderate supporters of an invasion, in Britain and in this country, in the
United Nations and out of it, complained that the very large body of opinion
against any war never offered an alternative, except to give up on Saddam or to
trust in indefinite inspection from the team of more than 200 members - the
United Nations inspectors - who'd been inspecting continuously from 1991 till
98.

The pressing reason for going to war was the dinningly repeated reports, before
the Security Council of the United Nations, given by the president to the
Congress, by Secretary of Defence Rumsfeld in his press conferences and by
Secretary of State Colin Powell wherever he travelled and begged for allies.

The reason was that Saddam Hussein, having flouted for 12 years the Security
Council's orders and the truce treaty that he'd signed, was now a clear and
present danger to the security of not only his region, most of all to Israel,
but to the security of the United States itself - because he was hiding and
refusing to destroy weapons of mass destruction and the makings of biochemical
weapons that had rained agonised deaths on thousands of Iranians and on his own
subjects.

That after 12 years of begging him to come clean, 12 years of time to build up
a nuclear capability and enlarge his chemical resources, the time had come to
say, no more.

Unlike former President Clinton who'd planned for an Iraqi invasion in 1998, Mr
Bush brought it up before the UN Security Council at a time - 57 years after
the founding of the United Nations - when the vast majority of the citizens of
the world knew practically nothing about the camel through the eye of a needle
procedure, whereby the Security Council will ever agree to order military
force.

It's called the agreed voting procedure in the Council. Let me briefly,
painfully, remind you who agreed to what procedure.

The main declared aim of the United Nations in the very first sentence of its
charter is "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war".

The only body of the new league which can do that is the Security Council.

Originally, of the 50 nations that met in San Francisco, 11 of them sat on the
Security Council for two-year terms.

The five equal great powers - the victors in the Second World War - were made
permanent members of the Council. they were the United States, the Soviet
Union, United Kingdom, France and China.

China meant then the China of Chiang Kai-shek. But time, with its crooked
stride walks some strange paths and by 1971 Communist China, over the
horrendous protests of the United States, became the China on the Security
Council.

The agreed voting procedure was that any act of aggression or threat to peace
brought up before the Council must have the approving vote of all five of the
permanent members before military action could be taken.

From the very earliest meetings of the Council, which I covered in 1945 through
1948, it was obvious every such aggressive act failed almost automatically to
get all five votes.

Anything the United Kingdom and the United States were for, the Soviet Union
was against. Maybe a hundred times that the Russian, Mr Gromyko, the moment a
vote was taken, would snap "nyet" - no - and march out of the Council meeting.

During the second war President Roosevelt expressed to Stalin his vision of a
world run by the only two superpowers, who would work so harmoniously together
that they would always agree in the Security Council, aggression would be put
down and peace would reign around the globe.

Stalin, who spent very little time thinking or talking about the United
Nations, thought this vision of eternal peace was a fairy tale.

He it was who prescribed that the permanent five powers should have a veto
power in the Council. If that was not to be the agreed procedure, he wouldn't
join the United Nations.

So of course we all gave in. He told his foreign minister later that joining
the UN could do no harm. It would be a useful propaganda sounding board.

When Mr Bush took his case to the Security Council last autumn there was not a
prayer that all five permanent members would vote yes to the Iraqi invasion.

Mr Bush hoped the disapprovers would abstain. But no, the unexpected "nyets"
came from Germany and France. they carried the day with their stubborn
determination to have the UN inspectors go on and on and on.

I never heard a convincing reason for this, though the New York Times published
recently a graph of the four or five nations that manufactured and sold to Iraq
biochemical laboratories and equipment. The two main suppliers were Germany
52%, France 21%.

Nothing more was said about this except that during the 1990s Saddam had
declared 340 pieces of equipment designed for making chemical weapons.

But the foreign services and intelligence of several nations - mainly American,
British, Polish and Spanish, I believe - knew and never made it quite clear
enough in the United Nations debates that that amount of equipment by no means
constituted Iraq's whole hidden supply. It is the rest that we fail to find.

So rising voices in Congress are now echoing the more strident voices in the
House of Commons - We were duped by the CIA and by the British dodgy dossier -
or - George Bush fervently wanted war and collected rumours and dubious
information to support his thesis of a never-proved relation between Saddam and
al-Qaeda, Saddam and Bin Laden.

The accusing theories mushroom and through them pierces the agonised voice of
Secretary Powell, who's been collecting an appalling load of reliable
intelligence for 12 years.

Secretary Powell now says that to believe that there are not any more hidden or
undeclared weapons is preposterous.

Still what fuels the argument and suspicion of the Bush administration is the
fact that by last March the French and the Germans in the Council were saying
in the face of American derision, "Give them more time, give them more time."

And now only the other day, with no irony at all, the great warrior Secretary
of Defence Rumsfeld cried, "There are 600 sites to examine, we've looked at
only 200. Give us more time, give us more time."

And what does the Commander-in-Chief, George W, say? Amazingly little about the
missing weapons and chemicals.

He's off around the country day after day presiding over fundraising luncheons,
dinners, rallies. Fundraising for what? For whom?

Fundraising for George W Bush, to help him fulfil his ambition to raise $200m
in support of his candidacy in November 2004.

More than anything in life he wants to be president of the United States.
Again.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL
SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.