Striving for a More Perfect Union - 22 January 1999

A poll taken by a serious New York City magazine. I don't know how
statistically pure this poll was but the result was so much more astonishing
than anything the editors had guessed at that they felt bound to publish it.

It was taken in and around New York City. The question: How often do you watch
the news or any of the proceedings connected with the impeachment of the
president? The answer: 94% said they'd had it up to here and made a point of
seeing and hearing no more.

It's my hunch merely that this is probably true of most listeners and viewers
around the world. So I shall hold to my shaky vow to stay off the topic until
it's about to be resolved. I must, however, mention a turn in the plot that
makes us seem to be living through a motion picture by the director who did
such wickedly funny things in The Lady Eve and The Great McGinty and Christmas
in July remember - Preston Sturges.

Consider first the sheer grotesquerie of the Congress being called for a formal
joint session to listen to a political sermon by a leader who is, at the
moment, on trial for high crimes and misdemeanours. I mean the almost hilarious
ceremony last Tuesday evening of the annual State of the Union address - the
most ceremonial evening of any presidency.

With first the members of the House flocking in, then the Senate, then the
Cabinet, then solemnly trooping one behind each other the Supreme Court, then
up in the Strangers' Gallery ambassadors and various distinguished guests and
finally, to a standing ovation, the defendant. Now a fine Sturges twist - a
week or more before this great occasion the Republican leaders in the Senate
suggested to the president that, in view of the unusual circumstances, he being
an indicted criminal and all, perhaps he'd rather postpone his annual address
to Congress or, why not, put it off altogether? Had they forgotten whom they
were appealing to?

Well Mr Clinton's response to the Republicans: "You've got to be kidding."

And he went ahead with the thing he does best with a brilliant all-embracing
review of the problems of the USA, the world, the universe - a performance
given a wonderful air of spontaneous intelligence and erudition by the
invisible device of what's called the three way wrap teleprompter - what's
called in Britain, I believe, an autocue.

Anyway you know that politicians and television actors have had for 50 years or
more a professional lifeline in the prompter - the text of their speech printed
out on a running belt of paper. It used to be just below the lens of the camera
they were looking into, just one text running from left to right but you could
spot the speaker's eyes following it like suspicious little mice scurrying from
one shoulder to the other.

By now though the new device is an absolute godsend to people who are not hot
at spontaneous extemporary speaking. Ronald Reagan was a prime example. They
have three teleprompters or rather three scripts running continuously from the
far left - 9 o'clock say - to the far right - 3 o'clock - in an ever moving
semicircle so the speaker can turn, pause, drop his head, wherever and whenever
he looks up there's his speech in three versions. The beauty part is the whole
device is invisible to the audience.

And during Tuesday evening's performance even sceptical or scowling Republicans
sitting on their hands there must have mumbled with the watching millions: "And
still the wonder grew that one small head could carry all he knew."

Result, next day one of the most dependable of public opinion polls showed Mr
Clinton's popularity rating had gone up from 67% to 76%.

One of his most powerful opponents, the Reverend Pat Robertson - the
conservative television evangelist who's been baying for Mr Clinton's
resignation throughout the past year - announced: "The president has hit a home
run." He thought if the trial went on the Republicans would pay a terrible
price in retribution at the election next year.

"They might," he said, "as well dismiss the impeachment hearing and get on with
something else because it's over as far as I'm concerned."

This is the most astounding turnaround of any of the president's political
enemies. It sent bitter shudders through the Republican leadership in both
Houses.

Meanwhile the television reporters and commentators gamely told us that we were
witnessing the most historic trial of the 20th Century even as millions were
turning it off the moment it came on.

However, there was something happened last Monday which along the whole stretch
of American history may turn out to be more historic, a more conspicuous
landmark in the American journey, than any trial. Last Monday we celebrated the
only national holiday named after a human being.

There is no Thomas Jefferson day or Franklin Roosevelt day or Thomas Edison
day, no more George Washington's birthday or Lincoln's birthday as separate
sacred holidays. Their birth dates have been combined on a day in between and
called Presidents' Day. An unfortunate blur for hero worshippers.

But we have the very odd day in the calendar, once a subject of controversy and
now taken for granted after only 12 years. Last Monday all the federal
government offices were closed, the stock market suspended trading, many
offices and banks and most schools closed. It was Rev Martin Luther King Day.

It is sort of startling to realise, after a lifetime's pauses and parades in
honour of Washington, Lincoln, of Columbus and in the South, of Robert E Lee,
that at the very end of the 20th Century the one human honoured exclusively
with his birthday set aside as a national holiday should be a young black
minister from Atlanta, Georgia who soared into public fame at the age of 26
when he'd just started his ministry.

His life had been the straightforward, humdrum routine of a religious family,
father and grandfather both Baptist ministers. He followed the pious well-worn
path - public school, college, theological seminary, Boston University,
co-pastor of a church - when, on 1 December 1955 the blacks of Montgomery,
Alabama - the capital city of the old Confederacy - staged a boycott of the
city bus service. It had been arranged by the famous black organisation the
NAACP, the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People.

A middle-aged, young middle-aged, black woman was chosen to refuse to give up
her seat in the white section of a bus. The bus driver asked her to move, in
accordance with the city law of separate seats - which if defied could put the
company out of business. The lady still refused and the driver had to call in
the police and arrest her.

Suddenly the doorsteps of coloured homes throughout several sections of the
city were littered with thousands of printed handbills mysteriously dropped
within the hour. The boycott began.

The stories up north were all of a piece: a spontaneous revolt of blacks
against the ancient, now insufferable, separation of the races in public places
which the Supreme Court, only 18 months before, had outlawed everywhere.

I went down to Montgomery in the middle of the boycott and in the evening went,
as the only white, into a black rally at the Mount Zion African Episcopal
Methodist Church where 35 black pastors hummed and chanted and awaited the
coming of their saviour. I couldn't guess who he might be but when a side door
of the vestry opened and a compact, young, solemn, ebony black man glided in I
wrote, at the time: "It was like the relief of Mafeking."

His name was Martin Luther King. He rose to a silence as immense as the ovation
and he read out to them what he called "A constitution for our cause".

Now, in view of the aftermath, you'd think it would have been as memorable as
the Gettysburg Address. Weirdly it was written in federal or company jargon,
about "the internal and external attachment in terms of organisational
structure" and implementing all sorts of things "with respect to
transportation".

It never crossed my mind then that this man could possibly become the inspired
and inspiring leader of the whole integration movement. But he soon changed his
tune. He learned to proclaim with ringing simplicity. He led marches, he was
despised and abused and stoned and wounded and went to jail.

To the disgust of militant blacks and the vast relief of whites everywhere he
led massive and massively peaceable marches on Washington against
discrimination and against the war in Vietnam. And I think it's fair to say
that no other leader could have led so many millions of protestors with so
little bloodshed. And then in his 40th year he was shot and killed in Memphis,
Tennessee.

Fifteen years later there was a move in Congress, spurred by blacks of course,
to make Rev King's birthday a national holiday. There was widespread opposition
but the legislation eventually went through Congress. President Reagan at first
resisted but eventually signed it and proclaimed the third Monday in January as
a national holiday.

A question nobody has noticeably asked to this day is: "Why?" Considering the
long parade of national heroes of all degrees of stature - statesmen, soldiers,
humanitarians, inventors - why? It is a delicate question to put because it
instantly suggests to some nervous people that you're suggesting it shouldn't
have happened.

It's still worth thinking about. And I honestly don't know the answer. Being
murdered has something to do with the hallowing of a good man, of presidents
especially - a halo drops on them.

For Dr King I think collective white guilt could mean something. The relief
after the cities blew up that Rev King, alone, had been responsible for the
following and widespread uneasy peace. I think his naming was an act of
gratitude.

So the third Monday in every January is a reminder that the great promise of
the Constitution in its first sentence to form "a more perfect union" has still
to be worked on.

Come to think of it, "perfect" would do.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP