Columbus: hero or villain? - 16 October 1992

The 12th of October is/was always one of the more engaging of American
festivals as an historical event to celebrate it had the luck to fall at the
most benign in New England and the north-east the most beautiful time of the
year when the landscape blazes with scarlet and gold foaming around the inky
evergreens when as Anthony Trollope's mother said, and she was no great admirer
of things American, "the whole country goes to glory".

Allowing for the difference between his calibre and ours, we decided long ago
that shortly before dawn on our 12 October 1492, was the magical time when
Cristóbal Colón as the Spaniards insist on calling a son of Genoa – our
Christopher Columbus – sailed through a gleaming green sea and landed on a
tropical white beach on what he believed to be the distant rim of the orient
and which we know to be an island of the Bahamas that Columbus named San
Salvador.

In most previous years I'd say, I believe even up to last year, the famous day
has been celebrated from the tip of Chile to the peak of Labrador. In this
country, the date was proposed as an annual commemoration by a group of new
patriots 200 years ago, after the peace treaty had been signed finally ending
what Americans call the Revolutionary War and Britain calls the War of American
Independence. This society took as its patron saint an Indian chieftain of the
Delaware tribe, Tammany, the society of Saint Tammany, which formed the nucleus
of what was to become the Democrats political machine in New York City, a
chapter of American history we're not going to delve into now.

So, in this country since 1792, Columbus Day has been celebrated every 12
October in Catholic churches throughout South, Central and North America and
out on the streets everywhere with, as John Adams prescribed as the pattern for
the fourth of solemn acts of devotion to God Almighty, with pomp and parade and
guns, bells and illuminations.

It has never been in this country as boisterous a celebration as Independence
Day, but at once devout and proud with peoples of every immigrant strain
trooping, usually out of a church service, and heading with flowers and wreaths
towards the nearest statute of Columbus. There must be thousands of them
throughout the Americas. I said paraders, marchers of every immigrant strain,
how about the native strain the Indian or as we are now required to say, the
Native American? Aye there's the rub and this year, rub was rough and hurtful.

If you'd asked me 10, even five years ago, what sort of show the American
cities would put on for this year, the 500th anniversary of the landing on San
Salvador, I should have guessed that most places would have staged something on
a grand, scarcely imaginable scale. It was not to be. So, long ago as last
winter in some cities in South America, all provisional plans for grandeur and
public show were either cancelled or discreetly modified, why?

The answer can only be that the prospect of 1992 sharpened the focus and
intensified the feeling of a movement which has been gathering force slowly but
irresistibly among all the the native peoples, the innumerable tribes, the
descendants of the many civilisations that Columbus and the following Spanish
colonists came upon. The movement, as I called it, was one of revolution
against the standard view of Columbus as discoverer of the Americas. The
Indians and very many white supporters now prefer to slap on Columbus the
stigma "enslaver".

In Mexico City, last Monday, thousands of Indians came together to celebrate
not Columbus but the cultures of pre-Columbian America, they came from the
furthest reaches of this continent, Eskimos from Alaska, Quechua indians from
the Peruvian city that was the capital of the Inca empire and from those two
extremes 5,000 miles apart, 500 or more Indians went on foot to Mexico. The
Peruvians left in August, the ones from Alaska last May, they all came to rest
at last at the Aztec pyramids outside Mexico City, they chanted they prayed,
they smoked peace pipes.

Elsewhere – and one look at the map you'll see means hundreds of miles apart
and thousands of miles apart –demonstrations took other forms. In Ecuador and
Bolivia, tens of thousands marched against the idea of the mission of Columbus
and his followers as 'Conquistadores' – conquerors. Great stretches, as much as
20 miles here and there of the Pan-American Highway were closed or stalled by
roadblocks of Indians playing flutes and drums. Two people were killed in
Ecuador and many wounded. The Spanish embassy in Santiago, Chile was bombed and
damaged and so was the Spanish Bank in Peru and statues of Columbus in Bolivia,
Mexico and El Salvador. In Buenos Aires, Indians chose to limp into the Central
Square to mark 12 October as the last day of their five-day hunger strike.

Now quite apart from the justice or falsity of recreating Christopher Columbus
as a villain, what do you suppose can have been what I called the driving force
of this continental rebellion? Well, as always, especially in Latin countries,
students and young historians have brought this movement into focus, but the
ground swell, the cause of the movement itself is the eruption of a sore that
has festered over the past 30 years or so – resentment against the firm hold on
the political and economic life by the dominant European strain. Guatemala has
been what the doctors call the primary site, 60% of its population is Indian.
In a word, two words, the cause, dear Brutus, is grinding poverty. But haven't
most of these native populations been poverty stricken for years and years for
centuries they have, why should they have waited so long to zoom-in on a
representative, a symbolic villain? I use the word zoom-in instinctively but it
points I believe to the answer and the answer is a camera it is television.

I first noticed this television as a stimulant or goad to violence long ago in
1963 in the black Los Angeles suburb of Watts, which boiled over as the rumour
spread what a policeman was said to have done to a young black. It was as bad a
race riot as we've known in this country since the blow up in Detroit during
the Second War. Once the rioters had taken their fill of liquor and groceries
and television sets and furniture and cameras and motorcars, they turn to the
people who as far as the blacks are concerned flaunt these goodies: the white
owners or rather their properties. And a sociologist at the time made the
interesting point that what was as black suburbs go a comparatively prosperous
one, small bungalows mostly with bathrooms and bedrooms and many with little
lawns and garages. Said this sociologist "the history of revolution shows that
when conditions get better, people become more openly dissatisfied". The
disparity between their lot and that of others becomes more evident. And what
then and today throws an insistent bright light on that disparity, well I wrote
from what's then.

There is one cause of chaos here which no sociologist would dare to bring up, I
believe it is the poor blacks envy not of the white man's vote or his
education, but of his fancied wealth and the baubles it buys. Whatever Watts
lacks, it does not lack television aerials and many mothers sit all day and the
men all night with a litter of listless children and watch the svelte girls in
the gleaming automobile ads and the young white Apollos and the glowing
families with the new washing machine and the house in the pines just secured
by a loan from the silvery head saint in the friendly bank. That it must seem
to them is the way whites live night and day.

Well, in the Americas, not least in South and Central America, in the very
poorest shanty villages, there is at least one television set – it is the great
tormentor of your own miserable life. The last image I saw on television last
Monday that had to do with Columbus and the 12th was a teacher and an American,
a North American school, she was plainly Latino. She was talking in English to
her class and then she turned to the camera and said "we must at last tell
these children the truth". Of course, what she truly meant was, we must
substitute the old picture of Columbus as discover and hero with the new
picture of Columbus as enslaving villain.

How about Columbus, was he either was he both? He was, I think, no different
from the sea-dogs of his time and later times from Drake and Hawkins for
example who were freewheeling pirates. There is indeed less to say for Francis
Drake who didn't stay and colonise, but just sailed into and ransacked the
coastal churches and the cities of South America of all their precious
treasure.

As for Columbus, I will simply say again what I wrote 20 years ago, he was an
obsessive ego maniac, a passionate Christian who combined in curiosity,
romantic stubbornness and sense of mission something of Galileo, Don Quixote
and John the Baptist. He was also a very great sailor.

True, he and his men were ruthless colonisers and actual destroyers of native
societies and religions and the Spanish have had to bear for centuries with
considerable ire the weight of this shameful story, but we ought to remind
ourselves that while they combined great physical courage, endurance and
intense religious zeal with devastating cruelty they behaved no worse than any
other European would have done who got there first. They were in fact, men of
their own time and place and this is a truth always difficult for us to
remember when we compare such men with our sainted selves – so enlightened, so
compassionate, so – well, in a word – decent.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP