Dan Quayle for vice president - 26 August 1988

Well, for once there’s no question of knowing what to talk about. About a man
whose name, two weeks ago, meant nothing whatsoever, to, I should confidently
guess, about 239 million, of the 241 million Americans.

Whose name and face now, thanks to the inquisitive magic of television, is more
familiar to more people than the faces and names of most movie stars. He is,
need I say, J Danforth Quayle III. Already known the length and breadth of the
land, and other lands, as Dan Quayle.

Two weeks ago, I believe, I should have had a hard time phoning any friend who
could have told me more about him than I already knew from the pocket version
of the congressional hand book – that he's in his second term as a Republican
senator from the midwestern state of Indiana, 41 years old, married with three
small children, lists himself as publisher of a small-town newspaper, lawyer,
Presbyterian, is a BA from the small university of DePauw, served in the
national guard for six years, 1969-75, is on the Senate armed services
committee and on three sub committees that look into military budgets, sea
power and strategic nuclear forces.

That's already much more than most Washington journalists knew before the
fateful Tuesday of the Republican convention, when Mr Bush, breaking his
original intention of keeping everybody in suspense until the Thursday night,
and announced he had chosen his vice presidential running mate, Dan Quayle.

A universal query rose into the hot air from Mexico to Canada, Dan who? Now
there is nothing strange in that in the choice of an unexpected name, it's
entirely normal. I shall never forget the wave of incredulity that jolted the
press and television people hanging around late at night, in Miami in 1968 when
the Republicans' presidential nominee Richard Nixon retired into deep thought
with his cronies and eventually emerged with the news that his vice president
was one Spiro Agnew.

Not a man or woman among the weary cluster of us waiting for the news could say
right away who this Spiro somebody was. No, there was one man, as shaken as the
rest of us, a man from the Baltimore Sun papers, he knew Agnew was the governor
of Maryland.

But this year, the disbelief was more startling because, as a consequence of
the death of the nominating convention system, and the new decisive role of the
primary elections, we have known from the spring who the two presidential
contestants were to be. And there had been months in which the men defeated in
the primaries have been angling pretty conspicuously to be chosen as the second
man.

So the only speculative fun left in the conventions was guessing which, of at
least half-a-dozen famous losers, would get the nod. But Mr Dukakis’s choice of
Senator Benson of Texas was a surprise but one readily approved of by the
Democrats, air force veteran of the second war, veteran senator, been there 18
years, from a state – Texas – with many electoral votes, expert on finance, the
environment, a powerful figure on the Senate’s intelligence committee, a
conservative Democrat who might be expected to catch Mr Dukakis if he appeared
to be leaning too far over to the left.

But on the republican side there was a growing list of vice presidential
possibilities, well publicised before New Orleans. Several of them actually
announced that, for one reason or another, they wished to withdraw their names
from Mr Bush’s list.

Throughout the first day at New Orleans the party bigwigs were wheedling,
betting, urging the choice of either Senator Jack Kemp, the fiery young New
York conservative, or Senator Dole, the waspish and witty Republican leader in
the Senate.

Mr Bush decided wisely that each of them was too independent, too ambitious, to
make a deferential vice president. And deference is the first qualification for
the vice presidency, which has no constitutional role, except in theory to
preside over the Senate – in practice, only when there is the probability of a
tied vote.

It used to be that no party chieftain or party underling ever questioned the
candidate's choice of his running mate, because all of them well knew that the
vice presidency was a humdrum role, taking over the president's ceremonial
chores, and for the rest, as HL Mencken put it, sitting in the outer office of
the White House hoping to hear the president sneeze.

For the first half of this century, the office was easily regarded as almost a
decorative joke. But then Franklin Roosevelt dropped dead one April afternoon
in 1945, and the humble senator from Misoura –Truman – was president. Five
years later he escaped unhurt when two Puerto Rican nationalists tried to shoot
their way into his house.

On a November afternoon in 1963, President John Kennedy was killed on a Dallas
street and suddenly the old cagey Texan, Lyndon Johnson, was president. Only 11
years later, on an August morning, in 1974, President Nixon, in effect,
abdicated and of all old congressional work horses, least likely to be
president, Gerald Ford was it.

A year later, twice within one month, first in Sacramento then in San
Francisco, a bystander's quick move to deflect a pointed pistol saved Gerald
Ford from assassination. In 1981, on a Washington street, President Reagan was
shot and perilously wounded. He survived and his jaunty walk on all public
occasions is due to the necessary flexing of his arms, akimbo, to accommodate
his bullet-proof vest.

These things are well remembered by a living generation of voters. In the first
century and a half of this republic, six vice presidents succeeded on the death
of the president but only since the second world war, there have been three –
as they are called – accidental presidents, following on one natural death, one
assassination, one unprecedented resignation.

So, it’s not surprising that down these last two decades the moment a man
chooses his vice presidential running mate, is a moment of recall, a reminder
that the second man is... as the grim saying goes. a heartbeat away from the
presidency. And so, as we never did before Dallas, we start to weigh also the
second man’s qualifications for the presidency.

Add to this new caution the new and unparalleled resources of the media to dig
and probe, through the freedom of information act, as well as through their own
competitive frenzy and you can see unless a man’s life has been as pure as the
driven snow, the instant examination of it can be rough on anyone chosen for
high office. It was very rough on young Dan Quayle.

One summer's day at noon, Dan Quayle was an unknown a blank. Two hours later
the whole country was being told that he once been on a golfing weekend with a
man whose girlfriend had posed for Playboy. That mischief was quickly defused –
to Dan Quayle a golfing weekend, is a weekend of golf.

Then, the main charge exploded – during the Vietnam war, in his 20s, and right
from the draft, he went to the national guard. The national guard springs
directly from the old 18th-century militia. The founding fathers were against a
national standing army, but they encouraged each state to have, on call, men
who in a crisis would form a militia. It's the reason – and the only reason –
given in the Constitution for sanctioning the right to bear arms.

Today, the United States army has a reserve, a national reserve, under command
of the president. But the units of the national guard, misleadingly named,
belong to each state and their disposition is at the discretion of the governor
unless the president declares a national emergency. In practice, the guard is
rarely called for national service to go broad; in the Vietnam war, only one
half of one percent of the guard went into combat.

Now, young men of draft age knew this, knew that the national guard was a safe
haven, though some conceivably joined up who would have been willing to go to
Vietnam. And one of them, according to Dan Quayle, was Dan Quayle. He was not
one of the war-time rebels, not, as Mr Bush, rather desperate to remind us, one
who escaped to Canada, one who burned his draft guard, or burned the flag. But
he wanted to go to law school and students could be deferred.

To show he was not ducking the whole show, he went into the guard, and after
basic training spent most of his six years filing press releases. There is
nothing culpable in this, but two remembered facts make it seem so.

One is that three men in four who went to Vietnam were from the working class
or the lower middle class and the linking fact is that Dan Quayle is heir to
fifty millions. Of course it's not his fault that, as we have shamefacedly come
to admit, Vietnam was a class war and not many of Quayle’s class fought it.

Well in the first days the media leapt on this story like famished wolves and
did themselves little credit working away at every tiny bone of rumour and
innuendo. Still, although the uproar is ended the misgivings linger on.

Dan Quayle remains in the national consciousness, specially in the
consciousness of the families of Vietnam veterans, as a privileged type. Very
rich, very conservative, for Star Wars and aid to the Contras, a gung-ho
all-American hawk who had the good fortune, shall we say, to escape Vietnam by
joining the national guard.

His defence of his position has been alternatively fumbling and defiant, never
conceding that the idea of a passport to safety ever crossed his mind. Of
course, many thousands did what he did, but they remain anonymous. As he said
in the moment of helpless naivety, "I didn’t know I would be standing here
today". That's it, he never dreamt he would one day be picked for the vice
presidency.

One other thought will not go away. It’s the question of Mr Bush’s judgement in
choosing, from the 46 Republican senators and the 177 Republican members of
Congress, such a nice, naive young backbencher of a hawk as a man qualified to
lead the western world.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP