Labor Day 1995 - 8 September 1995

It used to be that there were four or five dates on the calendar that
automatically required a certain talk. George Washington's birthday was an
obvious one. Though he's not celebrated in lonely splendour anymore. Since his
birthday falls so close to Lincoln's, they now lump them together and call it
Presidents' Day. Presidents in the plural. A rather raggedy title but it does
allow the government to pretend they're roping in any other president people
might prefer. Jefferson. Roosevelt the first. Roosevelt the second.

Christmas is an even more obvious occasion for a regular talk and of course the
trick was to find some impressive or entertaining American angle. One year I
did it from Hollywood and totted up the expense to movie stars' families who
wanted to do right by their children. The expensive laying down carpets of
cornflakes or of hiring snow machines from the studio to make your lawn achieve
on Christmas morning the proper deep and crisp and even look.

The Fourth of July inevitably provoked a talk giving a new spin to the origins
of the War of Independence. Or why it was always celebrated with fireworks and
the ringing of bells – because John Adams, the second President said it ought
to be.

Thanksgiving always produced a piece about the first harvest in Massachusetts
and the introduction of the first English settlers to the novelty of the turkey
and to what was to become the staple American crop from the Canadian tundra to
the tip of Argentina: corn. Or as it's called in England, maize. I've sometimes
wondered if cornflakes would have been as popular a breakfast cereal in Britain
if they'd rechristened it maize flakes.

Well, this past Monday, the first Monday in September always produced an annual
talk about Labor Day. How it started, and the growing power of organised Labor,
why it preferred, long ago, to remain a big bargaining chip between the two
political parties instead of becoming a political party of its own, a
preference never doubted by generations of American Labor leaders, in spite of
the spluttering protests of a visiting Briton, "Nye" Bevan, that they were
naive, behind the times, a quarter of a century out of date and so on. Even
without the historical appendage, Labor Day was always a big ceremonial day in
all the cities, and even in small towns, the occasion for parades and
respectful tributes to labour from local worthies and in the evening of Labor
Day, the president of the United States usually gave a rousing speech before a
great rally of Labor unions, or, better, after the invention of radio, did a
broadcast as solemn as a prayer.

I gave up doing a regular Labor Day talk when the power of union labour began
to weaken and wither. The parades and ceremonies stopped when eventually, as
now, 77 Americans in 100 did not belong to a union. We won't go into the
accumulated reasons why this is so, except to mention the main one: that after
the ferocious Labor management battles of the 1930s and '40s, all the familiar
practices once fought for, from the early dole to pregnancy leave, from
sickness insurance to stock sharing, have been taken over by business big and
small. And this year there were, so far as I can see, very few, if any Labor
Day addresses given as such by governors of states, by the party leaders. There
was one, given in California, no wonder. It has lost about 300,000 jobs from
the closing of military and naval bases alone. Its general unemployment rises
as, if you want to be mean, the rate of immigration and illegal immigration
rises. Now this is a false referent. One didn't happen because of the other.
But if you live in the cities close to the American border, it is tempting to
believe so when you hear that the moment a poor Mexican family crosses the
border it's entitled to the health care and public education of the citizen and
the legally resident alien, a fact of life the California voters rebelled
against in the last election.

And who do you suppose was making that only Labor Day speech? An impassioned
one it was too. The president of the United States. The New York Times which
did not otherwise notice Labor Day remarked about Mr. Clinton's speech that it
resembled a Labor Day campaign kick-off. Of course, he was campaigning, for the
presidency, it's the thing he does best. His problem is how he performs when he
gets to be president. Mr. Clinton took up the great California grievance,
illegal immigration, and declared it was not responsible for the economic
distress of the middle class. What was? Mr. Clinton's favourite slogan came
out, "Jobs! Jobs!" He then went to the oldest, the most dependable magic the
Democrats can invoke – either old Democrats or new ones – higher minimum wage.
A guarantee, his opponents always say, of swift inflation.

This must be the possibly the thirtieth time that Mr. Clinton has visited and
speechified in California since he was elected. Because California is the most
populous state, has most congress members, has the largest block of voting
delegates to both conventions, it is not conceivable – and Mr. Clinton knows it
better than anybody – that the presidency can be won by a candidate who loses
California next year. And when you hear too that the Democratic Party is in
such disarray in New York State, so muddled and divided in its leadership that
it cannot just now guarantee that Mr. Clinton will carry even New York. And,
yet another Democratic senator has announced that he will not run in 1996, thus
making it easier for the Republicans to get two-thirds majority on anything
they're determined to bulldoze through. You'll appreciate the jubilation of the
Republicans returning this week to work and the truly powerless state of the
Democrats as the party in opposition.

The Democrats plight is so bad, their fortunes so low, it almost makes one lay
an immediate whopping bet that the next President of the United States will be
Bill Clinton. Things, party morale and power, were never so low – 1883, 1908,
1930, – that they didn't go galloping back into life and victory. Well, that
may be going too far the other way but I do remember in 1964 when Barry
Goldwater swore to lead the Republicans into the Promised Land. Instead, in the
election, he was driven into the wilderness by the Texas Moses, Lyndon Johnson.
There followed a running stream of articles by the most thoughtful of American
commentators saying we had probably seen the end of the Republican Party. Ah
so.

Four years later, Richard Nixon went sweeping back and the Republicans were in
the White House again, and again in 1972, a Nixon landslide. There was, you may
recall, a blip, or stutter, in 1976 with a fella named Carter, and then the
Republicans were back in the groove in 1980 and '84 and '88. So the question
is, was 1992 another blip or a trend? But, with Congress bustling back into
session, its business was not I think yet the horse race it will become.

Two topics pushed their way into public curiosity. One foreign - Mrs. Clinton's
visit to Beijing, the consequences of which are not yet over – and one
domestic. The domestic theme was one I haven't talked much about, since I
guessed in January, facetiously, that the OJ Simpson trial would not be over
until Labor Day. Well, Labor Day's come and gone and, as I speak, the defence
says it will close its case this weekend. Well, perhaps next week or who knows
the week after that. What is certain is that in the past two weeks the trial
has taken an ugly turn that may affect the city of Los Angeles, and, by
extension, cities with large black populations, in a more menacing way than the
trial itself. For one week, the court was assaulted every day, with the jury
absent, by the showing of the texts of some taped interviews given over several
recent years, by a witness for the prosecution, who has turned into perhaps the
most powerful, involuntary witness for the defence: Mr. Mark Furman, a now
retired police officer who swore on the stand that he had not, in 10 years,
ever used the word "nigger".

Well, in those tapes, he not only used it pejoratively, sneeringly 42 times,
but expressed unbelievably foul-mouthed advice about how to cheat, beat up and
set up arrested blacks for guilty verdicts or frightening them into never
appearing in court. This appalling discharge of bigotry and obscenity made the
defence's charge suddenly believable. That this very police officer did not
discover the incriminating bloody glove, but planted it, and in other ways set
up OJ Simpson for the double murder charge. But the more frightening result of
the publicising through, I must say, riveting television, is that the tapes
have spread throughout Los Angeles's seething black community, renewed fears
and disgust over incurable racism in the city's police force. Probably very few
blacks identify with OJ Simpson as a typical black underdog like themselves, he
was seen from the beginning as a privileged exception. But many, many blacks
will identify Mr. Furman as the enemy.

And I really come back to the thought I mentioned at the very beginning of the
trial, it's unlikely that a jury with eight blacks, thinking back to the riots
after the Rodney King case, and now having its thoughts reinforced by Officer
Furman's filthy talk, it's unlikely that whatever their private opinions, those
eight would qualify for sainthood by finding Mr. Simpson guilty. It seemed
unlikely in January. Less likely than ever now.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP