Judge Clarence Thomas - 28 February 1992

About a month ago, a reporter was arrested and sent off to prison, his sin was
that in writing about some flaw or injustice or fiddle in the government he'd
used a confidential source. And when the authorities asked him to reveal the
source he refused, so he was bustled off. At which point, in stepped – or
considering his shape, barrelled – in the top authority, the president no less
and said "rubbish he has every right to protect his source, release him at
once".

The reporter was a Russian and the man who bawled out the arresting authorities
was Boris Yeltsin, a heartening piece of news for us if ever there was one.
Imagine in a country in which for 70 years to criticise the government openly
without benefit of any other source than your own opinion was to guarantee
yourself a passport to Outer Mongolia or to forced labour or to a so called
psychiatric hospital to stay there for months, perhaps years, until it was
plain to everybody that you had learned to think correctly about the Soviet
Union and all its works.

By the way, it was from the Soviets that we first heard that prim word, which
has cloaked so many layers of shame and hypocrisy. I remember being first
puzzled by it during the dreadful political purge trials of the 1930s when
about 50 of Stalin's old comrades had committed the error of not following
Stalin nimbly enough in switching from the right wing to the left wing of the
party and suddenly these men who had helped him to achieve the revolution were
declared to be victims of incorrect thinking and were consequently executed.

In the founding scripture of the Soviet Union in its Constitution, Article 125,
they actually adopted the American phraseology of the Bill of the Rights to
guarantee – what you do you think – freedom of speech of the press and the
right of assembly, but there was a provision not included in the American
version, provided these freedoms are restricted to such exercises as might
strengthen socialism. And now here, unbelievably, a man who grew from babyhood
to late middle age with that exclusive view of the law in his country, he gets
indignant when a reporter is questioned about his source or sources. "None of
your business," snaps Mr Yeltsin and so say all of us, or rather all of us
except the Senate of the United States. Just about the time the Russian
reporter was being packed off to jail, a young reporter from a Long Island
newspaper, a Mr Phelps, was subpoenaed by the Senate Rules Committee and
questioned for hours by a special counsel.

And this week, a young woman, a reporter for the National Public – that's non
commercial radio system – a Miss Totenberg was subpoenaed also and she too was
questioned for four hours on the same matter. Both of them on a day early in
October of last year had reported something, which the public until then knew
nothing about, namely that one Anita Hill a professor of law at the University
of Oklahoma had made a very serious accusation against Judge Clarence Thomas, a
judge of the Appeals Court who was at that moment coming to the end of hearings
before the Senate Judiciary Committee on his fitness to fulfil the president's
appointment of him to the Supreme Court. She had accused him, these two
reporters said or wrote, of being constantly asked to go out with him when she
worked for him at the education department of a government commission that she
as constantly refused, and that he recounted details of pornographic films he'd
seen and in other ways sexually harassed her.

The special counsel appointed by the Senate Rules Committee now wants to know
simply where the two reporters got their information, their source. They both
politely refused to tell him and spent the rest of the hours responding to
interminable questions as the 5th Amendment to the Constitution allows them to
do, "I respectfully refuse to answer on the grounds of self incrimination". Not
many listeners will need to be reminded about the bombshell that this
accusation threw into the confirmation hearings of Judge Thomas. In fact, they
were just about over, but the revelation or assertion of those two reporters
caused the chairman of the committee to call for a second round to have the
judge confront in another public hearing his accuser – and I don't need to say
that for several days the thing was gone into to the vast and ugly titillation
of millions of television viewers in more countries than this one.

Now two questions. First, if the two reporters were indeed the beneficiaries of
a leak, who was the leak, the deep throat, and who wanted to have the leak
traced to the point of inviting two reporters to refuse under oath to tell and
so put themselves in contempt of Congress? Well the history of how Miss Hill
came in the end to be called before the judiciary committee is long and
torturous but, in spite of the furious conviction on the part of some
Republicans, senators on the committee, that one or other of the Democrat
members had enticed Miss Hill into going public, there is a straight line a
sequence of events that is not in question and not hard to follow, though the
identity of some of the participants is unknown or in dispute.

First then, during the summer of 1991, when the personal staffs of the senators
on the committee were preparing for the hearings, a journalist who had written
profiles and other pieces on Judge Thomas was approached by some Senate
staffer, never mind who, nothing about Anita Hill has surfaced in his
testimony.

In August, a lady who belonged to a citizens group known as the Alliance for
Justice got a call from a man she knew who'd been a classmate of Miss Hill at
Yale Law School, he told the lady that Miss Hill had been sexually harassed by
Mr Thomas way back. The lady passed on this charge to the staff of one of the
Democrats senators on the committee. Soon inevitably, the chairman of the
committee, Senator Biden, another Democrat got wind of this and ordered another
committee of staff to talk to Miss Hill and have her confirm or deny the
charge. She thought things over and eventually made a sworn statement to a
committee staffer.

We really could stop there because it was that statement that the Long Island
reporter and the National Public radio woman reporter got a hold off, how and
from whom is what the Senate's special counsel wants to know. But I ought to
finish off the story because it has been wrongly claimed that what was leaked
was Miss Hill's private testimony to the FBI. Senator Biden, the chairman of
the committee, sent Miss Hill's sworn statement to President Bush in the
legitimate belief that this matter was serious enough to be looked into by the
FBI.

The FBI is the investigating arm of the Department of Justice, which of course
is under the president's wing of the government, the executive. The president
or his attorney general alone can order the FBI to make an investigation, which
President Bush did. Miss Hill agreed then to be interviewed by the FBI and
there she made again her charge of sexual harassment, pretty much in the form
she was later to recite before the committee in the presence of Judge Thomas.
Anyway, it was Miss Hill's sworn statement before a committee staffer that was
leaked by somebody to the two subpoenaed reporters.

You'll see that there were many pipelines of rumour and tattling that could
have provided a leak.

Second question, who insisted on this new investigation whose only aim, is to
discover the identity of the leaker. The answer is two or three Republican
senators, strong supporters of Judge Thomas on the judiciary committee who were
livid that Miss Hill's charges ever came to public knowledge and who claimed
then and now that Miss Hill was from the beginning a patsy, a set-up, a dupe of
somebody probably a staff member of one of the Democrat senators who'd gone out
early in the summer on a muck-raking expedition to find something damning to
Judge Thomas's nomination and by assiduous raking probably they hinted among
feminists, Liberals and other such mischief-makers had brought up in the sieve
this nasty bit of rumour or slander or whatever. Because the two reporters, Mr
Phelps and Miss Totenberg, were the first people to bring it out in public,
they were brought before the special counsel of the Senate Rules Committee,
which these Republicans had insisted should be called to investigate.

Now as I said, the Senate has the power to cite refusing testifiers for
contempt of Congress and therefore Miss Totenberg and Mr Phelps could, once the
citation is issued, be sent to jail. It's extremely unlikely that the Senate
dare do that.

In the past 25 years, there have been other cases of journalists refusing to
name the leaks who provided, for instance, secret documents from the Pentagon,
from the Justice Department some even protected by government security, but the
Courts have steadily maintained that the 1st Amendment Freedom of the Press
protects the free flow of information and a reporters right not to disclose
confidential sources. In this case, Miss Hill's sworn statement is not by any
definition a secret government document and no crime of any sort is imputed.
senator

If Mr Phelps and Miss Totenberg did get sent to jail, they'd be such a huge
national outcry as to turn the gallant or defiant victims into a couple of
martyrs. The vengeful Republicans who started the investigation surely know
this and must now be stumped on how to act like stern headmasters and yet do
nothing but slap two wrists, their plight is sad indeed, they didn't ought to
have done it, dad! Because the embarrassing comparison with Mr Yeltsin, which
John Chancellor was the first to spot would be instantly invoked to demonstrate
how freedom of the press, one of the glories of the American system is so much
more safely guaranteed in of all places holy Russia.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP