Jim Wright and the Baltic rebellion - 26 May 1989

Well this was the week that never was.

So many – and astonishing and unpredictable – things happening that any one of
them, at another time, would have been the inevitable topic A, if, that is,
China and the sudden turmoil in Beijing, which was timed to erupt during Mr
Gorbachev’s visit, had not swept off the front pages great and surprising
changes in many places.

In what places? Well to begin with, in Moscow. Mr Gorbachev’s offer – immense
offer – to reduce conventional forces and weapons. In Afghanistan, which by now
we’ve more or less relegated to the history books, Kabul is welcoming every day
a fleet of planes from the Soviet Union with food, fuel, weapons of all sorts
including missiles, ten thousand tons of supplies every week for the Afghan
government.

In a six-column despatch to the New York Times this morning its reporter in
Kabul, who was allowed on one of the flights, wrote, “Not since the United
States, Britain and France mounted the Berlin Airlift in 1948 has there been a
comparable effort to keep a beleaguered outpost supplied.”

In Warsaw, which for 50 years has dutifully accepted the Soviet version of the
1939 Soviet-Nazi non-aggression pact, the Communist party itself put out on
Wednesday a huge report on the origins of the second war in which it declares –
we’d say admits – that a secret protocol in that treaty agreed to split Poland
between Germany and the Soviet Union.

It confirms the deportation of millions of Poles deep into the Soviet Union and
– what must be the first true confession on this matter from any Communist
state – flatly upholds the allied version of the hideous massacre in the Katyn
forest, that the 4,400 Polish officers were murdered there not, as Moscow has
always claimed, by the Nazis, but on Stalin’s orders, by Russian troops.

Most startling, most unpredictable of all, I should say, is the news which is
allied to the publication of that secret protocol, the news from two of the
Baltic republics of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia. They were all taken over by
Soviet troops in 1940 by permission of Adolf Hitler and have remained part of –
puppets if you like – of the Soviet Union.

I don’t know about other western nations, but the United States has always
refused to recognise that takeover. Representatives of the former independent
governments still have legations here in the United States.

Well, now suddenly two of those Baltic states have rebelled against the yoke of
Moscow. The rebels are not students yelling for an easing of Communist rule
inside the system, the rebels are the parliaments of Estonia and Lithuania.

Six months ago Estonia passed a law asserting two rights – one, to overturn any
decision relating to Estonia that was made in Moscow and two, to assert an
absolute right of all Estonians to have and to hold private property.

This, to Estonians, must seem as historic a protest as the American colonies’
refusal to pay the Stamp Act imposed by London, but a week ago Lithuania took
on the mantle of Adams and Jefferson and Patrick Henry. Its parliament went
beyond economic defiance, it declared Lithuania to be a sovereign independent
nation.

How would that have grabbed us if there’d been no China, no threatened rift in
the NATO alliance? It’s an act of breathtaking audacity and if Mr Gorbachev had
nothing else on this plate he would have here a heavy dose of forced feeding.

China, of course, has absorbed and overwhelmed the reporting of these great
events and I had meant to talk about it but I’m not going to get caught with a
comment on a still-shifting situation that a week or a few days from now would
look brave but stupid.

You surely, in your country, must have heard, as we have, a whole posse of
China experts. I’ve read and listened to some of the best. They were all as
astounded as you and I by the millions in Beijing’s square, by the recoil of
the army and, like us, they had to confess they had never dreamed of anything
like it, they didn’t know what would happen and were not now disposed to say
why.

So what about this country where a scene was played in Washington on Tuesday
and watched over two national networks, a scene unique in American history. The
speaker of the house, Mr Jim Wright, if not exactly being put on trial, was
called to account before the ethics committee of the House of Representatives
on charges that he had broken the rules of ethical behaviour in two ways, by
evading the limit the house sets on fees for speaking engagements through
taking a whacking royalty on bulk sales of a book of his speeches, and –
probably the more serious charge – that he had set up a business with a
real-estate developer, taken $145,000-worth of gifts from him, had his wife
received an $18,000 a year salary, make free use of one of the developer's
condominiums and a car.

All this would have been all right if Mrs Wright could be proved to have worked
for her salary, if the gifts had been reported and stayed within the allowed
limit – which is $100 – and if the real-estate developer could be proved to
have no direct interest in legislation. That key phrase is taken from the rule
book of the Congress.

Any congressman or senator must be very careful not to take presents from
anyone who clearly could use him to influence the passage of bills that would
be in the donor’s interest. The real-estate developer had a considerable
interest in an oil well.

Well, after a long private investigation the house ethics committee voted 8 to
4 that the developer did have a direct interest in legislation which,
therefore, made his gifts improper. That first vote of the ethics committee was
the cue for a full open hearing of the committee on the charges at which Mr
Wright and his lawyer and witnesses could confront the special lawyer-counsel
hired by the committee.

The scene on Tuesday was a sort of preliminary hearing. It was called on the
initiative of Speaker Wright and his lawyer to ask the committee to dismiss the
charges. It was a one-day hearing and, from the tone and substance of the
arguments, it seemed then unlikely that the committee would go back on its
first decision.

The best Mr Wright’s lawyer could do was to quote approvingly from a 1930
judgment given in a Supreme Court case by Mr Justice Holmes, than whom to this
day there is no more revered figured in the history of American jurisprudence.

This was that sentence, referring to the line between what is proper and what
is illegal, “The very meaning of a line in the law is that you intentionally
may go as close to it as you can if you do not pass it.” The speaker’s lawyer
maintained that his client had gone up to the line but never tiptoed over it.

It appeared not much of a help as a guide to a committee which is not looking
into improper, unethical behaviour. The speaker of the house is, remember, not
only the man who, as in parliaments, presides over its deliberations – he’s the
political leader in the house of the majority party and this Congress has, in
all but four years of the past 56, the Democrats.

But also he’s named in the Constitution as the second, after the vice
president, in line for the presidency. Never before has the conduct of a
speaker been officially called to account, in this case through the house
ethics committee, which has a most elaborate list of rules of conduct. Even on
Tuesday evening the prospect looked bleak for Mr Wright.

Now I’d like to sketch out something of the ordeal that government servants
have to survive in this country before they take on their jobs. I’m doing this
because the... I’ve noticed the immediate reaction of foreigners, watching the
speaker’s hearing, is to sigh or marvel yet again at the corruption that seems
to be epidemic in Washington.

It may be, but what we ought to consider is if there is another country which
sets up so many rules of behaviour for its government servants. I’ve
wondered... for instance I don’t know, but if in Britain, in India, in France,
in Australia, all presidents, prime ministers, all judges, Cabinet ministers,
ambassadors, immediately on their appointment are required to put any stocks
and shares they hold into a blind trust which must remain untouched, unseen by
them for the term of their office.

It may be normal among democratic governments. I doubt it, but I don’t know.
I’ve been looking over the ethical questions put up to applicants as
contracting officials for the government, that’s to say people whose job will
be to look over contractors’ bids and recommend an award.

A couple of examples of their examination. You meet Mr B at a church, you
become friendly. He asks you to go sailing with him, then have dinner. He is an
executive officer of a government contractor. May you accept his invitation?
You may sail, but not take dinner, because the dinner has a specific value.

You’re invited to speak before a trade association meeting which will include a
lot of potential contractors. You are to talk about how your agency works in
general terms. You’re offered the invitation, a $50 honorarium, an airplane
ticket to the meeting. Which may you accept? You may go to the meeting and
talk, but not give out any information that’s not available to the general
public. You may not accept the honorarium. You may not accept the airplane
ticket, though possibly your agency might pay for it.

These are the very simplest ethical problems with which a government official
has to learn to cope. Aren’t you glad you don’t work for the United States
government? Aren’t you relieved not to be a congressman? Don’t you give thanks
to the Lord that you are not the Speaker of the United States House of
Representatives?

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP