UN weapons inspectors in Iraq - 15 January 1993

Daddy, asked the young daughter of an old Hollywood screenwriter, "what's a
documentary?" "It's a film he said with no plot and no stars." It certainly is
a forbidding word and the inimitable Scot who coined it, John Greerson, has
much to answer for, but no other word has come along to define this type of
movie, which can range between the deadly dull and the unforgettable.

I saw the other evening a brilliant film, which performed a service all
documentaries ought to perform, to penetrate your shallow understanding of
something and show you depths that you never guessed at or so to expand, in
this case alarmingly, your knowledge of a topic that most of us I think would
claim to be able to sum up in a minute or two. So the film, an hour long, was
made jointly by the United Nations television service and the Boston
headquarters of the American Public Television network. I ought to say this
film was made before, long before Saddam's latest provocation and the allied
strike in response.

The theme was the search-and-destroy mission of the United Nations inspection
team that started two years ago to track down first Saddam's suspected arsenal
of nuclear facilities. I noticed at the time, as yet another sad proof of our
human inability to be objective, where wishing is concerned that in this
country, anyway, the senators and congressmen who were against fighting Saddam
and in favour of relying on sanctions alone, they tended to believe that Saddam
was many comfortable years away from making the bomb. Well, the first thing
about this television film, it was called by the way, The Hunt for Saddam's
Secret Weapons, was the conclusion by the nuclear and weapons experts on the UN
team that Saddam was 18 months at most, probably a year or less, away from
having the bomb.

I think we all assumed when the inspectors started scanning the Iraqi landscape
that they were looking just for nuclear components but their mission was also
to ferret out weapons of mass destruction, which meant also chemical and
biological weapons. To me, the first shock was the far-flung piles of weapons
of these three sorts, once the teams started to probe – they already knew some
nuclear sites from old intelligence that were effectively bombed to rubbish
during the desert war – but once they started following up new leads.

And, needless to say, the Iraqis were no help; the wide spread of sites,
facilities, storage areas, underground hiding places were staggering and very
difficult to track down. Why? For the simple reason that Iraq is larger than
California (which is 850 miles long), 167,000 square miles or more than three
times the size of England, and so much of it a desert that aerial scanning for
weeks on end was sometimes about as rewarding as spotting the odd hairpin on a
sandy beach. No wonder it's taken them two years and the end is nowhere in
site. Now the team is plainly expert in all phases of nuclear and weapons
engineering, but they mention the other day that it will take two years to
perform the extremely delicate operation of destroying the known caches of
chemical weapons.

And imagine, after more than a year of searching and examining every sort of
pipe and wrench and tank, pot and storage bin and underground cave and tunnel …
imagine one day flying off over hundreds of miles and coming on a whole valley
of what looked like a plain stacked with torpedoes. It was, in fact, 40,000
canisters of nerve gas, so day after day, month after month the team rode and
flew and trudged through villages, factories, old battlefields, new suburbs and
found the Iraqis in the main hospitable and guileless, until you started to get
warm. Then they brought in one of their atomic scientists who made a big to-do
of protesting on some arcane principle that would stall the search and they did
this long enough to cajole or organise the onlooking people to march in
protest. By the time 10,000 people were on the streets of Baghdad throwing
things at 20 UN inspectors, the UN Team wisely decided, for the time being, to
retreat.

There was no sense incidentally from this report that Saddam's power is waning
or that he has lost any of his hypnotic or tyrannical grip. All this is going
on while Iraq still endures the United Nations sanctions, which some people
remember believed two years ago would bring Saddam to heel without the
nastiness of a UN war with such optimists still exist, I hope they'll see this
stunning film and come to believe what the UN Security Council – especially
Britain, the US, France and Russia – concluded two years ago, that we could
risk a manageable war with Saddam then or face him as a rogue nuclear power in
a devastating war a year or two down the road.

Well, you'll gather that here as elsewhere in the past week, Saddam has raised
his ugly head above the little crowd of horrors that increasingly hammer on the
doors of the Western nations. It's a wholly unexpected irony of the arrival of
Mr Clinton on the scene that while he won partly because he accused Mr Bush of
being obsessed with foreign affairs to the neglect to the poor, the drug
ridden, the uneducated, the homeless on his own doorstep. Yet in the moment of
his inauguration, President Clinton will besieged by more and more menacing
foreign troubles than any President we can remember. The hideous plight of the
women of Bosnia, the Marines' commitment for how long to Somalia, the
threatened prospect of military force against the Serbs, Angola again, but now
less noticed but drifting in over the Western horizon a thundercloud from the
Pacific comes an extensive survey of the range and pace of rearmament among
nations we have long learned not to fear. China, which was never really feared
chiefly because of its second-class military technology is now buying billions
of dollars worth of first-class Russian equipment.

The Russian foreign office, hungry as all the other Russians for currency,
forgivably explains we sell to all-comers. This renovation and strengthening of
China's huge armies has naturally alarmed Japan, which for most of 47 years was
forbidden by its constitution to acquire all but the barest means of
self-defence. Well, Japan is aroused and while buying prodigiously from the
United States is as you'd guess well along in developing its own military,
naval, aerial technology and the strategic boys say is today mounting the third
largest defence force, what we used to call "war machine" on earth. The United
States is also selling armaments briskly to China's chronic enemy, the defiant
exile Taiwan.

It is inconceivable to be, said a rather sober Asian historian, that we can
avoid in the next 10 years a really big war in the Far East. Well Mr Clinton
will wake up the morning of the 21st, when the party's over to ponder all these
things and instead of bemoaning them, enjoy the new sensation of being required
to act on them in the name of the United States.

In the meantime, the United States Supreme Court, all nine of the justices, are
– Christmas over – back in their gowns and up on the bench and have just
pondered without success a very profound question indeed, as is their wont. The
question is, "what is a person?" The Constitution in several places uses the
word, but there has been down the centuries no commonly accepted definition of
a person. This time, the problem turned on a California case, a bunch of
inmates in a California state prison brought suit against the authorities to
get free tobacco under a provision, which allows it to a pauper. These men sued
as an association of plaintiffs, the Supreme Court voted five to four against
them. No combination or association said one judge can be a pauper, a pauper is
a natural person. Another said, poverty is the human condition of a person. A
dissenting judge said, "nonsense", quoting two federal statutes that talk about
poor countries.

Since all great human affairs are decided in America in the end by those nine
judges or rather more often than not these days by one judge, the fifth vote in
nine, since that's how the vote came out, those poor persons in jail will not
get their tobacco, which is perhaps just as well if they did pretty soon they'd
be suing the state for giving them emphysema or lung cancer.

Oh what do you know, who should pop up this week like Mr Punch bopping up at a
seaside ventriloquist – do they still exist? – but Ross Perot. He's going to
revive his campaign outfit United We Stand America, he wants millions of
Americans to join him in forming a watchdog group keeping an eye on President
Clinton and seeing how well or badly he does with the promised cures, the
economy, ethics in government, healthcare and crime. Considering that Mr Perot
got 19% of the vote, more millions than any third party candidate in history,
his resurrection is not to be sneezed at. He's going to be a gadfly, he says,
to the administration, probably not a bad thing except for poor Mr Clinton who
is about to embark on what we always call the new president's honeymoon. And
who needs a gadfly on his honeymoon?

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP