The Democratic outsider- 16 September 1988

Just about two years ago when the 1988 presidential campaign was beginning to
warm up, I was having dinner in Boston with a political scientist, and with a
member of a Boston family that goes back far enough to have had a president,
two presidents in fact, in its background.

I should pause here, to remark that Americans who have some acquaintance with a
parliamentary system, have been envying for some time, any country who’s
general election campaign lasts three weeks. On the contrary, two years exert
an awful strain on the nervous system, and in one way may actual defeat the
main purpose, by boring so many voters, so that by election day, they are too
exhausted or indifferent to vote, with the result that, only just over 50% of
the qualified voters go to the polls at all, far and away the lowest percentage
of participation, in any democracy.

And we shouldn’t forget, whenever we talk about a landslide result that in this
country, we are referring to a comfortable majority of those – 51, 52% – in
other words, in 1980, Mr Reagan’s "landslide" meant that something between 26
and 27% of the qualified voters went for him. Which also means that three
Americans in four either didn’t want him, or didn’t care.

So, back to that evening in Boston, in spring of 1986. By that time, several
men in both parties were already well on the way to mounting their presidential
campaigns. Among them, a man, undeclared but much talked of in New England, was
the governor of Massachusetts.

"How about," I said to my companions, "your Michael Dukakis?" To be truthful
I’d only lately learnt to pronounce the name. They looked at me, chuckling but
forgiving. "Please," said the professor, "not that." The member of the first
family, appreciating that I had not kept up with Massachusetts politics, but he
was not wanting to sound superior, shook his head and smiled. "Not in the
cards," he said, "not a prayer."

The subject was closed, and we went on to discuss more serious possibilities,
Governor Cuomo of New York being then the lion of the Democratic party, who was
expected soon to break out of his governor's cage in Albany and go roaring
through the land.

Well that dinner reminded me of another time, another day, in New York City, it
must have been January, February of 1976. Just around our corner on Madison
Avenue I was off to the newsagent or the bakery and a small man with watery
blue eyes and a lot of teeth, stopped me and held out his hand.

I didn’t know him, he didn’t know me, he was proffering his hand to every other
passerby. "Good morning,"he said with a light southern accent, "I am Jimmy
Carter. I am running for President of the United States." I resisted saying,
you’re joking of course, and said something like well, fine governor, good
luck.

About a month later, one of our weekly news magazines came out with a big story
surveying the half-dozen or so men most likely to come down to the wire when
the Democrats came that summer to choose their man. Their likenesses were on
the cover, of that issue. Jimmy Carter was not among them, not even dismissed
as an unserious contender.

But nobody can say that Governor Dukakis has not earned his claim. He has
slogged his way through what surely be the most tedious the most interminable,
the most grindingly democratic, method of choice that exists.

Remember, what we call the primaries are state primaries. Before that, every
small town has had its registered members of the party vote to send delegates
to a county convention or caucus. Then the counties have a run-off to pick
delegates to a state convention, which picks the delegates to the national
convention.

So that by the time that final convention votes, the chosen leader really is
the man that a majority of the elected delegates from the states that hold
primaries – and there are 38 of them – decide is the best man for the job. And
whether the unknown man is Jimmy Carter or Michael Dukakis, by the time he is
picked and off and running around the nation, and being now the only man in his
party to receive, every evening on the news, the spotlight of television we
soon get to know the unknown.

Now his job is to establish a new and attractive identity. The way Jimmy Carter
did this, not himself a Clint Eastwood or a remarkable orator, was to picture
himself as an ordinary decent man from the country, who was suspicious of
Washington and its goings-on, and would come in like James Stewart in Mr Smith
Goes To Washington, to clean out the mess created by the pros.

And he certainly could point to a mess – the historic scandal of Watergate, the
first resignation of a president in history, a vice president forced to resign
on charges of fraud and the successor Mr Gerald Ford, everywhere seen as a good
caretaker president, but a caretaker. Only now can we realise how much Mr
Carter had going for him to outweigh his own lack of dynamism, charm, the aura
of leadership.

And unknown suddenly rocketed into stardom always has an appeal to an American
audience, whether it’s a weirdly handsome movie actress like Madonna or a
charming imp of a tennis player like Andre Agassi.

In the beginning, that's to say after the Democratic convention in Atlanta,
Governor Dukakis had the curiosity value of an unknown star, and in the polls
taken immediately afterwards, plunged the Republicans into unaccustomed gloom
by being 17 percentage points ahead of Mr Bush.

But now here is a puzzle, in the latest two national polls, a remarkable
percentage, something like 24% of the electorate say they still don’t know him,
don’t quite know who he is and what his party stands for. Of course, because of
the aforementioned steady nightly spotlight in the TV news, we all know his
face and manner as well as our next-door neighbour. It now appears that this is
not necessarily a good thing, unless you have something positive to offer to
your new large audience – Madonna’s slinky air of mystery, Agassi’s sporting
smile and good-natured antics – you may very soon come to suffer from
over-exposure.

From the beginning Mr Dukakis has not imprinted a positive image. We all know
what he’s against, he’s against drug dealing with dictators, he is against
knuckling under to the Ayatollah – a dead issue, if ever there was one. He is
against poverty and crime and low-paying jobs and homeless people and drugs in
schools.

What he is for is, alas, a mild echo of what Mr Bush is for. A strong defence,
he is for people’s right to carry guns, not only to shoot rabbits but to
protect their homes – that is a remarkable break with good Democratic doctrine;
the Democrats had always pointed out that the Constitution allows the citizen
to bear arms only to be part of a militia when called on.

To put it another way the two polls – Gallup and the New York Times-Columbia
Broadcasting System – both agree that Mr Bush is setting the pace, the subject
matter, what we now call the agenda, for the campaign. And on the two main
issues, on the domestic economy and on foreign policy, he is comfortably
leading his opponent.

Probably the most upsetting finding for Mr Dukakis’s team is that he is losing
ground on the issue he picked early on as the key to his campaign. He said it
at New Orleans and many times later, on the stump – this election is not about
ideology, it’s about competence.

Well, the competence is not a very rousing word with which to bring 30,000
people to their feet, but for a time, people were ready to learn how Mr
Dukakis’s brand of competence might show how things could be improved. Well, he
has used the word, but the thing itself evidently escapes the voters. On this
very question 51% think Mr Bush more competent of the two against 32% for Mr
Dukakis.

Of course, we analysts and pundits are always quick to cover our tracks by
saying either it’s going to be a close race – there is no more evidence to show
that than to show the possibility of a landslide, either way – or we say it’s
too early to be sure of anything. However the one theme that Mr Bush has
hammered away at is simply the prosperity of most Americans, of the huge middle
class that casts most of the votes.

Of course, it’s true, as Mr Dukakis goes on about, that there are patches, big
patches, of depression here and there, in the oil states, in the steel
industry, in the midwest farming stages, hurt in some places, devastated by the
drought, though the federal government is about to ladle out billions for their
relief. But these patches constitute a fringe of the continental prosperity.

I think the general feeling which has just shown up in the polls was best
expressed in a recent cartoon, widely reprinted even abroad, by Ed Gamble in
the Florida Times-Union. It showed Mr Dukakis with his umbrella up under a
blazing sun, approaching a shopkeeper, who is slapping a new coat of paint on
his store front. The shop's name is America and in the window is the legend
"Home of peace and prosperity, low unemployment, low inflation, low interest
rates, help wanted". Dukakis is saying, "I’d like to talk to you about how bad
the economy is" and the shopkeeper replies, "Sure, but can you come back when I
am not working?"

We have seven weeks to go. I won’t insult you by saying much may happen, it’s
too early to tell, it could be close. At the moment I see no new or startling
or compelling reason to change very much my guess, made at the time that Mr
Dukakis was 17 points ahead, that if American history follows its unbroken
course of never voting out the incumbent in a time of prosperity, the governor
is likely to take say, 11 states, and Mr Bush, 39.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP