Francis Perkins and the US deficit - 2 August 1985

I’m always going to rearrange my books, or I’m afraid I mean to arrange them,
as they do in libraries.

Well the trouble is that by now, in an apartment cluttered with about 5,000
books, they’ve all been there so long in a mad non-system of non-arrangement
that to put them into any order would upset the picture I have in my head of
where everything is.

I can put my hand on anything in a moment because by now every shelf has
registered a visual image. Useless for my secretary to ask, with ill-disguised
contempt, why a book on early jazz is bang up against a book entitled Climate
in Everyday Life, why a book called Facts about Denmark is next to Winston
Churchill’s Great Contemporaries. They are there, therefore I see them,
therefore I know.

Of course I couldn’t shut my eyes and call off the sequence of books on any
given shelf. I just remember the alternation of sizes and colours and bindings
and jackets and sometimes, as today, I’m rewarded with a surprise. I was going
to talk about the airline industry and was looking for a book on it. I didn’t
find it, but where it ought to be was the memoirs of, I believe, the first
woman Cabinet officer in America. Her name was Francis Perkins; Madam Perkins,
she was called by Franklin Roosevelt who appointed her as Secretary of Labor.

I took her – it – down and came on a fascinating passage in which the late
revered economist John Maynard Keynes, to whom President Reagan and his
disciples attribute all our woe with loss of Eden, in which Keynes met
President Roosevelt for the first time in a call on him at the White House.

Madam Perkins took him in to see the president and retired to an outer office.
After about 40 minutes Keynes came out smiling and Madam Perkins went in to ask
the president how it had gone. It, historians should note, was Mr Keynes’s
introducing the president to the wonders of deficit financing. “Well” said the
president, “he talked nothing but mathematics”.

Roosevelt plainly couldn’t make head or tail of the whole theory, which upset
him because he once said he got very little about anything except ships and
sailing out of books. He preferred to call in an expert and, as somebody put
it, take it all in through his pores. This time his pores were closed. So Madam
Perkins sat down and explained the theory suggesting to Roosevelt’s increasing
delight that governments can afford anything, that it is not necessary to have
the money on hand. It can do what a man does who can’t afford a house – borrow
from the bank.

Which bank? Ah, that’s where the government has the edge over its citizens; it
can borrow from itself. From itself? Yes, at a pinch it can make its money the
really old-fashioned way; it can print it. Amazing! Roosevelt felt suddenly
very warm and friendly to John Maynard Keynes who had indicated an escape hatch
out of the Depression.

But suppose you go on borrowing to the point where you doubt you can repay the
principal? Not to worry. So long as you pay the interest nobody is going to
keep pointing to the debt the interest is carrying. Wonderful! Roosevelt was
always very quick to grasp the nub of a new idea and he grabbed this one and
initiated a system now 50 years old.

I don’t know if Keynes ever told him what he liked to tell his students at
Cambridge, but Roosevelt would have got the point and revelled in it, the point
being that there is a great and vital difference between the economics of
private and public life. Keynes said if you owe the Bank of England a hundred
pounds and skip the country they will track you down and put you in prison, but
if you owe them a million pounds they will make you a member of the board.

Well, down those 50 years this philosophy has come to be so widely accepted
that not so long ago an American who won a million and a half dollars in a
lottery went to American Express to sign up for a credit card. They checked
down-town on his credit rating. They found he had none. He had always bought
what he could afford and paid for it in cash, a suspicious character. They
turned him down.

The first time I heard the word deficit was in a speech broadcast by the-then
Prime Minister, Ramsay MacDonald in, I believe, the autumn of 1931. He
announced he deplored a deficit of several million pounds. It sounded shocking.
It was all the more memorable because he pronounced it deficit. I looked it up
in the dictionary. I’ve just done so again. It says, not at the beginning very
clearly, "amount by which a thing is too small" and then "excess of liabilities
over assets", finally "deficit spending – the spending of money of funds raised
by borrowing, not by taxation".

Well, that’s what the United States has been doing in part ever since the early
'30s and mainly in the past ten years. And at least two generations are so used
to it as a regular thing as the way government works that all the anxieties of
all the bankers, all the salty eloquence of all the senators and congressmen
are failing to alarm the public.

The deficit in the past two or three years has become a monotonous nuisance of
a word like "poverty", "the flu", "the in-laws", something it would be nice to
do something about but something that is as incurable as a common cold. Every
other night we hear and see greatly concerned men wring their hands and protest
and warn and prophecy doom for the country and the Western world.

Nobody has been able to dramatise the problem accurately and vividly enough to
make people see the shape and size of the predicted disaster but this week one
journalist came as close as anybody I have heard or read. He is one of the best
informed, most literate, sharpest of America’s journalists. He writes twice a
week for the New York Times a column and is, of course, happily syndicated
around the country. On Sundays he writes a brilliantly-informed and funny
column on our language, on the latest twists and turns and idioms and
monstrosities of it. His name is William Safire.

On Thursday he attacked, as scores have done before him, the problem, the peril
of America’s growing deficit. Ramsay MacDonald’s piddling deficit of a few
million pounds would not pay the interest due on America’s debt for one
morning. Let’s go back a little, or let’s say when Jimmy Carter came to the
presidency, the deficit was just over $40,040 million. At the end of his term
in 1980, the country was in the red to the tune of £250 billion. In President
Reagan’s first term the debt piled up to $750 billion. The second Reagan
administration, his own men, project another 300 billion of debt, what Mr
Safire calls a “design for doom”.

By 1990 the revenue as brought in by taxes will fall short of the outlays by
well over 200 billion. Since the yearly deficit is already over 200 billion it
means that during this second term the government will have to borrow about 330
billion. That is the optimistic estimate based on the presumption that the
present prosperity will go smoothly along. Mr Safire asks but what if there’s a
slump along the way or a rolling readjustment or a crabwise movement, or some
other euphemism for a recession.

When that happens, and it is going to happen, growth will stop, revenues will
plunge, costs of welfare will increase and the deficit will mushroom even more.
For the first time Mr Safire believes the United States will have no fiscal
weapon to help stimulate its way out of the next recession. He guesses that the
government will then turn to Mr Volcker, the chairman of the Federal Reserve
and ask for money, pump up the money supply.

Of course the Fed will do it and then Mr Safire paints a quick picture of what
this will do to the American people. First – an inflation the likes of which we
have never seen. Social security will go bust and if there is still that
trillion-dollar debt, a thousand billions, those in their late fifties today
will be impoverished by inflation at retirement while today’s teenagers will be
crushed by a huge tax bill when they enter the workforce.

The Democrats, of course, blame this staggering but climbing deficit on Mr
Reagan and his policy of cutting taxes to which Mr Safire politely replies,
“Baloney!” Ever-rising taxes were suffocating initiative and needed to be cut
back, but there are conservative Republicans like Mr Safire who don’t agree
with him. One of them, who has risen from voluntary retirement this week, is
the former senator Howard Baker, the tiny, tenacious senator from Tennessee who
came to national exposure and instant fame during the Senate committee’s
hearings on the Watergate mess.

Senator Baker retired from the Senate last year but not just to brood and
cultivate his garden, rather to cultivate his grass roots and grow a national
constituency for a run up to presidency in 1988. Mr Baker says the president is
wrong to keep on saying “New taxes over my dead body”. Baker called the
tax-cutting policy “a riverboat gamble” and he doubts it is going to pay off.
In any case, he thinks there will have to be a tax increase soon and he thinks
an astonishing thought, coming from a Republican, that Senator Mondale –
remember him? – was right to run his campaign for the Democrats on a tax
increase.

Well, meanwhile the president has defied his own Republican senators and
rejected their plan for a budget which requires and oil import fee and other
taxes. “No taxes” says the president and his loyal lieutenants in the Senate,
most of all his leader Senator Dole, feel he has betrayed them. Senator Dole
said this week, “We’re going to have chaos in September and October on the debt
ceiling” and Mr Safire ends his grim prophecy with the sentence, “The
president, by embracing his policy of masterly inactivity now, by keeping all
his demagogic pre-election promises, stands at the bridge smiling into the fog
as we head towards his trillion dollar iceberg."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP