Clinton's veto - 10 October 1997

I know that the witching hour is, theoretically, midnight when witches and
other dark and paltering spirits appear.

But maybe, because of the association with spirits in our and many other
American households, the witching hour coincides with the near approach of
sunset but always with the tinkle of ice and the appearance of spirits which do
cheer, but we hope not inebriate.

According to practically a lifetime’s routine, and because I work at home, my
wife and I make a point of not seeing much of each other by day. She’s off
about her business, which I ought quickly to add is the business of maintaining
the household, saving us from dirt, decay and famine; and I go about mine.

As the witching hour strikes, I call her with the magic words,
“Huntley-Brinkley time.” And so it used to be 30-odd years ago – a team of news
anchor commentators on the network we preferred. Huntley is long dead and David
Brinkley has just retired at the age of 75. But Huntley-Brinkley is still a
rallying call, as unmistakeable and rousing as Donner and Blitzen, or (at this
fateful time of the baseball season) "Play ball!".

Anyway it’s news time; and though my habits are nothing like as meticulous as I
gather a professional journalist’s ought to be, I do take out a lined pad and a
pen and during the next half-hour or so jot down a note or two, hoping that
some word or phrase will suggest a topic for these talks.

Occasionally, as now, I look back to my pad and find a note that is cryptic to
say the least. For instance, our menu for the week, it says here, is eggs, pork
and breasts. To me, the headline of the week was the simple, stark one, "Eggs
are back".

Let’s begin with pork. Last Monday, President Clinton signed a bill that
Congress passed recently – a military appropriations bill, the final bill; that
is the one that spells out how the money is to be spent and who gets how much
for what.

Well in anything as huge and comprehensive as a bill aimed at defending the
country, there can hardly be a senator or a congressman or woman who can’t
claim or dream up some necessary work or construction to be done in their own
district. So military bills especially are stuffed with amendments that simply
bow to the needs, or (if they’re in the president’s party) the demands of a
congressman, a senator, to do something for the home folks.

Most often, the attached amendments have little or nothing to do with the main
bill. Example: a bill, a very serious national issue, a bill to sanction
abortion with the parents’ permission. A man from a mountain state took note
that a famous band leader born in his state had just died, so he put in the
Abortion Bill an amendment to spend $50,000 as a museum to commemorate the band
leader. If this man had had enough clout, power, in the Congress, he might have
stopped the main bill from ever getting passed.

But, unlike most worthy, unworthy and ridiculous amendments added for the home
folks, the word of this one got out. It was widely ridiculed by the public and
the infuriated congressman had to withdraw it.

The most famous regular bill that attracts local amendments as a dog attracts
fleas is the Rivers and Harbours Bill, which, as you might guess, just
magnetises the attention of every congressman whose constituents would like a
new highway, a dam, a bridge, a pier, a new paved right-of-way. The
construction business is the everlasting, bottomless pork barrel.

There, I’ve used the word about the custom, the barnacle that waves down and
stifles practically every bill that comes up. For generations, "pork" has been
the word for funds added to a bill to use for a local project.

The image of a pork barrel may seem odd until you learn about its derivation.
In the years before the Civil War, plantation owners would, on special days, as
a bonus to their normal diet, distribute slabs of salt pork to the slaves. The
connection with the hunger of a congressman for a slab of local pork is obvious
and has been used for well over a hundred years. Of course the successful claim
of some powerful senator to get his slab at all costs can (and does) often
bring down a serious bill.

One commentator wrote 80 years ago, ‘In their stampede to get their local
appropriations into the big bill, congressmen behaved like former slaves
rushing up on the pork barrel." And only 40 years ago, a famous and
disillusioned old senator from Illinois wrote, "As they win the battle for
their special expenditures, they lose the war for the general economy. They’re
like drunkards who shout for temperance in the intervals between cocktails."

I’m afraid that in a country that’s a continent in which congressmen are
elected for two years only, during which they’d better step lively and get some
visible lump of pork for their people if they want to be re-elected, in such a
country under such a system the prospect for ever abolishing the custom is
invisible.

But what last Monday came flashing in from the horizon was a new weapon that
might at least deter, or defeat, the usual wealth of nuisance or pork
amendments.

For the first time in history, a president had been given the power by
Congress, a privilege that every president since Franklin Roosevelt has been
begging for – the power to delete from a bill items he deems unnecessary to the
main purpose. Till now, if the president very much wants a bill passed, say on
maternity home leave, he’s been powerless to kill added items – a race track
for a county in Florida, a fishing licence for a river, and $20,000 for a
school basketball court.

Now he has the power of what’s called the line-item veto – literally the power
to delete individual items. And from that huge military construction law, he
struck out 38 items worth $287 million dollars. This district wanted a new air
force paint shop in Texas, another one a new aerial gunnery. Denied. On and on
through another 36 items, he thought not absolutely necessary to the bill.

It’ll be interesting, to put it mildly, to see how the new power goes down in
the long run. Of course congressmen who sponsored items left in were joyful.
Ones who found theirs were out were furious and, if they’re of the president’s
party, are likely to warn him that his man is going to lose next time in that
district.

Of course both the joy and the fury could be anticipated and Mr Clinton knew
what was good for him. He left intact $36 million dollars worth of projects
requested by Mr Trent Lott, the Republicans’ Leader in the Senate.

Now the second note says "breasts", and I hope I can offer at least a consoling
note. First, let me say that after 20 years of scare stories and million-dollar
lawsuits still pending, the National Institutes of Health have put out a final
conclusion that silicon implants alone do no harm.

The main story should do much to relieve the anxiety of millions of women,
especially the young, about breast cancer; an anxiety which in this country has
practically been organised into a national crusade, complaining that research
lags far behind and that the government doesn’t hand out enough money.

This panic springs from a basic anxiety just reported in two national polls,
which is that more than half of all American women believe that breast cancer
is the most life-threatening of all the diseases that can afflict them. It is
positively not so. Put the surveys that reveal this massive anxiety against the
actual mortal statistics, and this is what you find. The overall count for
causes of death among American women is as follows: from heart disease, 30%;
from breast cancer, 3%.

One figure quoted far and wide is that one woman in eight has the risk. That’s
true, but only women over the age of 85. A happier, contrasting truth is that
up to the age of 35, the risk of breast cancer is one in 622. The one cancer
that does cause many more deaths among women is lung cancer, at a rate that’s
been going up ever since 50, 60 years ago, women caught up with men in the
cigarette habit.

Finally, the note picked up from a riveting headline, the title over a piece
reporting an international conference that was held last week in Bethesda,
Maryland. The headline, "Eggs are back – maligned yoke, benign white and all".

Since the Second World War, the average consumption of eggs in the United
States is less than half what it was, all because in the 1950s the dread
bogeyman crept into the language and the kitchen: cholesterol. To people who
knew only that egg yolks were a rich source of it, the yolk became a condemned
creature.

Now these brooding scientists, concerned about the rising deficiency of – wait
for it – omega-3 in most diets, are telling us that the egg, the whole egg is
just what’s called for, especially when the chick is allowed to graze freely
and pick up this precious fatty acid, omega-3, from wild greens.

In a resounding final note, the conference took the curse again of the egg yolk
by declaring that omega-3 can reduce the risk of heart disease, arthritis, high
blood pressure, tumour growth and diabetes. Well worth weighing against the
threat of a little gain in that old devil cholesterol.

I had a friend in San Francisco who made up our Sunday foursome, which started
always with a hearty breakfast. Some time in the late 1950s, he stopped coming
to breakfast; he stayed home and made himself an all-white omelette. A kind of
frost settled on the foursome.

I hope to see him back some Sunday, quoting Oscar Wilde but with a twist, “An
egg," said Wilde, "is always an adventure.” And a healthy one too.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP