Nude dancing in Indiana - 28 June 1991

Well school is out, which means school both public and private and most
universities and college and the Supreme Court of the United States, which
ended its 1991 term and headed for its summer recess offering us a three-month
holiday from the daily recognition of how large a part the court plays in the
everyday life of Americans. It's something that begins to strike visitors only
if they've lived here through a winter and a spring and become constantly
surprised to discover that the men who wrote the Constitution 200 years ago,
are consulted by the nine justices unceasingly to decide whether an insurance
company can own stock in an undertakers, whether doctors can advertise, whether
a nightclub stripper must or need not wear a G-string to protect her free
speech rights under the Constitution.

Well we'll come to the fascinating variety of the judgements handed down in the
week before the court closed up shop, but for the moment I must say that surely
the most disheartening news of the week was that Saddam Hussein had managed to
hide from the United Nations inspectors at least 10 places, sites where nuclear
research is underway. And, according to American intelligence, some of these
undiscovered sites are devoted to isolating or as they say separating out
uranium fit for making weapons. It's especially disheartening because, way back
there last summer, many people especially in the United States and Britain felt
that all other considerations aside, Saddam had to be stopped by somebody as we
all became shockingly aware that he could have, experts divided on saying in
two years, in one year, in six months, could have a nuclear weapon.

All right now, the curious impressive always visible American phenomenon of the
Supreme Court. From now, I'll just say the Supreme Court instead of the United
States Supreme Court. Every state has in its judicial system, a supreme court,
which is usually the last stop before a final appeal to the United States
Supreme Court when people, plaintiffs, people with a grievance feel that some
single right of there's under the Constitution has not been respected, first by
a trial court, then by the succeeding courts of appeal in their own state then
they can go on to the United States Supreme Court. And remember, it is not a
trial court, it doesn't convict or free anybody, it can only say that in
convicting somebody of something, the other courts did or did not violate the
rights of an individual as they are spelled out in the Constitution.

Just to stress how odd the Supreme Court's function is to many parliamentary
countries, for instance, and to explain in a minute why Americans seem to go on
and on about this right and that right, let me read a letter to an American
magazine I read this week from an Englishman, perhaps not, but anyway living in
my native city of Manchester. He wrote in response to an article in which an
English political commentator had said that life in the United Kingdom was
fairer before Mrs Thatcher came to power and that if in the next election,
Labour came back, there would be, quote, "a rebirth of social democracy".

Now the Manchester man was not defending either the Conservatives or the
Labourites, he was pointing out certain deficiencies in social legislation,
which he wrote were constant and he suggested unlikely to change whoever
occupies 10 Downing Street. Anyway, his points are not I believe constantly
debated in the House of Commons.

This is what he wrote. "Under either party then as now, there were no basic
rights to protect freedom of speech and expression, protection against
self-incrimination as in the American Fifth Amendment is not a citizen's right,
there's nothing to protect the individual from discrimination on the basis of
age or sexual orientation and only puny legislation on sex discrimination,
indeed nothing to protect even an individual's citizenship. Consumer and
environmental protection legislation in England then as now resembles that of
the United States in the late 1950s for instance, there are today no British
emission standards for cars most of which use leaded petrol and pharmaceutical
products do not list ingredients or warnings."

I guess after all that this man must be an American because what he regards as
gross deficiencies in the citizens rights simply don't occur to people in most
countries, but they are the whole business of the Supreme Court. Let's just
look at one or two of the opinions the court handed down in the last week of
its session. In all the court ruled during this past term on 125 appeals and if
you were to flip through them, you'd be staggered and often amused at the
enormous variety of the subject matter and wonder unless you've been watching
the court for a very long time, how all these dull or weird and wonderful and
sombre and trivial cases can all be fitted into usually one phrase that was set
down in a sentence 200 years ago.

Last week, the court finally settled a case, which has been being argued with
much bad blood for seven years. It was about a a magazine article written by a
woman who wrote a very unflattering piece a profile about a male psychoanalyst
in which she was accused of having made up quotations from the man, which he
maintained were damaging and which he never said. Well, the court accepted that
the writer put between quotation marks, words and phrases that he didn't
actually say, but which paraphrased what she thought he meant. His appeal was
to the First Amendment's protection of freedom of speech, which has been
extended in recent years to the freedom of expression by way of rock music –
some pretty obscene lyrics were excused and burning the flag was forgiven as a
right under the First Amendment on old Justice Holmes's principle that freedom
of speech means freedom for the speech we loathe.

Well the Court decided by seven to two that even if you only approximately
quote a person and what you quote is unflattering to him or her, it's not
libellous unless you can be proved to have done it with actual malice, which is
always fiendishly hard to prove. This majority decision was applauded by
publishers and some writers I'd imagine by the types that do a lot of
interviewing, other people like me who are subject to being interviewed will no
doubt make a point of seeing that from now on, the interviewer carries a tape
recorder.

Much of the most far-reaching serious ruling and about to be furiously debated
first in Congress and then in every hospital clinic maybe every family
household in the United States was the court's decision to forbid health
clinics that receive federal funds to discuss abortion with patients coming in
for advice. A formula was suggested that every employee of such clinics, simply
say, "I'm sorry that is an option of family planning I'm not allowed to
discuss".

The whole Pro Choice versus Right to Life debate, which has been raging here
through two decades, goes back to the 14th Amendment's guarantee to any person
of the equal protection of the laws, and the question is, when does the embryo
turn into a person and, if you kill that person, are you not denying it equal
protection? The Right to Life response is "once a woman becomes pregnant, the
only advice a government supported clinic should give is how best to support
that life not destroy it" and the Pro Choice response "Isn't it ironic that the
court won't pay for clinics that counsel abortion, but will pay for babies born
addicted, for increased welfare costs and, possibly, incarceration for unwanted
children who grow up with antisocial attitudes".

I think perhaps the most historic decision of the past term centres on or
should we say throws a spotlight on that nude dancer I talked about, at the
Kitty Kat Lounge in South Bend, Indiana. She was charged way back in the early
1980s. Cases can take as long as Esther Summerson in Bleak House to come to the
top. Well, Indiana had a law forbidden nude dancing in public bars. The owner
of the now famous Kitty Kat Lounge protested that the law was unconstitutional
because it gagged the good old First Amendment's protection of free speech. He
lost in a district court, but last year a federal court of appeals voted to
uphold him under the Constitution. The Indiana state prosecutor soldiered on to
the US Supreme Court and the judgement was decided as so many these days are by
one vote, five to four. The four dissenters said that nude dancing is an
expressive activity entitled to the full First Amendment Protection, but the
majority through the Chief Justice said "sure nude dancing is a form of
expression and conveys erotic and sensual ideas" but what Indiana seeks to
prevent is public nudity, which might generate social disorder in, they
implied, those surroundings.

Consequently, the State of Indiana was not violating the First Amendment by
requiring the nude dancers to wear, quote, "pasties and a G-string". Now, it's
easy to find in a very knotty and fine-spun arguments and counter arguments of
the justices calls for hilarity and mirth. Nevertheless, after at least two
decades of ducking the social problem of obscenity, which all the Western
courts have done, the United States Supreme Court has for the first time
suggested that maybe in the public exhibition of male and female genitals there
ought to be a limit imposed by the law. A very daring decision in this
unbuttoned age.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP