Stress related illness - 12 July 1991

It was said long ago and it's been said many times since, that we'd better look
to America because, whether we like it or not, we see there our likely future.
Now today that sounds like a very vague piece of advice and perhaps to some
countries irrelevant. But coined, I believe shortly after the end of the Second
World War, what it was mostly about was a vision of the ways, the methods, the
techniques by which a bombed and badly damaged Europe would begin to restore
the fabric of European life as Dean Acheson put it, in urging the Senate to
pass the Marshall Plan. In short to learn, to copy American machinery, factory
construction, salesmanship, labour management relations, and the introduction
of every gadget from trouser zippers to frozen foods.

Well it's been a long, long time since Europeans were eager to acquire or even
pronounce the phrase, American know-how. The last time I heard it fall from
anyone's lips was oh, maybe 10 years ago or whenever it was that the
poker-faced Czech, Ivan Lendl appeared on the tennis scene, in particular
appeared in New York for the playing of the American national championships on
their brand new tennis centre at Flushing Meadows – not, come to think of it,
ill named since it was a large body of water rambling into the upper reaches of
the city from Long Island Sound and receiving a lot of the waste products from
the shoreline towns.

Several things were remarkable about this new tennis centre, the old one was in
a quiet and leafy suburb, the new one was planted bang next to LaGuardia
airport, now it's not strictly true that the great centre court was carefully
placed on the tarmac, but it is under the glide path of the incoming and
outgoing jets and the tense moments in any match the rolling thunderous din is
so awful that the players complain they cannot hear the ball and the spectators
can't hear the obscenities of John McEnroe.

Another remarkable feature of the place is a huge rectangle of a monolith, if
that's possible, which contains a battery of lights for night play and the
details of the score. This great high, flat block is so placed that about 6pm
in late August, early September when the championships are held, when the sun
begins to go over, it throws a great triangular shadow of the block across part
of the centre court, thus adding a hazard that previous tennis architects had
never thought of. Let's admit it, some famous tennis players especially when
they're losing, look on the United States national tennis centre as a foretaste
or pre vision of hell. And when Ivan Lendl was asked what he thought of the
placement of a tennis court on a tarmac and the looming shadow of the
scoreboard, he said, "I think it's what they call American know-how".

Well, I don't believe we've heard the phrase since, it tiptoed out of the
language once, 20,30 years ago, once Italian shoes, women's shoes began to put
a crimp in the Massachusetts monopoly, once the defeated Germans came through
with their cameras and calculators, and when 30 years ago now the Japanese
began to outshine us and overwhelm us with their cars and television sets and
tape recorders, relentlessly on and on until just when I was thinking of
yielding and buying a compact disc player, an expert in New York says, stop,
don't. Next year the Japs are putting out a player the size of a cigarette
package taking discs or chips I don't know, the size of a thumbnail that
contain all nine of Beethoven's symphonies. I think I'll just play the piano.
American know how if it means anything today must mean the manufacture and
retailing of junk food, and I was going to say smart bombs and such till I
remembered that 16 of the vital, not vital, on the contrary, death dealing
weapons used in the Gulf War had essential components of Japanese manufacture.

What brought on this meditation was the recognition on this present visit to
London of how completely by now the ways of life in working, playing, eating,
shopping, the whole routine of what my wife calls maintenance, how completely
it has been Americanised. This is not a blindingly novel remark, it's been made
grudgingly or protestingly by Englishmen since at least the middle of the 18th
century. But what struck me more vividly this time than at any time since the
War, that's the Second World War, was that so many material things,
institutions that were new to me on my first visit to America which is coming
up 60 years now, have been taken in painlessly. I remember in October 1932
seeing my first parking meter, in Newhaven Connecticut, I had no idea what it
was for, I thought it very ugly which may be millions of Britons 20 years later
thought before they adopted it. The same with teabags, paper towels, same later
on with the supermarket and everything in it. However, on this trip it was not
the continuing take over of American objects, conveniences, tastes, language,
it was – how shall I put it – the same concern throughout the country over
social issues that I had assumed were not exclusively perhaps but typically and
topically American. Let me give you an example right away.

One of the preoccupations of American psychologists has resulted in the past
year or two of much talk and writing about an affliction which affects millions
of people, and now the setting up of clinics, advisory centres, television
programmes, to help us all cure it. You know what it is, it's called SRI, don't
confuse it with MRI, that's a magnetic resonance imager, which can discover all
sorts of oddities about your insides at fabulous expense. No sirree, SRI is
stress related illness. The stress comes on, either when you get up and face
the prospect of work or when you get home, dog-tired from work, again. Huge
studies of this ailment have been made over the past few years, and the
conclusion is that work is bad for you. I think the battle song of these
sufferers ought to be, Irving Berlin's How I Hate to Get Up in the Morning.

Not long before I left New York, I read dead solemn stuff about exercises,
pills, treatment or, as we love to say, therapy for curing this distressing
condition. Nobody has yet suggested abolishing work but, for a fee, there are
stress doctors willing to help you evade, soften or forget it. Now I certainly
thought this is one piece of psychological mumbo jumbo that good old sensible
Britons will not be going into. Not so, a report out this week repeating,
confirming, lamenting this same affliction and suggesting that British people
who are chronically tired or bored, can now get treatment under the NHS for
SRI.

Those of you who listen more than occasionally to these talks must surely be
aware by now of the American obsession with cholesterol, saturated and
unsaturated fats, the perils of salt, sugar, milk, eggs, meat, cakes and the
pure therapeutic joys of plain yoghurt or yoghurt, cottage cheese, coleslaw,
lemon grass, fresh fruits, veggies. Only I think a month or two ago I earnestly
explained why Americans night and day weigh and watch and avoid this food and
that. I believe I quoted the best authority on the subject the American girl
sorry, woman, person, who said, right on the first page of her book, that you
couldn't understand why Americans were so obsessed with weight and diet, until
you realise that quote "in American death is optional". It's true, deep down,
even the mocking Americans sneakily believe that if they play it right, they
can live to be 150.

Now I come to England, and bless my lemon grass, there's a government committee
on medical aspects of food policy, saying the same thing, urging people to cut
out what in substance, that's to say in chemical composition are the staples of
the British diet. And wagging the same American warning finger, coronary,
unfortunately it can be truly shown, that Britain is just about at the top of
the industrialised or developed – used to say civilised – countries, when it
comes to heart attacks.

I notice one or two places where government, British government is finally
moving in to do in the public interest what the United States did years ago.
Health warnings on cigarettes, it says here, are to be compulsory, I may have
read that wrong, I thought they'd been compulsory in Britain as in the United
States for years and years. Ours, thanks to a missionary surgeon general who is
the chief government medical officer, ours get more and more lurid and precise,
mentioning lung cancer, emphysema, peril to unborn children, imminent heart
attacks, and they've certainly had their effect. But the tobacco companies are
unruffled they've simply stepped up their advertising and their sales among the
innocent populations of the Third, the under-developed, and the Asian worlds.

Another encouraging item says the British food industry will be encouraged to
provide more explicit food labelling. Although, this is the shocker,
legislation is unlikely. Why? Finally there's one bit of Americana that you
could well import, it is a word, one word which neatly replaces 10 English
words. Wimbledon I read is going to have to face the problem of guaranteeing,
here it comes, substitute tickets in the event of rain washing out play. In
America, they're called, rain checks.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP