President Johnson's inauguration, 1965 - 17 January 1965

Good evening, there are times when certain well-worn words in the language take
on the nobility, instead of merely the weariness, of old age.

This weekend has been such a time; the word vigil has been written and spoken
more than any other and nobody, not even the most desperate far-out satirist
seeking the most tasteless possible theme has mocked it; even the most hack
newspaper dispatches have seen to accommodate themselves to the grandeur of the
man they were writing about.

The first word, was of course, the most dramatic and it made its way into
ordinary occasions like going in a shop, catching an aeroplane, that resist
usually all awareness of any news that is not a catastrophe. I first heard it
after whisking along the freeway through a blizzard on the way to the Chicago
airport. We had to wait fifteen minutes or so while the plane was being de-iced
but when we were airborne, and the pilot greeted us on the intercom, and told
us the route and the flying time, he came crackling on a minute or two later to
announce and regret the news of Sir Winston’s stroke.

I don’t suppose there is another living man, save only the President to the
United States who would cause a pilot to do this. There is no tradition of
announcing news over airplane public address systems, so it’s not a question of
a pilot looking over some startling event and wondering if its weighty or
pressing enough to pass on.

This pilot got it on his radio from the control tower he happened to be in
touch with, and I don’t suppose he hesitated for a moment. He didn’t have to
ask himself about the unique position that Winston Churchill holds in the minds
and affections of Americans, he knew it.

Americans very rarely, I have noticed, bring up an hereditary fact with which
Sir Winston himself has had a lot of waggish fun, the fact of his being – as I
think it was John Mason Brown called him – half American, and wholly British.
He is, simply, Churchill, the lord and master of us all, the first and
commanding citizen, of that Atlantic community that never really quite comes
into being as a political family.

But whether the family is there, or not, its head is there, and that he was
still there, with his frail back to the wall, after 48 hours against an enemy
that topples the young and the middle aged, was somehow typical and quietly
satisfying, a small but good note and sounded far from our northern snowstorms
and far from the diamond brightness of New York today, where a bristling sun
made the snow's reflection stab the eyeballs.

Down on the Pedernales River in the central Texan plain, President Johnson
stood up before a press conference. Every president bends the institution of
the press conference to suit his personality, and there are few things more
dependable in Lyndon Johnson than the undependability of his news conferences.

These are men whose most constant pleasure is keeping the smartest people
guessing. Nothing about the Democratic convention last year delighted him more
than prodding Hubert Humphrey, literally poking him in the ribs, after the last
minute of the last hour, and asking him if he thought he was going to be the
choice, that's to say President Johnson’s choice, of a successor.

Saturday used to be the dullest, the emptiest, day around the White House and I
mean the White House now, in the technical sense of the place wherever the
president is. But in this administration the poor old White House press corps,
though it might play hooky on some other day, is always on the jump on
Saturdays.

Because after a light lunch, the president stretched and says, "Well how about
a press conference". And if you are not within earshot you don’t make it in
time. He did this yesterday, and in the middle of it a reporter said "Mr
President, Prime Minister Churchill, as everyone knows, is gravely ill, and..."
the president cut him off with "I am praying for his recovery, and hope very
much that his condition will improve."

The reporter went on "erm, Mr President, in the event of his death..". The
president frowned, and cut him off in a split second by saying, "I will stand
on the statement I made, I can think of nothing crueller, than going into
something in the event of...". The next question retreated fast and to
south-east Asia.

Mr Johnson was down on his ranch resting up for the great day next Wednesday
when he will have his first inauguration as president. Not to be morbid about
it, it will, of course, be the second time that he has taken the oath. And we
won’t dwell on the jarring contrast between next Wednesday’s splendour –
Washington with its vastly wide avenues and files of soaring tree trunks is
made for parades and processions – and the desperate moment in the plain of
Dallas, standing between his wife and Mrs Kennedy in her stained dress, and
holding up his hand and saying "So help me God".

In spite of the general troubles of the word around us, there is no particular
horror that, so far, seems to stand in the way of a great state occasion next
Wednesday, for the inauguration of a president is about as ceremonial an
occasion as a republic allows itself. But since this is the oldest continuing
republic, the inauguration has its traditions, if only traditions of change.

George Washington had a peculiar distaste which he shared, so far as I know,
with only one other president, he had President Kennedy’s dislike of being
touched, back-slapped and embraced. George Washington had it in an extreme
form, he actually declined handshakes, and when he became president he
rationalised it by saying that the president ought to stand apart from other
men.

So, at his inauguration, he rode apart in a state carriage with outriders as
his visible protectors. And when he took the oath he bowed and moved away from
his advisors and brother officers. This caused one choleric New Yorker to fear,
as he put it, "that we have exchanged George the third for George the first."
But any suggestion that the United States had got itself simply an elected
monarch was dissipated by Washington's succeeding wisdom and modesty.

I suppose that modesty enjoyed its finest hour with the inauguration of Thomas
Jefferson, who though he enjoyed chamber concerts and stately dances and
elegant surroundings, felt that the minuet should be restricted to the
ballroom. A man of the simplest tastes, he got to complain of the rigours of
presidential protocol, especially the regularity with which ambassadors and
congressmen interrupted his reading of Locke and Rousseau and his playing of
the fiddle.

He solved this irritation by simply appearing in whatever he happened to be
wearing when they arrived, usually a wigless head and carpet slippers. The
inauguration of Jefferson is still the model, or perhaps the sentimental
prototype, of the classic presidential inauguration. No visible splendour: he
abolished the state carriage, the parade and the outriders, he could not of
course, deny other officials their flourish of trumpets, a parade of artillery,
and riflemen appeared after breakfast at the new president's boarding house and
let off a couple of cannons.

At noon Jefferson came out, dressed as simply as ever and walked alongside the
secretaries of the navy and the treasury and a small, ragged company of
ordinary people and went up to the Capitol. It must have been no more formal
than Mr Truman’s morning walks along Pennsylvania Avenue.

The Maryland artillery, the only people in uniform, dragged those cannon along
to the north wing of the Capitol building which was the only part completed in
March 1801. They fired the cannon again and Jefferson went inside and took out
his notes and said what he had to say in a flat, squeaky, inaudible voice –
quite unlike that of Charlton Heston, who has been called on (all six feet four
of him), to represent in the movies the whispy, small redhead known to history
as Thomas Jefferson. Jefferson then went back again, on foot, to his boarding
house, where in the evening he came into a full dining room. Nobody bothered to
get up, except a lady who now shimmers in immortality in the history of
Kentucky.

She was the wife of Senator John Brown of that gallant state, and she rose to
ask the new president to take her place, which was the central one, and close
to the fire. He declined with a small bow, and went down to his usual seat at
the end of the room.

Well, as Duke Ellington said, there have been some changes made. President
Johnson is a pretty simple man too. He has abolished the top hat that his
predecessor wore, but he would thought to be out of his mind, if he wanted to
walk to the Capitol, to the huge reviewing stand and its thousands of flanking
seats outside. If he attempted it scores of secret service men would stop him.

He is now not only the prisoner of his protective detail, he is the star of a
television spectacular that would be seen by about 60 or 70 or more millions
and which, therefore, the networks believe should be a showy and magnificent as
if they had written the script. After all, if we announce the birth of a new
cigarette with a burst of trumpets, what can we bring by way of showmanship to
a presidential inauguration? The development of TV and its use as an impressive
public medium has turned the inauguration from a Washington ceremony into a
restrained national circus.

When an administration changes hands the outgoing president receives the
incoming man on the steps of the White House – after the record blizzard of 19
January 1961, President Eisenhower took Mr and Mrs. Kennedy aside and give them
soup and hot coffee – and then the two men get into the first open car and
drive at the head of a motorcade to the Capitol.

The niceties of precedence now take up volumes in the books of the office of
the chief of protocol, having to do with what order in the procession and what
seniority of seating at the site shall be assigned to the Cabinet, or Supreme
Court, the diplomatic corps, the military, the governors, the senators, the
congressmen and all their ladies.

The automobiles these days are long and sleek, the crowds are huge and well
roped in. The parade after the inaugural address in the open air takes hours
and hours and goes into the twilight and the night, and includes floats from
every state that applauds the election of the new president and every state
that hopes to cash in on his regime.

It includes also batteries from the army, navy, air force, marine corps and
always something particularly touching to the president standing there this
time inside a bullet-proof glass enclosure. Last time, it was the survivors of
the PT-109 – Lieutenant John F Kennedy’s boat that was rammed and sliced by a
Japanese destroyer. This time no doubt, it will be something large and gaudy
and good natured from, where else, but the great state of Texas.

It will be a happy time for all, except for the Republicans who know better
than our daily historians that Lyndon B Johnson did not serve as much as two
years of his predecessor's term and so is constitutionally eligible not only
for this first independent term, but for another one. There could be eight more
years of LBJ.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP