Baseball and politics in 1988 - 21 October 1988

There’s an old American saying that nobody pays attention to politics until the
World Series, the baseball championship, is over.

And just before the first game of this series, a famous player was interviewed
in the dugout, and asked how he felt about the presidential race. And he said,
"What race?" Then, I am sorry to say, caught himself and grinned, "Oh that
race".

Still, it's true that if there is one American institution that unites
Americans more honestly than the presidency, it's baseball, and most of all
during the ten days or so it can take to separate and crown, in the best of
seven games, the champions from all the rest.

It used to be not too many years ago that the world series always took place in
the first week of October but that was before they divided off the two leagues,
the national league and the American, into two divisions, each league having an
eastern and a western division.

Now the teams that come out at the top of each division in the two leagues have
a preliminary series. They too play, if need be, seven games so as to establish
the champion of each league, and then the World Series, begins. So now it’s all
this in the latter half of October, which can produce shivery nights, sometimes
in the east, but this year, the two emerging champs were both western teams,
the Los Angeles Dodgers and the Athletics from Oakland, which lies just across
the bay from San Francisco.

So, the windbreakers came off, and the smudge smears below the eyes, against
the sun, came on. This splitting of the two leagues was rationalised in various
dubious ways by the owners of the baseball teams, it was, however, like many
another drastic reform in other sports, engineered by the television networks,
and their clients, the advertisers.

Once they realised, that two World Series, so to speak, a preliminary play-off
series and then the thing itself would draw the same huge television audiences,
a lovely feeling came over them – the recognition that they could double their
advertising revenue. And sure, the players in both series would double their
take.

The cost of a 30-second commercial between innings of World Series, is about
$340,000. Somebody should do a study, it would make an absorbing magazine piece
or even a TV documentary, about the way various businesses have had to adjust
their plans to the fact that a whopping nationwide audience, something like 50
million Americans, would be hooked on the televised games, throughout most of
October.

The most obvious cases of enforced adjustment are normal television producers
and their sponsors, who had thought to launch a new sitcom, a new drama, a new
history of the Second World War. The problem is that until four games have been
played, you never know when the series will be over. It can run to only four
games, or five or six or seven. And, accordingly, you never know which nights
the games will go on after the opening.

Among the concerned outsiders few have been so nagged by anxiety as Mr Bush and
Mr Dukakis. A month or two ago, they and their campaign managers, got together
with the commissioner of baseball – a figure rather more revered in American
society than the chief justice of the United States.

They had several meetings and, what with having to check back with network
presidents and advertising executives and the presidents of both baseball
leagues, the meetings took on the complexity and the weariness of an
American-Soviet summit. The question at issue was simply when to hold the
Bush-Dukakis debates, and the Benson-Quayle debate. Each candidate has his own
reasons for wanting four debates, or three, or none.

When they agreed on three, and the interval between them, they saw that two at
least would fall during the league play-offs. After a dizzy joust with
calendars and figures and the comparative advertising revenue likely to be
reaped at different times of the day in the four different time zones, they
worked it out and one game was put back to noon, in the east, 9am in the west,
so that all the citizens could give their full attention in the evening to Bush
versus Dukakis.

Of course the campaign has gone on – it's supposed to be at full canter – while
this past week the country has been preoccupied with the Los Angeles Dodgers
versus the Oakland A’s, no way out of that.

But both candidates are sufficiently aware of the whole of the World Series on
American voters of all social intercut and ethnic species, that they have
gamely but rather pathetically introduced baseball metaphors into their pep
talks.

In the first game of the series, when the Oakland A's, the greatly favoured
team, had the game in the bag 4-3, who should emerge as an overnight hero but
one Kirk Gibson, who, two men out, slammed a two-run homer in the ninth inning,
the neck of doom, and put the Dodgers up one game.

Sure enough, next day Governor Dukakis, refusing to believe the polls and admit
that he was anywhere near down and out, made the psychological error of
admitting it by an analogy. He would, he said, amaze us all by pulling a Kirk
Gibson in the last inning.

Next day, good old George Bush, his wimpy image long gone and determined now to
reinforce his new image, as an all-American locker-room buddy, started chanting
at his rallies, "Our slogan from now on, is RBI". In baseball RBI signifies
Runs Batted In. But clever George had learned to pause after pronouncing those
electrifying initials, "Our slogan is RBI... Republicans Back In." Big cheers
and the waving of many little flags and big banners.

Do they need to do this? Well, that question in the minds of people who would
ask it implies that the candidates are stooping to show that they, too, share
the joys of the common people.

There is something in that, but their baseball quips also recognise that there
is probably no other interest outside bed, earning money and buying a house,
that so unites, every time, Americans of both sexes. I suppose that, between
the wars, cricket had something of the same hold in Britain.

Well, I remember one year "England facing defeat", was a London evening paper
headline, while tucked away in the bottom corner, was the movement of 100,000
of Hitler’s men, towards a neighbour's border. But, I don’t think, I may be
wrong, I don’t seem to remember that millions of British women cancel
everything, and lose themselves to the wireless and the Test match.

I had better say why I think baseball is the hypnotic game that it is. To the
stranger, and to many Americans who don’t really know the game, it's considered
slow and tedious. That delusion was shattered once for all with the coming of
television and the invention first of the zoom lens, and then the instant
replay.

Now, we can watch in close-up the signals before every pitch – the fielding
team's manager rubs his nose or tweaks his cap, or flexes an elbow, something
to tell the pitcher to spread the infield, say, and also advise what pitch to
use, the curve ball, the slider, the split knuckle, fast ball, the sinker. All
these through the air, that such patterns can be woven with a full toss. It's
not to be believed by an old cricketer until you have seen them replayed in
slow motion.

And then the pitcher's signal to the catcher and various yawns, foot tapping,
shrugs and whatnot, to indicate which fielder had better be on his toes. Then,
of course the players themselves, the incredible speed of the fielding and
accuracy of the throws to the bases, and the calculated but the marvellous
double player and much more, producing a game of long-drawn continuous
suspense, a game a subtle as chess, as droll and scoundrelly as poker, as
cunning as politics as physically aesthetic as an entirely new kind of ballet.

It is for this that during the past ten days the bars and lunch counters across
the nation have been packed in the evenings, and doormen in office and
apartment buildings sprout radios, farmers on their tractors in the mountains
and the desert, couch an ear to a transistor.

The most intellectual and the raciest of our conservative columnists, George
Will, had a piece the other day bemoaning the general attention given to drugs
and the Olympics as also to our daily concern with the presidential debates,
when all the while, a new national hero had flashed into the limelight with a
record unique in the history of baseball.

Orel Leonard Hershiser IV doesn’t quite have the ring of Babe Ruth,
nevertheless Orel Hershiser, a 30-year-old, had pitched 59 consecutive innings,
with never a run scored against him. Translate that to a bowler who should
never allow a run in, say, 20 consecutive innings. And in the present world
series, even at the end of only the second game, Hershiser became the first
pitcher in 64 years, to get three hits at bat, he is, an old man said to me who
has been writing about sports for 50 years, he is probably the best pitcher
that ever was, to the gasping joy of millions of every age and colour from
Maine to California, and Hawaii beyond the seas.

Not least to the delight of a very distinguished scholar, who from boyhood on,
has nurtured a holy ambition. Along the way he reached the foot of the
mountain, he became the president of Yale University, but next January he will
ascend to the peak – Mr A Bartlett Giamatti, will become the commissioner of
baseball.

Sixty years ago, an English author wrote a sentence which I think was shrewd
and true at the time, "America is bound or unified by baseball as England is
bound by the class system". Who wrote that? None other than the very
unathletic, the very ethereal, flower of Bloomsbury, Virginia Woolf.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP