Intervention in the Gulf and no new taxes - 26 October 1990

A picture, a photograph, in the paper, a giant of a man, probably you'd say at
first glance a Japanese sumo wrestler. But no, he's an American, a black man
and, surprisingly, a boxer, for he looks at least 30lbs too heavy even to
qualify as a heavyweight. But that's what he is.

A year ago, he was a journeyman boxer, known only to the small world of other
journeyman boxers, and to coaches, trainers, and the nondescript men who hang
around local gyms.

On Thursday night this hulking former unknown received, whatever happened, $24
million to defend nothing less than his World Heavyweight title, which he
picked up one cold night last February, in Tokyo, when the odds against his
beating the unbeatable Mike Tyson, were 40-1.

Looking at the Thursday morning picture of the new champ, James Buster Douglas,
I thought, I don't know if it's the last flicker of the American dream or the
last gasp of the 1980s.

Buster Douglas did seem today to be a symbol of an old American myth and of a
new one. The poor boy, rags-to-riches saga, and the peculiar myth of the 1980s,
more applicable though to young white men, the recent graduate of a business
school, snapped up by an investment firm at the ludicrous beginning salary of
$80,000 a year, who got into the habit of picking up the phone and taking an
order for zero coupon bonds that brought him in, right there, a $50,000
commission, so that with some healthy junk bond deals along the way, at the end
of the year, this youngster of the dizzy '80s earned, as he'd say, 1.8 mil. And
thought himself master of the universe.

Either way, the sure mark of the '80s, and a phenomenon that is on its way out,
was preposterous salaries for starting investment bankers and preposterous
prize money for athletes, for unbelievable purses for boxers down to scarcely
less believable prize money for skinny 14-year-old, 16-year-old girl tennis
players. These latter rewards have not yet passed but as the country – slides
is the popular word – slides into a recession, they surely will.

Certainly the junk bond business is dead and gone. And literally hundreds,
maybe thousands, of the masters of the universe in every big city of America
are selling their gorgeous German cars, cancelling their subscriptions to the
country club and looking around for a job.

Well, there's no need to prolong this search for symbols, something happened at
the end of this week that, more firmly, more glaringly, announced, as if by
presidential proclamation, the certain end of the 1980s and the passing of the
Reagan area of careless rapture.

President Bush was ready to sign a budget which raises taxes, including income
taxes. That gross act – on the president's part, surrender – reverses the whole
movement of Reagan's eight years and Bush's two years.

For 10 years, these two leaders carried a banner with the beautiful device, "No
new taxes!" Of course, we shouldn't forget that there were lots of new taxes
under President Reagan, but he called them painless things like "user fees" and
"revenue enhancements". And he did keep his promise to send the standard income
tax rate from 50% of earned income to 28% and he held it there.

Well, now the top rate is to go from 28 to 31% for couples earning $80,000 or
over. The minimum tax rate will go to 23 from 21%. There has always been a
regular personal exemption, a figure something like $5,000 a year deducted from
the taxable income of individuals. This will be gradually eliminated for people
earning $100,000 a year and eliminated altogether for incomes above $275,000.

What the Democrats failed to get the president to agree to was a super tax on
the very rich – very rich, these days, being defined as anyone who enjoys an
annual income of over $1 million.

This had been a sore point between the Democrats and Mr Bush. They'd been
squabbling about it for five months, because it strikes at an almost sacred
belief of Reagan economics – that the more you tax the rich, the less money
they'll have to invest in new factories, new plant, less able to create new
jobs.

The Republicans have constantly cited the triumph of this theory in the fact
that throughout the 1980s the United States created more millions of new jobs
than the countries of western Europe combined. Now, whether that is so or not,
the Democrats doggedly ignored it and pointed to all those rich men whose firms
made whacking profits which did not go so much in to reinvestment as to paying
out $3, $5, $10 million bonuses for the company's directors.

The president has also given in on the capital gains tax. He's always said this
was sacrosanct and untouchable, on the same theory as that governing a super
tax. Increase the capital gains tax and business will be less brisk and less
profitable, and you'd soon see the signs of it in unemployment and rising
inflation. The new capital gains tax is 3 points up from 25%. However, the
taxes – and they're called taxes – are being raised on petrol, on alcohol, on
tobacco as, also, on yachts, expensive cars and other expressions of sin.

The seemingly unending five-month fight over the budget has been between the
president's men, allied most of the way with the Republicans, against the
Democrats, especially in the House, all of whose members are up for election
the first Tuesday in November.

The various budget bills proposed by the House along the way have been, in the
president's view, downright punitive – wanting to have a super tax from the
start, to raise the capital gains tax. In the main, to leave the impression on
the people who are going to be voting for them on Tuesday week, that the tax
battle has been a simple one between the fat cats and the honest, middle-class
family.

It used to be the honest working man, but since about 85% of working people
regard themselves as working-class, you very rarely hear an American, unless
he's a recent immigrant, say I am lower middle-class. Nowadays, it is the
struggling middle-class that is the object of the House Democrats'
compassionate concern.

Well, I think you can say that on the whole the Democrats, in both Houses, have
won. Republican leaders in both Houses are not willing to say, but they will
reluctantly admit that the finished budget represents an imminent threat to
their holding their numbers in the new Congress and has delivered a political
blow to President Bush.

However, the result will leave him more time to deal with what, to put it in an
odd way, he's more "at home" with. Foreign affairs. And foreign affairs means
you know who.

It's been one of the most striking consequences of the budget obsession in the
past month that the Gulf crisis has, in the television coverage of the news,
retreated from centre-stage to the wings. Of course, Saddam Hussein hasn't
retreated at all but the daily preoccupation with the budget has had the effect
of making it seem that Saddam's threat to the Middle East has weakened, that
the whole crisis has cooled off.

This is a dangerous delusion. It has provoked the first protest groups across
the country, "Our boys must not die for oil". And misgivings, at least, in
millions of Americans about why they are in the Gulf at all.

During the past month too, Mr Bush has been rattling around the country,
speaking up for various Republicans who are up for reelection to the Senate or
the House, so we've heard less about the Gulf even from the president who, in
the beginning, did such a whirlwind but controlled job on stating the American
case, mobilising the support of many United Nations countries and dictating or
supervising the quickest overseas deployment of the largest fighting force
there has ever been.

Now Mr Bush is going to have to face something I don't think he anticipated in
the first fine flush of early August – a steady, rising, widespread movement
across the country against the American presence in the Gulf. Slowly, down the
past three months with no sign of the expected drama, public opinion has been
drifting into one or two attitudes with little or no guidance from the man at
the helm, Mr Bush.

One attitude, as I say, stands against any American involvement in war in the
Gulf. People who take this attitude say either that we have no business being
there at all or that the war is not worth fighting for oil alone. It's odd that
practically nobody points out that many of the great wars of history have been
fought over the prospective loss of an economic resource thought essential to
one nation's prosperity.

The other attitude, shared by many respectable statesmen and public figures and
fanned by the Soviet Union and the French, is that there must be what is called
a diplomatic solution. And that getting Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait would be a
diplomatic victory.

Very little is heard of the warning that many older statesmen and pundits
voiced in early August – and the president is not saying it – that Saddam
Hussein's invasion of Kuwait was Hitler's invasion of Czechoslovakia, the first
course of a martial feast. That Saddam Hussein needs no more than two or three
years to have a nuclear weapon and the chance, with his enormous and very
modern army, of using nuclear and chemical weapons to conquer the Middle East
at least.

These old voices which Mr Bush is not echoing, so far, say that Saddam's
retreat from Kuwait would be a Munich. And we are now living through the
daydream of a phoney war. In other words the question of 2 August has not yet
been answered. "Who will stop Saddam Hussein?"

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP