Bobby Kennedy's assassination - 9 June 1968

It does not seem nearly so long ago as 30 years that the trade of the foreign
correspondent caught the fantasy of Hollywood producers, because Hitler was on
the loose and Europe was crackling with crises and atrocities and some of the
best of the American reporters of that time, John Gunther and Vincent Sheean
and Ed Murrow, always seemed to be on hand.

They came to seem like heroic stand-ins for the American people, who were
fascinated and repelled at long distance by the violence of Europe. And who, I
must say, indulged a good deal of self righteousness in parroting the old
American lamination about old, sick Europe.

Well, I was saying that the foreign correspondent was in vogue, and soon,
Hollywood created a romantic stereotype of him. First, in the Boy Scout version
of Joel McCrea and then the subtler variation of Bogart in a trench coat, who
seemed so tough, as tricky as Goebbels, but who, for all his smoker's cough and
his cynical appraisal of passing females, was secretly on the side of all good
men and true.

This attractive stereotype was not only larger than alive but luckier than any
journalist living or dead. He followed unerringly in the tracks of dictators
and foreign ministers. He was behind the curtain when a king signed the
instrument of abdication. He knew the man who shot the prime minister. He
decoded the vital message that gave the date of an invasion. He was always
where the action was.

In life, it’s not like that, only by the wildest freak is a reporter, after
many years on the hop, actually present at a single, accidental convulsion of
history. Mostly we write the coroner’s inquest, the account of the funeral, the
trial of the spy – not the hatching of the plot.

Last Tuesday night, for the first time in 30 years, I found myself by one
casual chance in a thousand on hand, in a small narrow serving pantry of the
Ambassador hotel in Los Angeles, a place that, I suppose will never be wiped
out of my memory as a sinister alley, a roman circus run amok, and a charnel
house.

It would be quite false to say, as I should truly like to say, that I am sorry
I was there. It’s more complicated than that, nothing so simple as a conflict
between professional pride and human revulsion, between having the feelings and
then having to sit down and write them.

Yet, because I saw it not, for once, as an event to comment on, but as a
thunderbolt assault on the senses, my view of this catastrophic episode is
probably strange, and I ought not to ascribe to anybody else the shape and
colour of the opinions that floated up later from my muddled sensations.

I warn you about this, because I feel unmoved by some ideas that others feel
strongly. And on the other hand, I have some fears that others may not share.
So, since this is a more personal talk than I could have hoped, I'd better tell
you how it came about.

Early last Tuesday afternoon I flew in to Los Angeles. I had seen a score of
these election-night entertainments, they are amiable but blousy affairs. But
to give me a fresh view of a ceremony that had stalled by familiarity and also
to make some compensation to a hostess who had offered me a bed, I’d asked her
if she would like to mooch around the town with me and see what we could see.

She was agog with anticipation, for just as a foreign correspondent thinks a
movie actress must have a fascinating life, so a movie actress thought a
correspondent's life must be glamorous in the extreme.

So, high in the Santa Monica hills, amid the scent of the eucalyptus and the
splendid California cypresses, we sat for a while in the evening after the
polls closed, and waited for a sign of the outcome. You don’t have to wait long
in these computer days, the Oregon result was predicted exactly by the big
brain 12 minutes after the poll was closed, when the returns already in were
under 1%. Somehow, the big brain was having trouble with California, party
politics there are, for various historical reasons, very loosely organised. And
for one thing, the northern end of the state tends to contradict the verdicts
of the south.

So the computers were silent, but the writing was on the wall, and just before
eleven o’clock we took off, for the McCarthy hotel, and there was no doubt when
we got there that the college students and the mini-skirt girls and the
wandering poets and the chin-up McCarthy staff, were whistling in a graveyard.

There was a rough band that hooked it up all the louder to drown out the
inevitable news. They’d pause a while and another ominous statistic would be
flashed and then an MC would shout, "Are we downhearted?", and the ballroom
crowd would roar its defiance of the obvious.

The Ambassador, a venerable hotel miles away on Wilshire Boulevard, was the
Kennedy headquarters and that was the place to be. We took off and, in the long
driveway, lined up behind hundreds of cars containing all those sensible people
who love a winner. At last, we got into the hotel lobbies and a tumult of
singing, dancing, music and cheering. Guards and cops blocked the entrance to
the ballroom and a passport and a birth certificate and, I believe, a personal
recommendation from Senator Kennedy could not have got you in. My own general
press credentials were quite useless, and screaming at each other, through the
din of all these happy people, my companion and I decided the whole safari had
been a mistake, and we’d go home.

We turned, and started down the corridor. On our left, about 40 or 50 feet
along, was another door, and a pack of people trying and failing to get through
it. There was a guard and a young Kennedy staff man turning down everybody. The
Kennedy men suddenly shouted over the bobbing heads, "Mr Cooke, come on, you
can get in here".

So we were sandwiched, or folded in, through the mob and emerged as through a
chute into an open place, a cool, almost empty room, a small private dining
room of the hotel. It was fitted up as a small extra press room and there were
about half a dozen women telegraph operators, two newsmen I knew and half a
dozen others, a radio man untangling cables and a photographer. And one or two
middle-aged women and a fat girl in a Kennedy straw hat, a young reporter in a
beard and, I suppose, his girl.

It was a perfect way through to the ballroom for inbetween was a serving pantry
that led through a passage right into the ballroom. "You don’t want to get in
there," a friend of mine said "It's murder in there. And when Bobby gets
through his speech, Pierre Salinger has promised us he’ll come through into
this room, and talk with us – the senator that is." It was an unbelievable
break.

So we sat down and we had a drink, and heard the telegraph girls tapping out
copy, and tried to bear the TV set in the corner that was tuned up to an
unbearable decibel level.

A few minutes later, the commentators gave way to the ballroom scene and Bobby
was up there with his ecstatic wife, and he was thanking everybody and saying
things must change and so... on to Chicago. It was about eighteen minutes after
midnight, a few of us strolled over to the swinging doors that gave on to the
pantry. They had no glass peepholes but we'd soon hear the pleasant bustle of
him coming through as the waiters and the coloured chef in his high hat and a
bus boy or two waited to see him.

There was suddenly, a banging repetition of a sound that, I don’t know how to
describe, not at all like shots, like somebody dropping a rack of trays. Half a
dozen of us were startled enough to charge through the door, and it had just
happened. It was a narrow lane he had to come through, for there were two long
steam tables and somebody had stacked up against them those trellis fences with
artificial leaves stuck on them, that they used to fence up the dance band off
from the floor.

The only light was the blue light of three fluorescent tubes, slotted in the
ceiling. But it was a howling jungle of cries and obscenities and flying limbs
and two enormous men, Roosevelt Grier the football player and Rafer Johnson, I
guess, the Olympic champion, piling on to a pair of blue jeans. There was a
head on the floor, streaming blood, and somebody put a Kennedy boater hat under
it and the blood trickled down like chocolate sauce on an iced cake.

There were flashlights by now and the button-eyes image of Ethel Kennedy turned
to cinders. She was slapping a young man and he was saying, "Listen lady, I am
hurt too" and down on the greasy floor was a huddle of clothes and staring out
of it the face of Bobby Kennedy. Like the stone face of a child, lying on a
cathedral tomb.

I had and have no idea of the time of all this, or even of the event itself,
for when I pattered back into the creamy green genteel dining room, I heard
somebody cry "Kennedy shot" and heard a girl moan, "No, no not again" and my
companion was fingering a cigarette package like a paralytic.

A dark woman nearby suddenly bounded to a table and beat it and howled like a
wolf, "Stinking country, no no no no", and another woman attacked the shadow of
the placid TV commentators who had not yet got the news. And then a minute,
maybe, or an hour later, or a day, the cops and the burly Johnson shot through
the swinging doors with their bundle of the black curly head and the jeans. And
I recall the tight, small behind and the limp head, and a face totally dazed.

Well, the next morning when I saw and heard the pope in his gentle, faltering
English, I still could not believe that he was talking about this squalid
appalling scene in a hotel pantry that I had been a part of, and would always
be a part of.

I have no doubt that this experience is a trauma and because of it, no doubt,
and five days later I still cannot rise to the general lamentations about a
sick society. I, for one, do not feel like an accessory to a crime. And I
reject almost as a frivolous obscenity the sophistry of collective guilt, the
idea that I, or the American people, killed John Fitzgerald Kennedy and Martin
Luther King, and Robert Frances Kennedy.

I don’t believe, either, that you conceived Hitler, and that in some deep,
unfathomable sense, all Europe was responsible for the extermination of six
million Jews. With Edmund Burke, I do not know how you can indict a whole
nation.

To me, this now roarlingly fashionable theme is a great folly. It’s difficult
to resist because it deflects an attack on one’s own conscience to some big
corporate culprit. It sounds wise and deep but it is really a way of opting out
of a human situation, a situation that includes pity for the dead Kennedy,
sympathy for the American nation, and the resurgence of its frontier traditions
in a later time. And, not least, compassion for Sirhan Sirhan.

I said as much as this to a younger friend and he replied, "Yes, but and I too,
I don’t feel implicated in the murder of John or Bobby Kennedy, but when Martin
Luther King is killed, the only people who know that you and I are not like the
killer are you and I."

It’s a tremendous sentence and exposes, I think, the present danger to America.
The more people talk about collective guilt, the more they will feel it. And
after 300 years of subjection and prejudice, any poor Negro or desperate
outcast is likely to act as if it were true that the American people, and not
their derelicts, are the villains.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP