The Kennedy Missile Tapes - 24 October 1997

Thirty-five years ago this Sunday, October 26th, I woke up here in New York
City and looked out the window at a sparkling, and I felt then, a God-given
scene, a dazzling, crystalline day in late fall.

Looking over Central Park's rolling forest of light green, yellow, golden
foliage to the west side skyline and, above it, a cloudless sky. The forest
ends down to the left and gives way to a large, blue lake, a city reservoir.
And on that shining morning, a seagull came winging in from the ocean and
soared high over the reservoir and the park, and was gone, off to the northern
horizon to tell its marvellous story.

Did I say a seagull? Of course. But for a happy split second it seemed to be a
dove to announce the blessed tidings that we had, overnight, emerged and
unscathed from a prospect which the previous night the President of the United
States thought could be avoided only by the mercy of God. Or, what we call,
luck. The prospect, in a day or two, of nuclear war.

Even people – temperamental scaremongers and bloodshot journalists – who are
given to the most lurid view of any event may recoil, I think, at such a
grandiose sentence. But we have only now become privy to the taped private
discussions of President Kennedy and his advisors and the desperate
communications with the Soviet leader, Khrushchev. I'm sure that blood-chilling
sentence is nothing but the truth.

I say "only now made privy" because there has just been published, for all to
read, the transcript of the tapes recorded in the White House of the two weeks
of discussion between President Kennedy and his advisors on what to do about
the alarming discovery by American reconnaissance planes of nuclear missiles
and bases, some launching sites, in Cuba that could have been planted there
only by the Soviet Union. Incidentally, some listeners may still be reeling in
disbelief at the simple mention of the Kennedy tapes.

Wasn't it Mr Nixon who taped conversations in the White House? The record that
eventually proved he had covered up the Watergate scandal and bribed
participants to stay mum about it. Yes. But lately, it turns out that other
presidents taped conversations with cronies and visitors. And only they knew
they were doing it. Lyndon Johnson's most private thoughts and pep talks are
now available. We hear that Franklin Roosevelt had a crude taping system,
entirely at the touch of his own inclination. And only last week, President
Clinton released tapes, video tapes, talking pictures no less, of meetings with
foreigners and one or two shady characters, many of whom gave large sums of
money to the Democratic Party.

It's enough to make you, in retrospect, feel actually sympathetic towards
President Nixon. His big mistake, not done by his predecessors or successors:
he forgot to turn the machine off. And the way our experience of presidential
shenanigans is going, it may soon be that the big act of obstruction of
justice, which is a ground for impeachment, will be turning off the tape
recorder in the White House.

I ought to say, after these disheartening revelations, that President Truman
did not make secret recordings. Neither did Eisenhower. And a former Clinton
aide who's now free to feel relieved, said chucklingly the other Sunday,
"Nobody in the White House today dare scribble a date in his appointments book,
let alone write a memo!"

But you'll have guessed that in this unexpected and unpredicted flood of
presidential tapes, the now released Kennedy tapes, the two weeks of secret
talks in the White House between Monday, 15 October and Saturday 27 October
1962 are at once the most historic and blood-curdling. For they record an event
that has been called, without melodrama or exaggeration, "the single most
dangerous episode in the history of mankind".

It began for me on, I can't swear to the date, it must have been the Saturday
before Monday 15 October. In an airplane, the press plane that goes on ahead of
the presidential plane wherever he's off to. President Kennedy was going off to
Chicago to give a needed lift to a Democratic Senator, I believe it was a
Senator, who was up for re-election in a few days' time – 1962 was what they
call an "off" year. Not a presidential, but a Congressional election year.

We were flying along, then suddenly from the cockpit came striding in the
president's press secretary, Pierre Salinger. He had serious news for us. He'd
just been in radio touch with the president's plane. The president was showing
symptoms of the flu and we were all going to turn around and go back to
Washington.

I don't know how many days, we, the press, inquired about the flu, or how soon
we came to know better. But we now know it must have been while the president
was heading west to Chicago that he heard from the CIA the thundering news that
an army reconnaissance plane had taken pictures over Cuba, that the pictures
had been developed and, clear as a flower petal, were missiles and launch pads
and all the paraphernalia of missile launching grounds.

On Monday 15th, Kennedy put together a committee of the Secretary of State, of
Defence, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, national security advisors, and
one or two other men who'd been close to the conduct of foreign affairs. The
first meeting is the first recorded session of the two weeks' discussions about
the developing crisis. And I ought to say now that the tapes were, technically,
infinitely inferior to the Nixon tapes of a decade later, a low-pitched drone
of hissing, crackling sounds, not to mention the overlapping voices that you
get in any recorded conversation of a room full of people. It took two Harvard
professors more than a year, with the help of expert court reporters, to
improve the sounds and make all but a fraction of the dialogue understandable.

At the start, you may wonder why Mr Khrushchev was able to install such hugely
visible technology without being spotted. Well, at the time, the White House
was absorbed, even obsessed, with the likelihood that the Soviets were going to
seize Berlin. And Cuba was not being routinely patrolled by reconnaissance
planes. Mr Khrushchev's mistake, it now appears, was not to know that American
reconnaissance had got to the point where photographs taken from 30,000 feet
could count leaves on a tree.

The Soviet ambassador was called in and assured the president to his face that,
whatever his planes saw, they could not be missiles or missile pads since the
Soviet Union was quite innocent of such a plot. President Kennedy did not
contradict him, just bowed him out and went back to his committee meetings. The
problem of what to do with these installations was not complex. It was very
stark and simple. And so were the responses the committee batted back and
forth.

From the start, there was no general agreement on a course of action but, in
the beginning, it was agreed that one of three things could be done. A sudden,
unannounced air strike to take out, destroy the weapons, or a wider aerial
attack covering airfields and storage areas. Thirdly, to mount as soon as
possible a full-scale invasion of Cuba. Kennedy heard all the suggestions and
all the alternatives, tapped his pencil, made only one positive assertion,
"We're certainly going to do number one. We're going to take out those
missiles!"

Through the next six days and nights, the discussions probed all the likely
Soviet responses to any, and all, military action. To delay or tip the Soviets
off to a chosen form of action would hasten their building and probably make
them move the missiles underground somewhere. To delay, while making martial
sounds in Khrushchev's direction, might make him come out more defiantly in
support of Fidel Castro, a position from which he could then not retreat.

It took a week for the fourth alternative to grow and become the one favoured
by the president: a proclaimed naval blockade of Cuba. And this, too, was
ferociously debated. It's remarkable that the Senate's King of the Doves, when
later it came to Vietnam, Senator William Fulbright, was dead against the
blockade because it would announce a direct confrontation with Khrushchev.
Kennedy's brother called it "a slow form of death". Fulbright, like the top
military, was all for an all-out invasion.

After the president announced the blockade over national television, everybody
waited for Russian ships on the way to Cuba to turn back or risk attack.
Khrushchev offered privately to remove the missiles if the United States would
promise not to invade. Then he suggested removing the Cuban missiles in
exchange for the American removal of allied missiles in Turkey. To do that,
Kennedy thought, would invite the outrage of the NATO allies and perhaps mark
the end of NATO itself.

All this while, new photographs showed that the Russians were hectically
installing missiles. At the end of the second week, Kennedy, having gone ahead
with the blockade and secretly massed in Florida an invasion force larger than
anything since D-Day, he called in the Congressional leaders of both parties
and wearily told them not to expect a peaceful solution. If we stop one Russian
ship, it means war. If we invade Cuba, it means war. There's no telling.

He went to bed on the Saturday night fairly convinced in his own mind that a
war was imminent and that it would begin probably with the Russians firing
tactical nuclear weapons at Florida. He said goodnight to the committee. The
machine was turned off. He hoped he'd see them tomorrow. None of us might ever
see each other now. It's up to luck.

At dawn the next day, the marvellous news came in that the Russians' lead ship,
the Grozny, had turned back from the blockade. That was the Sunday morning
that, against a clear blue sky, a seagull flew in from the ocean, looking like
a dove.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP