Ross Perot withraws - 24 July 1992

One very angry man last week brought a breach of promise suit in Dallas. It
might well be unique in the history of disappointed lovers. The object of his
jilted affection was Mr Ross Perot. The suit charged that Mr Perot had broken
the promise he gave to millions of Americans to run for president, cut through
the trash of the system, topple the establishment and lead the people to a
simpler, finer and fairer America.

Nothing much is likely to come out of this man's suit. For all I know it may by
now have been withdrawn, but it expressed in an intense, sincere, slightly
dotty form, the allegiance just falling short of adoration that Mr Perot has
roused in millions of Americans since that artless evening in February when he
was just a tycoon being interviewed on an evening show and when, to the abrupt,
almost ad lib question, "Would you consider running for president?", he said,
if they'd get his name on the ballot in all 50 states, yes he would.

When he quit, he was on 25 state ballots and rising. His announcement on the
Thursday evening didn't quite swamp the following for Governor Clinton's
acceptance speech but it took over the headlines next morning, and before that
a strange thing happened. At the end of Clinton's speech and while the
delegates were waving flags and embracing and wiping eyes, a camera swooped in
from nowhere and zoomed in on a man holding up the New York Times of the next,
Friday, opening and there, a three-column headline, was the staggering
declaration, Perot chooses running mate, Oprah Winfrey.

The camera danced over this feature for a moment or two and cut to a bewildered
bystander saying, well what do you know, there it is, and then we were back to
the crooning, cheering and apparently unaware crowds. Oprah Winfrey is a large,
popular, black, daytime talk show hostess and about as likely to be picked for
Vice-President as, say, Madonna. This astonishing news was flashed around the
country, several of my friends in California had the word within minutes of
that camera shot and as the night wore on, the thousands of delegates and
stragglers at Madison Square Garden seemed strangely unmoved by this staggering
development.

Next morning it came out. The headline, the issue of the New York Times was a
fake, but beautifully done, absolutely authentic as to layout, typeface etc. Of
course by the Friday morning, not even the New York Times had space or time to
comment on this lark, it was too busy thundering, Perot quits race, leaving
two-man field. And below that stunner was the more dense line, Clinton vows
change and new covenant. By the way, I'd better say it now before either the
opposition or Mr Clinton's own team comes to the conclusion. The governor is
going to have trouble with that covenant promise. What does he mean? Nobody's
quite sure. It's an attempt, of course, to early on, to coin a memorable slogan
that identifies his campaign and he hopes, his presidency. Teddy Roosevelt had
his Square Deal, Franklin Roosevelt had his New Deal, which stuck and resonated
down the 12 years of his reign. John Kennedy proclaimed the New Frontier, which
was catch enough to see him into the White House, though after that nobody knew
for sure what or where it was. But Mr Clinton promises a New Covenant. It won't
do.

Anyway, since that final night of the Democrats' orgy, more words have been
used, more arguments tossed back and forth about Ross Perot, than we've read or
heard about anyone since the fall of Gorbachev and the rise of Yeltsin.
Naturally the weekly news magazines would be failing in their function, which
is to explain everything, if they didn't boldly entitle their pieces, Why Perot
Quit. I'd better say right away, I doubt than anyone including Mr Perot, can
give you one certain reason why he did it. He and all the commentators have
given many reasons but in matters of bold or drastic behaviour, I remember Dr
Freud saying, there is always one reason. After that the intellect invents
cover-up reasons.

Well, there was one incident about five days before he gave up that raised
eyebrows everywhere and I'm sure must have given Mr Perot a nasty jolt. On
Saturday 11 July, Mr Perot was addressing the National Association for the
Advancement of Coloured Peoples. It's the oldest of all national black
organisations, you can almost guess as much from it retaining the word,
coloured. No outfit today would so christen itself, it would have to be
African-American. However, the association has a very long and honourable
history.

It was started so long ago as 1910 and you can get some idea of how socially,
historically far away that is, when I tell you that its first aims were to end
the lynching of blacks and to try and improve the lot of sharecroppers and
tenant farmers. It's been through all the subsequent battles and in the past
30, 40 years, heard itself mocked by new black associations, more radical black
leaders. Nevertheless it is a national association with several hundred
thousand members and a speech before it is an obligation of anyone running for
the presidency. President Bush and Mr Clinton both were prompt to appear and
make their usual special pledges to blacks and other minorities and then it was
Mr Perot's turn.

At the end of his speech, crisp, racy, direct as ever, he assured his audience
that he would be mindful of your people. It was a tiny, fatal phrase. A
reporter wrote: it marked him as a son of Depression era Texas when white folks
could afford to be a little patronising. Mr Perot's large audience was
respectful but a nerve had been touched. Of course there was nothing deliberate
about it, it was a slip, truly a Freudian slip. It came from deep down and long
ago, when any black who'd just been told his people would be taken care of,
would have answered, whatever he said under his breath, yes sir, thank you,
sir.

It's most striking, strikes me about once ever four years, that politicians can
recite the wildest charges, commit shuddering errors of taste and fact, attack
each other with malice and exaggeration and soon it's all forgotten, but make
one little slip, which appears to set you off from the people you're addressing
and you're a goner. Lots of us whites of Mr Perot's generation and beyond his,
mine, are quite capable of saying, the black people but no longer in public
saying, your people. Mr Perot was genuinely shocked by the response to his
slip. He said it made him sound like David Duke, that forgotten right-wing
segregationist from Louisiana. To an aide of his he said, this is the last
straw. That, on his part, is surely a huge overreaction but it did show that
the campaign had put a strain on him beyond anything he'd imagined. That seems
to be it.

From the reflections after the events, of the two professionals he'd hired, the
man who ran Ronald Reagan's successful campaign and the man who had been Jimmy
Carter's principal adviser in his successful run, Mr Perot, it comes out, had
never expected his own life, his experience as a business man, corporation
executive, to be gone into, questioned. He never expected the media to do what
they do with everybody these days, go looking for cracks in the public visage,
smells in the back rooms. Boasting of not being a professional, he never
expected to be subjected to the extreme scrutiny professionals must suffer.

Finally, he tried to respond to the constant charge that he never got down to
particulars, specifics, as we say. He would drastically trim the deficit by
$400 billion, therefore balance the budge in five years. He spent two days or
more, maybe he'd spent weeks, working over the actual parts of the body politic
that were going to be cut and he found, to his dismay, it wouldn't begin to
work. Then by some swift mental association, he decided he could not possibly
win the election outright.

His standing in the polls at that point was still about on the low one-third of
the vote and that would mean, and it probably would have meant, that none of
the three candidates would get a an election majority and so, as the
Constitution dictates, it would have gone into the House of Representatives,
the new one, in January. Since the House is and again will be, overwhelmingly
Democrat, therefore he figured, the Democrats would win. Time, Mr Perot
decided, to quit. In the last moment, he tossed a bride's bouquet to Mr
Clinton. Since, Mr Perot said, the Democratic Party had been re-vitalised, much
of his urge for change had passed over to them. God bless Ross Perot, said a
Clinton aide.

Talking of simple phrases that damn a Presidential candidate, I think the best
was spoken in the election of 1884. The Republican candidate was one Mr Blaine,
known to his opponents as the continental liar from the state of Maine. The
Democrat was Governor Cleveland of New York. During the campaign, it came out,
it was brought out by the Republicans, that Governor Cleveland had fathered an
illegitimate son by a woman he'd abandoned. Quite right, said Cleveland, but
she abandoned the child and I maintain him in an orphanage and take care of him
to this day. Shock and grief among the Democrats.

At the end of the campaign, Mr Blaine returned to new York, to a reception
given for him and heard a parson say, we, the Republicans, have no intention of
turning the country over to the party of rum, Romanism and rebellion. A slap at
the Irish. A Democrat spy, so to speak, present, went off in ecstasy, had the
phrase printed and dropped in a blizzard of handbills over New York City. The
election was very close and turned on New York State, indeed on the city vote.
Irish Catholic shock over an illegitimate son was outvoted by outrage over
being called the party of rum, Romanism and rebellion. Cleveland squeaked in,
as if by the tiny wail of a baby.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (Â©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts Â©BBC. Letter from America
scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP