50th anniversary of D Day, 1994 - 03 June 1994

As this weekend came on, and all the pride and sadness of commemorating D-Day,
I couldn't help wondering if there had been a similar to-do three weeks ago on
12 May. If there were ceremonies in Poland, Morocco, New Zealand, South Africa,
12 May 1944 is likely to be in those nations as memorable a day as the
following 6 June, it was the beginning of the Italian offensive that pitched
General Alexander against Field Marshall Kesselring, but in mentioning it here,
I was noticing the part played by those Poles, Canadians, French, Moroccans,
Indians, South Africans and New Zealanders in the two armies under Alexander's
command.

By the way it strikes me once again, how little notice is ever taken in
European and American histories of the wars of this century of New Zealand,
which has been there usually the firstest with its mostest in the First World
War, the Second, in Korea, Malaysia, in Vietnam. This idea about 12 May
occurred to me in watching the parade of television programmes celebrating the
famous 6 June. I did so this time with a certain anxiety, which was not
pacified after recalling the television celebrations 10 years ago of the 40th
anniversary of D-Day. I happen then to see two or three American programmes one
French and to be in England for the British commemoration. In all three
countries, the impression left wasn't hammered home but it was quietly perhaps
even unconsciously pressed into our senses that the invasion of Normandy was
touch and go in the beginning, but its success was guaranteed by the
incomparable bravery of the French army on French television, of the British on
British television of the Americans on American television.

I hasten to dampen a rising chorus of protest by saying it was not quite as
gross, as downright as that and I hope I'm not showing my blood strain when I
say that nothing I saw anywhere then or now approached for fairness and
dramatic interest, the late Huw Weldon's account of the planning of D-Day in
which more than any programme I heard or saw he took into account the
coordination of the five armies, British, American, Canadian, French and Polish
that landed to meet the defending sixth, the Germans.

What I've seen this time has been exclusively American programs, I have the
feeling there have been dozens but the four networks, the three commercial and
the public television service have I'd say acquitted themselves pretty well,
except for leaving the impression that everything happened on Omaha Beach.
Elsewhere, due credit was given to the British some to the Canadians; less if
any to the free French, nowhere did I see or hear a mention of the Poles. Maybe
the local public television stations in Pittsburgh, in parts of New Jersey
tried to raise backing for their own shows, I doubt it. This gap struck me most
forcibly at our end of Long Island the North Fork where way back at the turn of
the century Polish immigrants saw a stretch of sandy potato country that
reminded them of home and settled in there and more or less bought out the
farms and lands of the old original Yankees.

The parish priest who represented the United States at the installation of the
present Pope was the priest in our village from the church of a Polish saint,
Our Lady of Ostrabrama. It spoils my story rather when I tell you that his name
was the Reverend Patrick O'Reilly, but he spoke Polish.

Well, I wished somebody had asked me to do a D-Day program, it would have been
mainly about the Polish contribution to the Normandy invasion. Just think in
the first week of September 1939, the Polish army had been destroyed and the
human remnants of it scattered and mostly interned in four or five central
European countries. As late as 1942, the Polish prisoners that the Russians
held, their a pretty feeble ill-fed lot were released and went into Persia,
Iran. Somehow, they found their way into the desert war and fought at El
Alamein and then in Italy, but there had been in the winter of 1939 a huge
stream of over 100,000 Polish refugees padding through the Balkans and on into
France.

There were enough soldiers among them of several specialties that unbeknownst
to most of us onlookers and warriors alike added to the reserves of the French
air force, they formed also a mountain brigade and boosted the French army with
three divisions of infantry, but they became like the rest of us victims of the
Nazi Blitzkrieg and advance through the Low Countries and on into France. Less
than 20,000 of them got across the channel to take refuge in Britain, some
grizzled old listeners will undoubtedly remember the Poles in their dashing
uniforms, their panache on social occasions, their hair-raising indifference to
blood and danger in warlike situations.

Well, it was heartening to have them around in the early 1940s, helped British
morale and all that provided a high-spirited buffer to the incoming hoards of
sassy Americans, but not much was to expected from them, they'd salvaged
pitifully little equipment, the contrast between their fighting demeanour and
their obvious lack of arms was of course an embarrassment to the British Army.
And the Poles were given the few weapons Britain could spare and posted off to
protecting the coast in farthest Scotland.

The American and British command in London certainly admired the spirit of the
Poles, but assumed that once more weapons were available they could become a
factor as a sort of supplementary infantry – not what they had in mind. To cut
the story dramatically but truly short, their commander General Sikorski
announced to anybody who'd listen that he was going to form a Polish armoured
division. The German radio heard about this absurdity and wondered every night
how General Sikorski's tourists were coming along, but Sikorski did it and that
armoured division performed superbly.

What I've been saying is that I suppose there's an irrepressible natural urge
to praise one's own country at the expense of others; people who think of
themselves as remarkably fair minded may bemoan this habit, which is as
dependable among nations as town pride is epidemic among soccer and baseball
fans. This is not a trivial matter, though the analogies from football and
baseball may have led some people to think so. What I'm saying I'm afraid is
that chauvinism instinctive patriotism is firmly planted in human nature and
all efforts to create a primary continental or regional loyalty let alone world
government, sooner or later has to take account of it and not pretend as we've
been doing for about 600 years that a new league, a new big alliance, a new
United Nations is an advanced in civilisation that will make nationalism, pride
of race or country wither away in the dawn of world citizenry.

This tough human fact seems to be to be at the root of our reluctance to
undertake joint military missions; I mean the United States, Britain, France,
Germany, Japan into the alarming number of countries that are now racked by
civil war. Bosnia – everybody agrees that that has been a disaster as an allied
effort. The moment intervention is proposed first the presidents and prime
ministers and then the people ask what national interest do we have in this,
they don't fear for sending United Nations boys, its American boys, British
boys, French boys.

We are now facing in the moment of commemorating the first giant allied step
taken to begin the defeat of Hitler, a threat of intransigence or bluff at
best, war at worst from North Korea. It is primarily, perhaps I mean
theoretically, a threat, a massive insult to the United Nations whose nuclear
inspectors have performed every possible minuet of courtesy and protocol to try
and preserve some dignity while facing what we used to call a Prussian
brutality of refusal.

North Korea, people say, is after all a very small country, true, it has the
fourth largest army on earth but of course the dreadful sticking point is its
possession and American intelligence is now quite sure of this it's possession
of four or five nuclear weapons and the capacity to deliver them. Everybody
from Washington to a mountain village in the Rockies is scared stiff at the
thought of an American invasion or a first strike, which could risk a nuclear
response, so sanctions always the boon and blessing for people who want to
punish an aggressor but don't want to do it by fighting.

The trouble with sanctions – look at Iraq, look at the Serbs – is exactly what
it was when the late General Marshall looked at sanctions against the communist
government of China, transshipment. The ship's manifest doesn't say these
fruits or medicines or weapons are going to Iraq or going to Serbia, they are
posted to any country that has trade relations with the people you want to
punish.

The weekend, an appeal has gone out to China, Japan, Russia and South Korea
join us Westerners to protect our cities and yours from nuclear missiles. I
don't know whether North Korea has been put up to this perilous stance by China
to see how much paper is built into the American tiger eagle, but China has
stalemated us before the game begins by announcing it will veto any resolution
in the United Nations to impose sanctions. Any bold and good suggestions you
may have for facing the North Korean problem should be sent express to 1600
Pennsylvania Avenue, Washington DC, the address of the President of the United
States.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP