Feminism in American 1993 - 24 September 1993

I suppose this weekend; every commentator on earth is talking or writing about
the new turmoil in Russia with its frightening memories of the 1991 August
coup. My sources are no better than anyone else's and even the White House
won't, can't say how it will all turn out, so I move on to something much
smaller, very domestic but something I've wanted to talk about for sometime.
Let us move up on the main theme gradually with an apparently frivolous
overture.

Last Sunday night marked the performance of an annual ritual that has been for
almost 60 years as dependable in the American calendar as the celebration of
Thanksgiving or the 4th of July, it took place where it first happened in 1927
in Atlantic City, the Blackpool of the New Jersey Shore. The Miss America
Pageant. For years and years we said quite fliply the Miss America Beauty
Contest, it was first called a parade because that was more or less all that
took place, a parade along a stretch of the boardwalk of what were called then
"bathing beauties" one from each state in the Union. The girls in those days,
there was no political requirement to call them women or love objects in
popular songs with girls. The girls lined up in bathing suits each wearing a
sash bearing the name of their State, which they'd come to Atlantic City to
represent Miss Iowa, Miss Tennessee, Miss New York, Miss Idaho and so on. Those
two features of the event, the bathing suits and the flaunted name of each
State are just about all that's left of the original event. The Miss America
Contest much more than any of its imitators has changed and will go on changing
because, because why? Because I've come to think of a rather late but sure
response to the pressure of women's lib.

In 1969, feminists staged a protest parade in Atlantic City affecting to be
disgusted by the very sight of 50 American girls showing off their bodies and
that the libbers maintained as they've maintained ever since that the pageant
is dedicated to the degradation of women to reducing them, the fighting phrase
of the day "to mere sex objects". Some of the girls of that 1969 vintage
replied rudely, "you bet" or "what else" or "right on" or "what do you mean
merely?" In the following years, the more dedicated or rampant libbers moved
on, they went instead after pornography as a species of female debasement.

Now the Miss America Contest had started I think in the '50s at the latest to
require the contestants to express themselves in several new ways to the
bathing suit parade was added an evening gown parade and then pretty soon a
talent contest. By now, we're not at all staggered by the sight of a handsome
woman playing a movement of, say, the Beethoven violin concerto or reciting
from Harold Pinter or proving to be a whiz on the trampoline.

Where I believe the feminists have had their small secret triumph is in the
requirement, which has been standard for the last few years to make a little
speech about their particular vision of America. Now this sounds fatuous put
like that, but the sponsors came to see that at last physical beauty was not
what the contest was about and they all now must say not only what profession
they hope to follow, but what they expect of life or what they mean to do about
the present state of American society. The early efforts in this style were
fairly pathetic, because up to that point nobody running a beauty contest,
including the girls, had ever expected the Miss America hopefuls to be anything
but sleek, bosomy, have a fine figure and want to be an actress or a later
ambition a real estate agent.

Today it's not enough of the 10 finalists we heard from; three or four of them
had sensible things to say about the dark side of American society and
expressed a hope at least of doing something about it. This year's winner was a
black girl who means to spend her year's reign going around the country helping
the homeless. That's an unbelievable leap, one giant step for womankind from
the giggling bathing beauties of the 1920s.

Earlier this year, there was in feminist and literally circles a, I should say
a well deserved, celebration of the 25th anniversary of Betty Friedan's The
Feminine Mystique, which certainly has turned out to be a pioneer work taking
up the crusade of the suffragettes where it much too early left off. Up to her
arrival on the scene, less combated feminists drummed away at the prevailing
inequity of inferior wages for the same piece of work. Betty Friedan went far
beyond that, she wanted to see a radical revision of the male view of women in
society, she would not stop pointing out that there was only one or was it two
women in the United States Senate that America along with most of the Western
democracies did not exercise much democracy in giving equal rank to first-rate
women doctors, lawyers, engineers whatever.

Betty Friedan stressed that all women did not choose to find their place only
in the home and inspired by her came a flock of protesting women and then I'm
afraid of whining women and then rallies of women who got drunk on the special
thought of just being a woman and wanted now by next Monday morning a universal
right to abortion, equal pay, equal appointments who wished damnation on all
right to lifers on every lumberman to would intrude on a national forest and
every male who clung to the abominable notion that a woman's place is in the
home.

There was through the '70s and '80s such a multiplicity of aims, so many
crusades for so many instant reforms that it all caused Florence King a
sympathetic feminist to fear that, quote, "the all purpose feminist goal
appears to be an abortion performed by a gay black doctor under an endangered
tree on an Indian reservation". Well, during that quarter century, life and
liberty hearing themselves talked about so much as private possessions came out
and asserted themselves and the feminist movement slowly and painfully began to
learn that freedom from home, in the kitchen, might also mean neglected
children or an unsolved problem, children shunted off into the very diffused
affections of a day-care centre.

I think Betty Friedan was about the first to see and say that the aggressive
feminist model was not for everybody and that some of her disciples had gone
too far in failing to connect their battling ambitions with the reality of the
time and place they lived in. The popularisation of feminine mystique did what
all popularisations of original movements do, it vulgarised the doctrine. Chic
popular magazines declared that the new woman could have a career and a home
and a lover if she chose and a baby or two without the encumbrance of what was
called at the time a piece of paper. The piece of paper was nothing less than a
serious contract, which has been drawn up and sworn to by quite enlightened men
and women for many centuries, it is called a marriage certificate. You can have
it all, declared the smart magazines, well a lot of women who tried to have it
have discovered that, of course, you can't.

Betty Friedan has been the first of the pioneers to deplore the naivety and the
sheer asininity of the next generation of extreme feminists. Meanwhile, she's
off writing about the blessings, bless her, of old age. The new generation of
libbers has other targets, other goals and no feminine complaint is more
popular just now than that embodied in the charge of sexual harassment. One
event more than another prompted the idea of a successful lawsuit pursued under
the banner of female equality and that event was the long two-day agony – and
agony for both protagonists – of the Senate judiciary committees hearings in
the matter of the fitness of Judge Clarence Thomas to become a justice of the
Supreme Court.

When the young black law professor Anita Hill who'd worked for Mr Thomas
accused him with graphic details of sexually harassing her in the long ago, in
that moment, the country divided into opposing camps after Miss Hill's
appalling story and Judge Thomas's furious denial of it, Miss Hill to some
people became a puppet hired and manipulated by various liberal outfits or she
was and immediately to the rampant feminists a Joan of Arc, a national heroine
and still is.

After her, a deluge of similar confessions and lawsuits from women all over the
country especially from ones who worked for a prominent public man. There's a
United States senator who faces charges from several women who have detailed
their helplessness before his alleged assaults going back I believe in some
complaints to the 1970s. Now obviously it's a healthy thing and a proper
advance to women that this sort of humiliation should be brought out and
punished. A clause of sexual harassment of women is in the Civil Rights Act of
the mid-60s, but I must say that there are legions of men who have found this
charge of sexual harassment to be a blanket charge that covers everything from
the touch of a hand to a joke to a passing gallantry.

The sad thing to me about the monotonous and widespread employment of this
charge is its reducing to a legal generality and to a legal threat very much of
the emotional detail, the subtlety of life between men and women, in fact, the
rich raw material of literature all reduced to a magistrates rubber stamp. The
wisest words I've heard on this whole topic, which I've not seen quoted
anywhere, came from a judge in a federal court in New York, a woman judge who
looked over a whimpering docket of complaints of sexual harassment and said,
"Where has all the laughter gone?"

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP