Protest and historical change - 28 April 1978

I read somewhere the other day where an eminent man was saying – I forget who,
now – that … I know, it was Lawrence Durrell, the famous novelist. He said that
“History is a total waste of time.”

Well, the late Henry Ford, the godfather of the cheap car, is remembered in
America by most people, I should say, for two things: the assembly-line
automobile, and the single saying of his that has stuck, “History,” he said,
“is bunk.”

I think he meant by this that if you try to learn from history, you won’t
succeed, because in every time there are new elements that you won’t take in,
and those are the new elements that will determine the immediate future. So
it’s not quite so philistine a phrase as it sounds.

If Henry Ford had been a devoted student of the history of transport, if he’d
moved in his mind from the ox to the wheel and the horse and carriage, he might
have arrived in the end at the idea that what was needed was a faster bus or a
more luxurious car. But the new idea that struck him was not bigger or better
cars, but the quite original idea of a car for everybody.

The suspicious thing you know about history books is their confidence in
dividing time up into so-called “periods.” Historians invent periods like the
Middle Ages, the Renaissance, the Reformation, and then they magnetise all the
available facts like iron filings and dump them into these periods. But did the
people at the time know they were living in the Renaissance? They’d never heard
of it.

We now talk confidently about 1910 to, say, 1945 as the Twilight of Empire.
Well I was around for all of that time and we, we in Britain certainly, didn’t
go round peering through any twilight. The loss of the British Empire in fact
was one of the biggest shocks of the Second World War. Mr Churchill at one time
maintained that the war was being fought to “save” the empire, and I don’t
remember anyone saying, “But when this war’s over and we’ve won, there won’t be
any empire to save.”

I remember now Mr Durrell going on to explain his remark about histories being
a waste of time by adding, “History is the endless repetition of the wrong way
of living.” Another way of saying that is, unfortunately the men who direct
history – the statesmen and politicians, businessmen, inventors and so on –
don’t know enough history to learn by it.

Well no doubt there are nippers now alive who 30, 40, 50 years from now will
grow up to be historians, who can tell us that the 1970s and '80s constituted a
period called The Decay of Capitalism, or the Collapse of Communism, or the
Computer Age. Or, more likely, some label we wouldn’t even recognise because we
don’t know what the really big movements of our time are. We are too deep in
the trees to know whether it’s a forest we’re in or an ambush. But when you
look back, you can do it, proving once again the old line of the American
football coach who said, “Hindsight always has 20/20 vision.”

Now if you ask me what we thought we were doing at San Francisco 33 years ago
when we set up the United Nations, well the wise ones knew that for as long as
we’d live, one of the main political problems would be putting the old colonial
empires, intact, under the care of the old colonial powers and other powers on
a new basis. It was to be called the Trusteeship System.

We never anticipated the rise of the black man, the rush for independence or
the universal rush of country people to the cities, and the consequent vast and
equally universal problems of overpopulated cities, a huge increase in city
crime, let alone drugs or the worldwide growth of terrorism. Least of all did
we anticipate the overwhelming traffic problems of every big city on earth –
the morning invasion, the evening exodus, one man, one car – which, if there’s
a strike or the Arabs jack up the price of oil, can paralyse industry and in no
time strangle a nation’s prosperity.

Henry Ford had as much to do with this as anyone, so in the long run he was
nothing like so much of an ignoramus as he first sounded.

All this comes up because this spring our magazines and papers and television
have been looking back to 1968, and what I thought of at the time (and
surprisingly still think of) as the black year: Martin Luther King assassinated
in April; Bobby Kennedy in June; Washington rioting and patrolled by armoured
cars; Baltimore burning; the streets of Chicago gone berserk during the
Democratic Convention. And through it all, the marches and more riots and
random violence that erupted from the anti-Vietnam protests; university
presidents being besieged in their offices’; bombings, flag burnings, and so on
and on.

Now the heroes or the villains of that time, certainly the people most directly
recognisable as rebel leaders, were the Chicago Seven and the Berkeley Boys and
Eldridge Cleaver, who felt at one time that a black man’s rape of a white woman
was an obligation, a necessary symbolic act.

I’ve forgotten the names of the other student leaders, of the Panthers and the
Weathermen and the Students for a Democratic Society so-called, but I’m sure
I’ve remembered Eldridge Cleaver because he is the most dramatic example of the
difference between the young rebels of 1968 and the same men ten years later.

Cleaver, out on a federal criminal charge, escaped abroad, thought to embrace
his own origins in Africa, stayed away for years. But he’s come back. He’s
willing to face the old charges. He’s convinced, he says, that America is worth
living in and living for. He is a quite forthright penitent. He doesn’t say
that he made stupid mistakes or errors of tactics. He says he sinned, and all
his revolutionary fervour has gone into his conversion to Christianity.

Very few of the others, I imagine, have made such a complete about-face, but
almost all of them have had long second thoughts about their role in the 1968
rebellion. They meditate a good deal about it. One or two even go on the
lecture circuit, telling a generation of quite different types that they were
wrong to be so violent about overthrowing a system whose working, whose
possibilities of creative working, they did not understand.

Most of them have sobered considerably by way of dress, hairstyle and what we
call lifestyle. They’re married, they have children, they go to offices. They
work in city government. They teach in schools or universities, but they seem
to be teaching more chemistry or history or social science than rebellion,
which reminds us of the old crack during the more radical days of the
Depression: a liberal is a Communist with a wife and two children.

When these sobered rebels talk to college audiences, they must be more aware
than anybody not of changes in America perhaps, but of great changes in the
youth of the late 1970s.

The generation now in college may have only faint personal memories of 1968 and
there’s nothing much to show that they’ve followed the Cleaver and Weathermen
and similar histories except in television documentaries. But after talking to
some of them and wondering about their surprising sobriety – or, if you like,
inaction – I gather that they do not hold the same romantic view of the
alternatives to the American system of government that the boys of '68 did.
Many of them, though they had few illusions about the Soviet Union, did harbour
the dream that Communism or at least a workers' and student revolution could be
made to produce more equal justice, more equal rights without dictatorship and
its accompanying barbarities.

In Europe, I suppose this growing belief has produced Eurocommunism. Well if
the surveys of the present college generation are anything to go on, this
belief is, in America, highly suspect. The heroes of the non-conformists of
today (wherever they are) seem to be not Cohn-Bendit or the old Cleaver or
Trotsky converted into a dynamic leader of the Democratic Party. Their heroes
seem to be the exiled dissidents and the imprisoned dissidents of the Soviet
Union, the men who’ve risked a great deal, sometimes their lives, to defy and
denounce the fake psychiatric asylums, the prison camps, the suppression of
liberty in the Soviet Union.

We don’t hear much about present college radicals. Indeed the surveys say that
a sizeable majority of college students today are strikingly conservative. They
go to college under the extraordinary impression that they’ve gone there to
study, not to dictate what shall be taught. Their rebellious instincts have
conformed to the new conformity of settling down not into marriage, but into
what used to be called “companionate marriage” and is now called “mating”.

Nobody should infer from this that the bad days are long gone and that the
violence and despair are over. A college generation, after all, is four years
at most. And another Depression, another black uprising – and, among the
blacks, unemployment is worse than it was ten years ago – could spark another
reaction against the conservatism, the calm of the present undergraduate.

The good sign of something permanently learned is the number of college men and
women who are active in a far less dramatic and ideological way in the society
they live in. In other words, they don’t burn buildings in defiance of the
Vietnam War. They mount protests with placards and marches against the arrival
of pornographic shops and hustlers and pimps on streets close by the campus.
They enrol for the voluntary care of handicapped children. They get into local
politics. They complain not about police brutality, but about the lax state of
police security for women students who have been, or are likely to be,
assaulted. They are at their books by day and by night they rocket up in their
rooms. They’ve given up cigarettes, but they may occasionally smoke pot. They
attend town meetings of citizens protesting this or that. They give some spare
time to work in the slums.

It may not be enough to contain the violence and squalor of the world they are
growing up to, but for the time being it does seem to be a sane legacy from the
wilder days of '68.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP