150,000 more troops to Iraq - 16 November 1990

In what we call an off year, when there's no presidential election but when the
elections are for a new House of Representatives, one-third of the Senate
seats, but also a time when many states elect new governors –and there are,
across the country, local elections for every sort of office from mayor to dog
– we can always assume once the November election is over that Americans will
be absorbed, more than at any other time, with their local troubles, with the
things they've just voted for or against.

Because the Congress is dead and gone, the senators and congressmen have gone
back to the grass roots or the asphalt jungle, and the new Congress won't come
to life until January.

So this is the time when you expect to hear what the new governor of
California's going to do about the crackling fight between the state's mighty
legion of farmers and the smaller, but equally belligerent, legion of
environmentalists over the use of pesticides.

A time when we expect to learn what the new governor of Massachusetts is going
to do, to salvage the state from the pit of debt and depression, into which it
as plunged by the departing governor, one Michael – remember? – Dukakis.

And here, in New York City, we do hear that the man who replaced the
incomparable, the incorrigible Ed Koch, New York's first black mayor, Mr David
Dinkins, he has spread before New Yorkers a very scrawny dish of goodies.

In fact what he had to announce last week was that many promised goodies
weren't going to be served. The several thousand new policemen for duty on the
streets? Can't afford them. A pay rise for the schoolteachers, which had been
joyfully applauded? It will have to be revoked. Cuts everywhere and the quiet,
unannounced, sneaky threat of new taxes.

It's much the same all across the country. Lay-offs throughout most industries,
threatened cuts in social services and everywhere the growing problem of rot in
the physical structure of the cities, the roads, water and electrical systems,
bridges, the nervous system, if you like, of any city's vitality.

A system built, of course, built to last we thought, a century ago. In short,
the question is no longer, is the country moving into a recession, but how deep
is it now?

Well of course the inner pages of our newspapers, the second and third items of
our nightly television news programmes, are about such things. But while the
big story remains Saddam Hussein and the Gulf, suddenly within one week,
another figure has been unwillingly shoved into the limelight, as if into the
dock in a court of law, and challenged to defend himself, and he is President
Bush. Within two weeks, the approval for his Gulf policy has dropped from 69%
to 49% and it is slumping more every day.

Why now? What set off this popularity landslide was the president's
announcement last week that he not only had cancelled the plan for rotating the
forces that go on duty in the Gulf, but he was ordering another 150,000 troops
to Saudi Arabia.

This will build the American fighting force, by Christmas or thereabouts, into
380,000 and that's, that's only 40,000 less than the entire American forces
that, in the end, served in Korea. Served, of course, meant fought and so far,
in the Gulf, not a bullet has been fired.

The president said he was sending that extra 150,000 to provide an adequate
offensive military option. You may have noticed that in all the political
announcements, the United Nations resolutions, the ambassadorial
pronouncements, we stagger through thickets of jargon and always come out with
something like "offensive option".

And what does that mean? Of course it means war. On the day that President Bush
announced the huge increase in the number of "offensive option" personnel, that
means soldiers, he also let drop the casual, irritated, aside that he's had it
with Saddam Hussein.

Well I'm sure he and the other allied leaders have said such a thing, as also
fed to the teeth and had it up to here, in private, but when the President of
the United States says it in public, and then orders up another 150,000 troops,
what is that meant to do? Frighten Saddam Hussein?

Well, to paraphrase the Duke of Wellington, it frightened us. It frightened the
disbanded Congress, so much so that many Democrats said out loud in public what
they'd been muttering in private and two leading Republicans, normally
dependable Bush lieutenants, Senator Dole and Senator Lugar, came out and asked
the president to revive the dead Congress, call it back into special session
now and, frankly, say what he has in mind.

In fact, the urge has taken hold of Congress, about a month after it was felt
in the country, to force the President to answer the original elementary
question. Why are we in the Gulf and what are we going to do there?

This seems an extraordinary question to ask, at this late date, almost four
months after the president's so swift response to the invasion of 2 August. He
said then, "We are opposing naked aggression. Saddam Hussein must get out of
Kuwait. We can't have dictators walking into little countries. This aggression
will not stand."

Well the first, what 50,000 and rising every week, were sent off to defend, the
president said, Saudi Arabia, for if Hussein conquered coastal Saudi Arabia, he
would control over 40% of the world's oil supply. I should think that for any
western nation, that was in itself an intolerable prospect.

It was unfortunate however, that the administration, president in particular,
didn't stress this dire prospect and emphasise that it represented a threat to
the economies, the actual prosperity of, among others, western Europe.

Fight for oil? Yes indeed, the president might have said, and gone on to quote
vivid and memorable instances from history, of great wars, fought down the
centuries, from the Egyptians to the Indo-Chinese, for some raw material whose
denial would impoverish your country.

But neither the president nor his secretary of state came out firmly at the
start and said there was nothing dishonourable in fighting for oil. The awkward
fact which may have inhibited this line, was that the United States is far less
dependent on oil from the Gulf than most other western countries and, most
glaringly, Japan.

As the American forces gathered through August and September I must say many
thoughtful Americans began to feel nervous about the president's apparent
assumption that everybody knew why America was in the Gulf and there was no
further need to define the cause more clearly and put it up to the people.

Of course there was no pressing popular objection to make him do this, for a
month or so more than 80% of the American people backed him, on what they took
to be American policy in the Gulf. Nevertheless, I felt at the time that the
country was in a sort of a trance. It was proud of all those thousands of
troops being deployed in Saudi Arabia.

A nightly high was available in the television shots of men thundering through
clouds of sand, in tanks or toasting their families and saying things were
fine. The country got a lift from seeing the first big, dramatic exhibition of
its strength, surely to be used, if at all, in a good cause.

But once the United Nations security council passed that unanimous resolution
and voted sanctions, it was noticeable with what relief a lot of political
leaders, and surely millions or ordinary citizens, decided that the UN decision
was an actual insurance policy against war. All those precious American boys
weren't going to fight after all.

The administration expected, I think, that the troops would then settle down
for the long haul. Living in the desert till March, April, maybe through the
blazing summer, to see if sanctions worked. But the TV microphones soon
amplified the dreadful fact that most, many, of the troops weren't at all
prepared for a long haul. They wanted action or they wanted out.

Realising this, and getting disturbing reports about the morale of all those
thousands, President Bush said he'd had it with Hussein and ordered up another
150,000 and suddenly it occurred to the complacent home bodies – you, me, the
Congress – that perhaps, after all, the president meant all those soldiers
actually to fight, sooner than later.

So again, suddenly, the New York Times and many other fine institutions begged
for patience, let the sanctions work. Demonstrators took to the streets, no
blood for oil. The Congress, roused from its deathbed, says, under the
Constitution, the president cannot go to war. Only the Congress can declare
war.

And that is absolutely correct, but they do not remark that the Constitution
has been blandly ignored for 49 years. The last Congressional declaration of
war was against Italy in December 1941. In the meantime, at least six
presidents have committed American forces abroad, without even a nod to
Congress.

So the question now emerges, does the president have emergency powers that
transcend the Constitution? For nearly 50 years, presidents have assumed those
powers. So a noisy confrontation seems to lie just ahead.

All this, the preliminary noise, the war drums, the street protests, the
sulking troops, the weeping wives, the angry liberals and others in Congress,
the rebellious Senators Dole and Lugar, all this must be music to the ears of
Saddam Hussein. He must be leaning back, sitting it out and loving it.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP