Kansas City - 16 February 1990

It used to be that whenever you went west, the further you drew away from the
east, the more rapidly did the affairs of the east fade away.

That's to say the preoccupations of New York, its money markets, its politics,
its theatres, books and the national preoccupations of the Congress. And, even
more, the concerns of Europe and with Europe, retreated like chapters you'd
just finished in a history book.

Those were the days, and I'm talking about the '40s and '50s, when I used to
advise newly-appointed foreign correspondents from Britain or France, Italy,
Sweden, if they sought advice, before they settled in Washington, to go and
live for a month in Kansas City, just halfway across the country.

The big Kansas City, in Missouri, that is, not Kansas City, Kansas. The point
being that Kansas City, a population then, and now, of about half a million,
was the crossroads and marketplace for the entire western half of the United
States.

It had 11 railroad stations with 190 trunk lines, the terminals or transfer
points for 11 separate railroads. It had one of the first big airports. It lay
on the wide Missouri River where it turns north. So between the river traffic
and the railroads, fanning out north and south and west, Kansas City was the
reception centre, the wholesale market, the hub for the handling of the crops
of half the continent – the wheat of the plains, the corn, the maize and
vegetables of the Midwest bread basket, the cotton of the south, the lumber of
the north.

It was the banking centre for farmers from a thousand-mile arc around. If there
was an archetypal American capital city, Kansas City was it. From its earliest
days, it had developed a great newspaper and in my time, early and late, to
wake up and read the Kansas City Star, instead of the New York Times, was a
revelation.

Not only the sort of information it poured out but its view of American life,
society and politics was very different from anything you'd pick up in Boston
or New York, or Atlanta or New Orleans. What's more to the point, it was more
typical of more cities and regions in the heartland of the country than any
other place.

It was, most of the time, conservative, rural, republican and – when foreign
wars rumbled on the horizon – it was isolationist. It saw itself, and tried to
keep itself, isolated from the scheming barons of Wall Street. The good place,
a rewarding place, in other words, from which to begin to know America.

Incidentally, I never knew any correspondent who took my advice. Not because
they weren't inclined to believe me, but their editors held firm to the
preconception that the first and last place to know about America was
Washington.

Sending a correspondent on his arrival to Kansas City seemed about as mad as
sending an American correspondent, newly assigned to England, to Manchester or
Leeds – which, by the way, wouldn't be such a bad idea.

All American correspondents in Britain, to this day, arrive in London and tend
to stay there, unless there's a big airplane accident in Scotland, say. And
they bring with them a comfortable stock of preconceptions about Britain and
Britons which are generally two generations out of date.

Their editors require an early filing of pieces on class distinctions, on the
royal family today, pieces on the London theatre, on the see-saw relative
popularity of Mrs Thatcher and M. Kinnock, and, more recently, astonished
pieces on the quality – if that's the word – and the virulence of the tabloids
that most Britons read.

But the day's long gone when there'd be much point in staying in Kansas City to
see a microcosm of much of America. Not because it's much changed but because
everywhere begins to look the same and get the same news, and market the same
columnists, the same commentators.

And you know who, what, has been, for 30 years or more, the great leveller?
Television. For over 30 years, the three commercial networks and the public
non-commercial network have fed their programmes to hundreds of affiliates in
every corner and part of the country.

On all the big issues of the day, domestic or foreign, the news and the views
arrive in Washington or New York or wherever there's some big accident or
prison break or drug bust, and the whole country sees the same account.
Accounts, I should say, from the three anchormen of the three big networks,
from the two men and one woman who anchor the public television network.

So that in San Francisco, from which I've just returned, I was watching,
listening and reading the same voluminous mass of reports on the problem of
German reunification, on Mr Mandela's release and its consequences, on the drug
conference in Cartagena, on the never- ending issue on how to deal with Japan's
export trade and its developing, highly developing, high technology.

So, it's a relief when something comes up that appears to be peculiarly
American and, for the moment, catches the attention of the whole country.

Nothing I can think of is more American, has remained for so long an American
preoccupation, than the concern with health, especially with foods that
somebody says, somebody fears, might cause cancer, heart attack, high blood
pressure.

Why this should be more of an obsession with Americans, than say with the
French or the Chinese, is due to two, I think, contradictory views of life and
death which Americans pick up in childhood. One is Mark Twain's admirable and
undebatable line, "Nobody gets out alive".

The other, though, which has superseded this home truth has been best expressed
by an American lady who lives in London and who, not so long ago, wrote a
funny, a cute, book, called Brit-Think, Ameri-Think, Miss Jane Walmsley said
it, "In America, death is optional".

In no other country do otherwise intelligent people talk seriously about the
prospect, the early possibility, as of a new and automatic gearshift, of living
to be 120. Why not 150? They realise, of course, that there will have to be
some conquered preliminaries, chief of which is avoiding foods which will not
cause the notorious dread diseases.

And for about 30 years now, the popular knowledge which is as much taken for
granted as the circulation of the blood is that the daily demon who must be
exorcised is cholesterol.

The popular wisdom does not yet run to an accurate description of what it is.
Namely, a monohydric alcohol, a sterol, widely distributed in animal tissues
and occurring in the yolk of eggs, various oils, fats, nerve tissue of the
brain and spinal cord, the liver, kidneys and adrenal glands.

The popular wisdom knows that cholesterol, too much of it, can cause clots and
give you a heart attack or high blood pressure. And lately, the popular
knowledge has been supplemented or confused by the word that there are two
kinds – high-density lipoproteins, which contain more protein than low-density
lipoproteins.

Even this distinction is too fussy to go into. We now settle for the scary
knowledge that there is good and bad cholesterol and that, hang it, either kind
is better avoided.

So, for several years, we've been running away from animal fats. There is a
very marked national slump in beef eating, and running towards fish and chicken
and salads and, with cancer in mind, bran, fibre – what they used to call
roughage.

And during the past year there was a sudden fashion for oats. Oat bran. Oat
bran everything, from porridge, to bread, to cookies. And recently, the most
famous, old-time manufacturer of breakfast oats went so far as to put on their
famous package "lowers cholesterol".

Last month, the most eminent of American medical journals, the New England
Journal of Medicine came out with a careful study which concluded that oats
have no special property for banning cholesterol or lowering it.

If the person who loves to gobble his porridge gets lower cholesterol, it's
only because he gets too full to eat as much animal fat as he would if he
didn't eat his porridge. The same result would come from eating strips of
carpet, which doesn't mean that a carpet diet will lower your cholesterol. It
might well upset your vitality, not to mention your digestion.

Well, the government agency that polices false health claims in advertising,
the Food and Drug Administration, has declared the oats' people culpable of a
foolish claim. And this has started the agency going on a whole campaign to
survey the packages, the literature, the television advertising of every sort
of food product and stop them making false health claims. Most of all, it's
going to do a lot of damage to the innumerable products that claim to lower
cholesterol.

The same week, another blow was struck, this time to the fashionable yuppie
world, or those that aspire to yuppiedom. Bottled water is so chic and is
regularly asked for by people edging their way up the social ladder. The
refreshment of choice of such people has been Perrier, which for years Orson
Welles used to tell us in his doomsday baritone, "Perrier, from the centre of
the earth".

Well, no matter where it comes from, the Food and Drug Administration last week
recalled every bottle of it from shelves throughout the United States because
traces of benzene – benzene! – were found in a few bottles. The recall amounted
to 160 million bottles, $70 million-worth which, they used to say, "Ain't hay".

I'd recommend to the distraught yuppies a consumer report put out several years
ago, a whole issue devoted to chemical analysis of about a score of popular
bottled waters.

The conclusion? That the purest water available in the United States came, not
from the centre of the earth, but from the Groton Reservoir, up the Hudson
River. It is known as New York City tap water.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC.

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP