The Iran-Contra scandal revealed - 21 November 1986

I see where an eminent British judge has made a distinction between the people
who report the news, and the people who read or hear it – a distinction which
is all too familiar to reporters, but may never even have occurred to the
reader or the listener.

It is that whereas the reporter has to grab the news on the wing, the reader
can check it with another messenger and conclude that the reporter was misled
by the mocking bird of rumour. The judge didn’t, of course, put it quite that
way, but he did point out that a reporter works against a deadline and can’t
enjoy the advantages of checking his stuff line by line, and correcting with
the help of hindsight.

The cautionary words could not have struck a more telling note with me. Last
week, I decided to talk about a topic that, I said, had seized the country. It
was, of course, the uproar that developed out of that article in a Beirut
magazine which accused the Reagan administration of shipping arms to Iran and
holding secret negotiations with unidentified moderates – if any – in Iran,
while the president and his loyal secretary or state Mr Shultz had been busy in
publicly imploring America’s allies to follow America’s staunch example by
banning all arms to nations that sponsor terrorism, and never, ever try to deal
with them.

Once American and other reporters got on to the story very much more came out
and, Mr Shultz more than anybody looked pretty foolish. Foolish and betrayed,
since he had been dead against negotiating from the start, and in the past six
months or so was left out of the negotiations and not briefed about what was
going on.

Well, all this and more was on my mind when I sat down last week at this
microphone and taped my talk for its usual transatlantic delivery by carrier
pigeon to London. Right afterwards, I learned that President Reagan was going
on the air that evening so – my talk would not be heard until the next night –
it was necessary to scrap the talk and start all over again next day, in the
light of what the president would say and how he would defend and justify his
policy.

I noted then, as I still would now, the avalanche of criticism that had
descended on him all the way from the liberal wing of the Democratic party to
the right wing of his own party, mentioning in particular the surprising
denunciation of Senator Barry Goldwater, who has been the president's most
loyal supporter at all times.

Well, not quite all times – he once wrote and published a blistering letter to
Mr William Casey, the head of the Central Intelligence Agency, when it came out
that he had sanctioned the secret mining of those Nicaraguan harbours. "Hell,
Bill," wrote Goldwater in his no-nonsense way, "what is going on here?"

Before I sat down again to broadcast the Iranian story, and after the president
had made his artful, sincere plea to us to trust him and his worthy motives, I
waited to hear the result of the first poll and how the people – the people who
had heard or read his television talk – had taken it. It was a shock, but one
essential to report, which I did, that 72% of the people were on his side.

What I didn’t think of then, was that any nationwide poll of the people based
on a true statistical example of the whole population must include the 63% of
the qualified voters who didn’t bother to go to the polls in the congressional
elections two weeks ago. It’s a shocking fact of what Americans like to call
participatory democracy that almost 30% of the voters chose to participate; the
other 63% very likely don’t care much about the way they're governed, provided
Mr Reagan keeps minding the store and gets the remaining hostages out by any
means he cares to use.

Well, a day or so later it became clear that the poll was taken pretty soon
after the president had finished his television appeal and it was an immediate
reaction to his performance. This week the Los Angeles Times sponsored another
nationwide poll, equally reputable, with a startlingly different result. Only
12% of the people approved of his secret negotiations, about 20% were in doubt,
58% against the whole business and did not accept the president's assurance
that the release of hostages following on three arms shipments, two by
trans-shipment via Israel, was simply, as Mr Reagan called it, a bonus, and not
the chief aim of the negotiations.

Well, now the whole thing is being investigated by both the Senate and the
house committee and we’d better not jump the gun but wait and see what other
secretes they unearth and whether they will propose new and more stringent
laws, in this case, to govern the limits of the president's initiative in
foreign policy. That – better laws – is what congressional investigations are
about.

If a country can be seized by two scandals at once, this was the week it
happened. A name that nobody had ever heard of came leaping into the headlines
and on to the screens, not only in America but in Europe. It is the name of
Boesky, Ivan Boesky the 49-year-old son of a Russian immigrant who came to make
a respectable pile in a small restaurant chain in Detroit.

The son never finished college being, I should guess, too smart to wait to have
his talents authenticated with a degree, though he did get one from a small
so-called college of law. He married a very rich girl and, to his credit, felt
uncomfortable living in a plush New York apartment which was a present from his
father-in-law. About ten years ago he discovered arbitrage, which sounds like
something in arbitrage, which sounds like something in admiralty law, but is in
fact a speculative game played in the very real world of financial mergers and
takeovers.

It’s a special profession and there is nothing illegal about it. An arbitrage
firm is one that commits capital in the stocks of companies that have publicly
announced – note that, that have publicly announced – they are available for
mergers or already about to arrange one, and also for firms that have filed for
bankruptcy and are about to be reorganised. The legitimate arbitrage firm does
not arrange mergers or buy up stocks on rumours of a merger.

Mr Boesky borrowing about half a million pounds from his mother-in-law, set up
his own arbitrage company, and developed a wide and deep knowledge of the
market value of securities in both American and European corporations. He gave
a new and daring dimension to the practice of arbitrage, by going out on a
wrangler's limb and risking huge amounts of money on the financial future of
current mergers and takeovers. He never flaunted the enormous wealth he
acquired as Wall Street’s most brilliant and, you might say, most envied risk
arbitrator, able to buy up millions of shares to trade in and out, as they say,
of a promising situation.

In the past year or two even ordinary newspaper readers, let alone small
investors, have become fascinated or frightened by the running epidemic
throughout Europe and America of mammoth takeovers and giant mergers. These,
often totally unexpected, mergers in which fortunes could be made from swift
purchase of stocks that might become more precious overnight from the alliance
with a prosperous giant, tempted some arbitrageurs to take bets on which merger
might be next.

We are now moving from the heady daylight of legal speculation into the
twilight zone of illegality. Mr Boesky, it seems, glided into the shadows and
appears to have gone beyond, not merely guessing who’d be next, but discovering
from confidential sources about possible or likely unannounced mergers and
takeovers. Pick the next possible target, buy up thousands, perhaps millions,
of shares. So as not to draw attention to the game, do it through various
American or European partners or fronts.

The merger's then announced and you reap the enormous profit from stocks whose
value you yourself have helped to inflate. Acting in this way, before a merger
is announced or perhaps even much thought about, is called inside trading and
is a criminal act.

Nobody knows for sure how much Mr Boesky is worth but he was caught, confessed
and fined $100million. Which leaves him, it's calculated, only about
$200million to get along on. To avoid the likelihood of a jail sentence he – as
Americans say – copped a plea.

A famous criminal lawyer once said, "Show me a conspiracy case without an
informer, and I’ll show a leaky prosecution case". So, Mr Boesky agreed to pay
his whopping fine to the federal agency, the securities and exchange
commission, which polices the stock market. And, as I say, in the hope of not
going to jail and agree to inform on some of those well-disguised partners or
fronts.

To do this, he taped telephone calls and wore a hidden microphone to record
conversations. I think he’s been doing this for three months or so. You can
imagine the wave of shudders that must have passed over some of those rather
grand companies in America and in Europe that had shared or shielded his
shenanigans. Worse still, it now appears that Mr Boesky, having decided to come
clean in the SEC, sold off last week nearly half a billion dollars' worth of
securities. So now many legitimate corporations and stock traders are feeling
waves not of guilt, but of righteous fury.

The SEC’s plea-bargaining deal with Mr Boesky prompted a wry memorable comment
this week. You must have read that very different sort of commission, a sort of
Cabinet of the Mafia was convicted last week and some of the biggest shots of
the families of organised crime were sentenced to long prison terms for
conspiracy fraud, and arranged murders.

One of the victims being lead off to jail said, "There is no justice in this
country. If you are handling millions of dollars you get off with a fine but
it’s not the same if you are handling human beings."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP