Sir Lionel Sackville-West (1827 - 1908) - 16 May 1997

Several listeners have wondered about American feelings, thoughts, on the
British General Election.

"You let it go by," one listener writes wistfully. Well, I did make a point of
not breathing a syllable about it before it happened, while it was happening,
for fear some mild remark of mine might be taken as an unforgivable intrusion
of prejudice into something that was none of my business. Such things have
happened to individuals far grander than a journalist. I doubt... I don't
doubt, I'm quite sure that you, whoever and wherever you are, heard nothing at
all about the election from the American ambassador to the United Kingdom. And
even the present British ambassador to the United States was, how shall I put
it, brilliantly silent.

Which reminds me of the way a French newspaper reported the first Cannes Film
Festival, which was a dreadful flop. Showing a film to a half-empty hall and
noticing the lack of top Hollywood stars who'd been expected, the gallant
French paper wrote, "Bing Crosby, Fred Astaire and Errol Flynn shone by their
absence".

There's an old, and very good reason why British ambassadors, especially, not
only don't say a mumbling word on the eve of an American election but, if
possible, claim a pressing reason for taking a holiday. I don't know if it's
still true, but one of the things a new British ambassador was always told
before he left for Washington was the horrendous case of Sir Lionel
Sackville-West.

The year was a presidential election year, 1888. The man in the White House was
a Democrat, Grover Cleveland. Mr Cleveland was being opposed by the Republican,
General Benjamin Harrison. There was one overriding issue in the campaign,
tariffs. The federal government was running up an enormous surplus and
President Cleveland wanted not to embrace Free Trade, which was a dirty phrase
in those days but to reduce taxes for the benefit especially of farmers who
suffered from the high costs that arise from excessive duties. The Republicans
wanted the high tariff to go on forever.

As in all presidential, and dare I say parliamentary, campaigns there was a
good deal of misrepresentation of the opponents' views. The Republicans hunted
high and low to find some incidence, some pretext for pretending that President
Cleveland was secretly an advocate of Free Trade. Undreamed of treasure trove
fell into their laps from the pen, no less, of the British minister in
Washington. Sir Lionel Sackville-West had been in the Foreign Service for over
40 years and represented Great Britain one way or another in eight countries.
His public behaviour, so far as the books go, had been impeccable. In this
Cleveland/Harrison election year, he was the British minister in Washington. I
cringe to have to explain that in 1888, Great Britain did not consider the
United States a superpower; it did not rate an ambassador, only a minister.

There came a day, in early October, when Sir Lionel received a letter from
California, from a man claiming to be an Englishman who was naturalised, and
facing his first presidential vote. "Please, Sir Lionel, what do you think?
Which candidate do you suppose would be most friendly to England?"

Incredibly, this veteran diplomat promptly wrote back in his own hand, saying,
"Mr. Cleveland is the man!"

Well, this conscientious, naturalised Briton was nothing of the sort. He was a
devout Republican and had been put up to the trick by a local party agent. The
Republicans crowed with delight and, two weeks before the election, printed the
minister's letter and distributed it throughout the nation, converting it into
hand bills circulated by the thousands throughout New York City. Where, it was
rightly figured, it would inflame the Irish population.

The Republican gloss on the letter was that Cleveland was, thus, unmasked as a
free trader, a president who would commit the United States to a policy of Free
Trade to England's benefit. The administration responded quickly. The Secretary
of State had Sir Lionel on the carpet. Sir Lionel maintained he was shocked,
shocked that a private letter should be published. He'd been tricked, of
course. He never meddled in domestic affairs.

These protestations, alas, were reported to the president as examples of what
the secretary called "his general fatuity". President Cleveland asked to have
Sir Lionel recalled, and gave him his papers. It was, however, too late to
scotch the mischief already done. New York State was pivotal to the election,
and General Harrison carried it, just – thanks to a decisive majority in New
York City.

So you see from this enlightening bit of history how a correspondent here, with
ties to Britain, is going to button his lip until the moment the door of Number
10 Downing Street, or in this case, Number 11, has closed on its new inmate. I
honestly don't think there's anything very dramatic or startling about what was
thought and written here about the election.

The wonderment of the size of the Labour majority was just as gaping as it was
in Britain. All the reasons that your papers had rehearsed were repeated here.
Too long in office; serious ideological split in the Conservative Party itself;
the serious and repeated smell of scandal. In a very rare linguistic trick,
Britons have taken an American adjective for shoddy material as "sleazy rayon",
which we always assumed was manufactured in Silesia, and turned it into a noun.
Sleaze. As, I gather, a synonym for sordid behaviour, usually sexual.

The most striking reaction, to me, anyway, was a general comment, you might
say, of disillusion. American correspondents in Britain used to remark on the
small, intent audiences and their tendency to heckle or put tough questions to
the speakers. This was thought by American reporters to be an admirable
difference. American rallies were always huge, mass gatherings of the faithful
who bellowed with laughter at every thin joke, thundered applause at every
platitude, and any time a dissenting voice or a placard rose up, the villain
was promptly bustled out of the auditorium by the police.

Apparently, this has changed. The rallies now, as in America, seem to get
bigger and bigger and to have become rousing sermons to the already converted.
Also, much admired, was the institution of free television time for each party
to present its case through a leading spokesman or woman.

I myself remember how serious and sensible both speakers were. Sometimes there
was a forlorn, even more serious, Liberal. I gather all this has changed. The
reporters found that the deliberate copying of American style razzle-dazzle and
flapdoodle comes on apace. Sound bites, sight bites, grotesque caricatures of
the opponents' promised policies, clever distortion of each other's slogans.

The last British election I covered was the 1955 one and I've just looked over
my dispatches. They're almost touching in their antique flavour.

I wrote, "Here, no motorcades sirening into a city square with the candidate
and his spreadeagled arms acknowledging the roars of 20,000 people, like Hitler
entering Vienna. Rather, Mr Attlee, in a Mini car driven by his wife, through
country lanes. Talking to a hundred, sometimes a dozen, citizens. Giving a
scoutmaster's pep talk. It might be a parent/teachers meeting in the United
States. No army of youth for Eden. No flights of a thousand balloons for
Attlee. And the candidates saying, 'Thank you! One and all!' To a rustle of
hand claps." I concluded that a British election campaign compared with an
American election campaign is as a prayer meeting to a Roman circus.

Well, no doubt from the long coverage we had on several TV channels, Britain
has developed its own form of circus. And much of this has been done by
American advisers. As for what we used to call the issues, I have to throw in
as background that in most American elections, rebels inside either party
sometimes unite and form clubs for the other guy, like Republicans for Dukakis
– there were precious few of them. Democrats for Reagan – they got him in.

So I said last November that Clinton won because he ran as a Republican for
Clinton. Similarly, to use the same parlance, the American reporters might have
written that Mr Blair ran as a Conservative for Blair. Enough said.

Or rather, not enough said! I ought to add that, in the little time since the
election, long and admiring dispatches have been published here about what is
being called the hyperactive and whirlwind pace of Mr Blair's already announced
reforms. The banning of all hand guns. Parliaments for Scotland and Wales.
Tough punishment for juvenile criminals. Reform of the health system.

An envious reflection is added by American politicians who note that, in a
parliamentary system when the Prime Minister says "Do this!", it is performed.
Whereas here the president can propose, and propose himself blue, but the
Congress, most often the House, disposes.

What I regret most in the six-hour coverage of the election – one national
channel simply switched to the BBC coverage – was any single line of wit from
the winners, or humour from the losers. There were lots of "Time - not to look
backwards but..." Guess what? "To look forwards". And one gem. One winner said,
"It is the beginning of a new dawn". It made you wonder at once what the
beginning of an old dawn would look like.

Still, even that unforgettable line is not as memorable as the most famous
campaign sentence of Calvin Coolidge. A shrewd New Englander, President of the
United States, 1923 to '29. He said, "When large numbers of people are out of
work, unemployment results".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP