Burma and Quentin Burdick - 11 September 1992

Twiddling through 50-odd cable channels, which is a breakfast routine of mine,
I came on something the like of which I doubt has been seen in recent years in
any Western or shall we say halfway democratic country. It was broadcast from,
of course, Atlanta's TNT and showed the results of a Scotsman's trip inside
Burma. The last inside look at a foreign country that had a similar uneasy
effect on me was all over our networks 20 years ago, when the then President
Nixon made his famous breakthrough visit to Communist China. There we saw
beaming workers who work fewer hours than they used to under the tyrant Chiang
Kai-shek, so they could get home and spend the evenings, our guide said,
studying the works of Chairman Mao.

Mmm, we saw happy students, happy peasants thrashing rice, even happy surgeons
carrying the little sacred red book, The Thoughts of Chairman Mao. We saw
bookstalls, platoons of books all on Karl Marx or Lenin or Mao or the Long
March or the history and triumph of communism. What about the rest of the
world's literature, no call for it apparently. We saw a group of
eight-year-olds performing a dance – and they were dressed as cute little
soldiers – in which they stabbed the air with fixed baronets. This didn't
impress our side quite as much as they'd hoped.

Well, inside Burma was nothing like so sugary and spicy, the Scotsman's little
tour of Burma, mainly of the capital Rangoon, was obviously totally controlled
by the authorities. He went where they let him go, but the commentary was his,
so he showed us first a whole company of marching soldiers coming towards us –
hip hub, hip hub – but they weren't soldiers, they were doctors. Young male and
female in blue fatigues marching along under a major doctor, I guess, to an
orientation or training class, training in the proper military approach to
medicine. The doctors were asked if they enjoyed their training lesson. Two,
three extremely pretty young women said with no expression at all, "Yes, why?",
they turned back to their books they didn't say they weren't going to say
anything. Few people on the streets said anything at all.

We did have a short interview with U Nu whom some people will remember as the
first prime minister of an Independent Burma after the Second War. He'd been
under house arrest, but now he was free, free to make guarded remarks about the
people's wish for democracy. We never knew quite what anybody meant by that
since under U Nu, Burma was once firmly allied with the people's democracy of
China. I never saw a population going about its daily business in more
uniformed gloom, the people wouldn't say anything controversial like "it's a
great day, isn't it" to the Scot. Here and there, outside an important building
you would see a lolling soldier or two, otherwise as the Scot remarked there
was nothing except the weary I'd say frightened faces of the people nothing to
show that this was a country under martial law run by a military dictatorship.

A couple of present cabinet ministers were quick to explain that it's true,
there were several hundred political prisoners – Amnesty says many thousands –
but the present government does not intend to stay for ever, there will be
elections. I gathered that they were about as imminent as the elections in
Cuba, which Castro has been promising ever since 1960 when he took over. As for
the infamous 1987/8 student demonstrationists, what he called "'descendants for
democracy", well we were assured that they were not genuine political uprisings
just a shambles of lootings and burnings and killings by hooligans. What has
all this got to do with America?

Well this whole bleak piece was no longer than about 12 minutes, but I shall
never forget it and I had the feeling that the Scotsman was trying to be as
fair and inquisitive as he could, but when I switched over to one of our
networks and heard and saw the messieurs Bush and Clinton and Gore and Quayle
bawling away lampooning and systematically distorting each other's policies and
generally behaving like teenagers in a tantrum, I felt like the prodigal hot
footing it home. I thought well bless your heart George and Bill and Dan and
Al, Churchill was right, democracy is a perfectly awful form of government.
Unfortunately, it's better than all the others.

It's sometimes hard to believe that, but I have to say that electioneering in a
democracy while mainly the sound and fury of factious oratory does allow for
something vital, which I gather from an old friend of mine a born Russian is
highly suspect in any totalitarian regime – humour, conscious or not. I haven't
heard this time of any campaigner as good as the southern senator who beat the
late Senator Pepper in I think his first run for the Senate from Florida. His
opponent rattled around the inland countryside, the back country of Florida in
an old jalopy, stopped at every rural crossroads rang a bell to summon everyone
in sight – sometimes he'd gather only 20 or 30 people but he did it everywhere
and he crisscrossed the state. He made the same little speech, an outrageous,
scurrilous speech about his opponent designed to impress the poor and the
simple and he delivered it absolutely deadpan.

It ended: I just hate to tell you this folks, but my opponent masticates his
food and worse he has a sister up in New York who's a thespian. He won
handsomely. Well we have nothing to match that classic this time, but we did
pick up a jewel of rhetoric from the Republican convention.

Do you remember the evangelical, the Reverend Pat Robertson who four years ago,
ran for the presidency himself. He was one of the orators at the Huston
convention and in doom-laden tones he made a warning reference to something
most of us had forgotten, the Equal Rights Amendment. Now that was an amendment
to the Constitution, which declared in the simplest language, equality of
rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by
any state on account of sex. Sounds sensible, it was thought to be so by both
Houses of Congress, which passed it easily. But to make an amendment to the
Constitution come into force, it must be ratified by the legislatures of
three-quarters of the 50 states. The Equal Rights Amendment fell short by three
states 10 years ago this summer and expired.

But the Reverend Robertson seemed scared that it's going to be brought up
again. At the Republican convention he thundered, and I quote, "The Equal
Rights Amendment is a socialist plot designed to have women leave their
husbands, kill their children, destroy capitalism and turn lesbian". Almost as
offensive as the sentence itself was the fact that nobody, from President Bush
down, got up and said "the Reverend Pat Robertson is talking rubbish", they
just let it stay there like a bad smell in the air. It would do its work, nasty
work among the ignorant.

This week an old politician died whom nobody practically nobody outside his
home state had ever heard off even though the man was 84 and had been in the
United States Senate for 32 years – Senator Quentin Burdick. He was known and
cherished in its native state of North Dakota for the reason any congressman or
senator is cherished quite apart from his personal charm or beguiling
character, he brought home the bacon. Fellow senators were enviably aghast over
Burdick's unashamed way of tacking amendments on to every sort of bill that
could cajole federal money for some strictly North Dakotan project – a bridge,
a crops subsidy, a veterans hospital, a highway – what are known as pork barrel
projects.

In his time, Quentin Burdick was proud to be known in the Senate as the King of
Pork. Only once and very lately did he acquire national exposure, an old dance
band leader early sweet swing much adored for years on the telly by fans
equally creaking died a year to two ago. Senator Burdick somehow collared
$500,000 in government money to build a museum in Strasburg, North Dakota in
honour of the dead sweet swing king. Usually slices of pork go deliberately
unnoticed, since your colleague is busy slicing his own, but this was a whole
hog. Congress was properly appalled and withdrew the half million dollars.

We haven't up north here heard anything lately from Louisiana, where at
election time you can see democracy in full bloom. Louisiana is famous for
Cajun cooking, jazz, reformers, machine politicians and routine corruption. I
suppose David Duke the former neo-Nazi is running for something, but we haven't
heard of anybody in the fine old scoundrelly Louisiana tradition, nobody
anywhere in the country as memorable as the late Earl Long, Hugh's brother one
and forever remembered as governor of the state. He who, once elected,
immediately reneged on the main promise of his campaign and confronted by an
angry delegation of citizens asking him what he thought he'd done – "Done?" he
said, "I lied."

One time, the federals were after him with a raft of income tax evasion charges
and his opponents crowed that the investigation would upset him, he said, "I'm
the most investigated man in history and I'm upset, proof". He was the first
Southern governor to give blacks the vote and when a notorious New Orleans
judge, a racist leader, went storming into Earl Long's office, the governor
said, "What are you going to do judge, the feds have got the atom bomb." An
honest politician if ever there was one. When he left office and was in failing
health and an old colleague was deploring the corruption in public life, the
old man said, "One of these days, the people of Louisiana are going to get
decent government and they ain't gonna like it."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP