Al Gore's Chinese aeroplane deal - 4 April 1997

The announcement that 1 May is the date may not have sent a shockwave through
Washington, but the approach of a British national election has already
provoked pieces on the way the British parliamentary system works and a fair
amount of editorial comment.

Most of which reassures Americans that, in any result, there will be no return
to the old, blue-collar, union-dominated, class warfare socialism of Kier
Hardie. Or, for that matter, of Aneurin Bevan and Clement Attlee. Surely the
American leader writer is correct who commented "the Conservatives appear
caught in a paradox. They have so transformed the terms of political debate
that Labour now competes with them on proposals for privatisation, welfare
reform and tougher law enforcement". Incidentally, you could substitute the
word Republican for Conservative and Democrat for Labour and you'd be
describing pretty accurately the same paradox in American political debate.

The rush to occupy the political centre seems to be an international urge. I've
often wondered, since this flight from the Left and the Right has been going
on, whether it will go on for ever. Some of us watch, with fascinated anxiety,
Russia. A huge country, at the moment in turmoil, with massive unemployment,
most people months' behind with their pay cheques. The dubious gift from
democracy of a flourishing mafia, and the vast army, impoverished, officers
homeless, millions of weapons outdated.

A correspondent just back from years there was saying the other evening that
although the polls are encouraging about the people's wish to keep on plugging
away at the democratic experiment, he sensed a great yearning hunger for
somebody to take hold, to reinstate some recognisable order. Not having had,
ever, any experience of democracy, Russians cannot expect to have the luxury of
debating what kind of centre politics would be effective. The subdued, but
surging, cry is for discipline. And, of course, many of the old and middle-aged
say yes, even at the price of a return to Communism. The name Lebed is chanted
by wistful millions.

Well, now, there's one feature of British election campaigns that Americans
greatly envy and one they shudder from thinking to copy. The envied practice is
a three-week campaign instead of, as here, a one-year – effectively a two-year
– campaign.

The other feature, which has been brought up by several listeners who heard my
talk on the campaign financing scandal, is free television time for each party,
a practice which, if it was adopted by the Republicans and the Democrats would
avert at a stroke the need to raise millions to run for Congress, say 70, 80
million dollars if you're running for president. All Americans who are
interested in government admit that it is a rotten system, that it demeans
every candidate who's forced to practise it and that it is a seed bed of
corruption.

"So why don't you", asks the visiting Englishman, "Simply give each party an
hour or two free on the telly, as we do?" Believe me, the question has been
asked and swiftly repulsed ever since the invention of the cathode tube. The
answer is swift and true. Americans are elected, or fail to be elected, by
television more than by anything else.

Most of the campaign money raised for a candidate, for anything, used to go to
renting meeting halls, speech releases, travel fares, printed banners, portrait
blow-ups, balloons, campaign buttons, even something I've just taken out of my
desk drawer, would you believe it – a teaspoon, silver-plated. The handle has
an embossed decorative American eagle flying over an embossed and remarkably
accurate portrait of the Democrats' 1912 candidate, Woodrow Wilson. I'm pretty
sure they don't manufacture campaign spoons any more, that must have been a
tidy campaign item.

But I should say that today probably 80% more of a candidate's raised money
goes for television. Consider, most cities in America have at least 50
television channels, most of them national. A candidate tries to get his
message on as many as possible. And as the campaign goes along, the message has
to get shorter and neater and snappier and, if it's vivid, nastier. Tap a small
group, a dinner party of responsible Americans, and ask them what do they
remember most vividly of, say, Mr Bush's campaign in 1988?

I do believe most of them would instantly recall a brief image, they would now
be ashamed to admit, had the most powerful effect on millions of voters. It was
of a black man coming through a revolving door and going out on to the streets.
This was the Republicans' snapshot view of a practice Mr Bush was accusing
Governor Dukakis of Massachusetts, the Democrats' candidate, of being
dangerously addicted to. In fact, many states had the same law which allowed
long-serving convicts of proved good behaviour to go out on a weekend pass, and
rape again. Repeating this terrifying 30-second message overwhelmed and drowned
the Democratic vote in many states.

Nobody I've talked to sees the faintest possibility that either party will give
up the precious, if unsavoury, blessing of a memorable 30-second, 10-second,
television image. Mr Clinton and his shining bridge to the 21st Century
illustrated, if need be (in case you didn't know what a bridge looks like),
stamped on the imagination, thousands of times, must have done more than
speeches, to make Mr. Clinton sound like the man of the future.

We talked, a week or two ago, about how the financing of Mr Clinton's last
campaign had struck a new and embarrassing note when it was alleged that
Chinese Americans, friends of Mr Clinton, had tapped American corporations in
China and may have actually involved the Chinese government in financing Mr.
Clinton's election. All this has been gone into by a Senate investigation but,
true or not, it's had a messy, altogether devastating effect on American policy
towards Communist China.

Indeed, responsible men and women in the Congress or in one of the media agree
that the administration doesn't seem to have a China policy. It's not just
because of the unfortunate intrusion of a money scandal that the administration
is seen teetering, circling round the China problem, wondering whether this
huge, now flourishing and powerful military country is a juicy foreign market
or a time bomb.

The truth is that the United States is caught in a dilemma which has bothered
American policy toward foreign nations for most of this century. Some of you, I
hope, will recall a talk I did about a year ago, which was prompted by a new
book written by President Nixon's former Secretary of State, Mr Henry
Kissinger. He has a persuasive theory to explain what to Europeans often looked
like timidity, or double dealing, that for just about this century American
diplomacy has had two dominant strains: the idealism of Woodrow Wilson, the
pragmatism of Theodore Roosevelt.

Put it more bluntly and say that ever since President Wilson, the founding
father, don't forget, of the League of Nations, every American administration,
Democrat or Republican, has professed anyway to have a double mission to
stimulate free trade around the world and to encourage democracy everywhere. In
many times and places, this is an impossible demand.

Most democratic nations do not refuse to trade with productive countries that
are ruled by a dictator. America's problem is double-edged. It wants more than
anybody to be in on, indeed to dominate, the global market. But it cannot
stifle its Wilsonian conscience when it comes to looking at a totalitarian
country, especially after the bloody history of the Soviet Union, a Communist
country.

Just last week, the Vice President of the United States went to China and came
back. Mr Gore went over to bless the signing of very big deals with two
American giants of big business. It was noticeable in all the television
newsreels that Mr Gore was a very uncomfortable man. His is the old liberal
party, sworn to doom dictatorships and encourage rebellious Democrats. Until
lately, it was the party that had been most open in its condemnation of Dr Li,
known here as the Butcher of Beijing, and China's continuing imprisonment of
dissenting opinion, its use of slave labour, torture, total repression of free
speech, independent unions and so on.

In other nations, other liberals don't like these things to be mentioned. The
liberal view of China in Europe has replaced the 1930s and certainly '40s view
of Stalin as a, yes, a ruthless leader, but at bottom a stern, progressive
school headmaster. It's only in the past 20, less, years, that we, of that
time, have realised our almost criminal wilfulness in not believing in Stalin's
monstrous crimes, the 20 millions or more of his own people who were liquidated
in the great cause. That is to say, murdered.

So now there's a curious situation with respect to America's dealing with
China. There's a split in both parties between devotion to $2 billion worth of
business with China and condemnation of the existing tyranny. It's now
conservatives who tend to stress China's suppression of human rights. It's now
a Democratic administration that's anxious to do the big deal and gloss over
China's sins against human liberty. Mr Gore said he thought things on that
front had greatly improved in China. He was plainly embarrassed to say it.

And who should pop into China and uphold the Wilsonian ideal? Who was the man
who faced Dr Li and told him that the memory of Tiananmen Square had not faded,
that America wished to be an active trading partner with China but only when
basic freedoms, I quote, "speech, religion, assembly, the press" were
established.

Just to confuse the picture of party ideology, who was this brave one? The
Republican Speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP