Election predictions and certainties - 30 October 1992

Finally, on Tuesday the 3rd something like 80 million Americans will go into
voting booths, draw a curtain behind them – which ensures them the privacy of a
confessional box – and face what a foreigner might look on as the dashboard of
a jet, a whole battery of little levers. They then decide which ones to lock in
place against alternative sets of names. And just what percentage of those
millions are going to flick the lever for Clinton-Gore or for Bush-Quale is
something nobody knows.

Of course, you'll say "nobody ever does know", but in most previous elections
we've had a pretty good idea about the outcome, no matter how dogged our
personal preference is. Though I have to say that whenever I've put it to a
friend during the past two months or so the challenging question – putting
aside your own prejudice and looking at it as objectively as you can, what is
going to happen? – all but one of a dozen friends picked as the winner the man
he wants for the winner, which is a natural, sad commentary on the capacity of
the human being for objectivity in anything, and perhaps explains why there are
in any society so very few great judges.

This time is a particularly perilous one for prophets and gamblers, not simply
because the pollsters hope in giving the election to Mr Clinton for two or
three months, not because they're now warning us that his lead has shrunk
drastically during the past week, but because it ought to have been clear since
the earliest summer that what has drastically changed this year is the balance
of party's allegiance. Now that's a rather cryptic phrase, let me explain.

For as long as I can remember, it was a constant of American politics that
there were four registered Democrats for every three registered Republicans.
The four first. Eisenhower and then Nixon broke the Democrats' vice-like grip
on the South – through most of my time it was known as the solid, that is
Democratic, South. Before then, the ratio in the country as a whole was three
Democrats to two Republicans. However, did the Republicans win at all? Well,
for Congress they didn't, for the presidency people are not so entrenched in
their party as they are when it comes to voting for a congressman to take care
of their own neck of the woods.

The presidency is a special show – a search for leadership – and every four
years the people look for a new Moses, sometimes finding him in their party,
sometimes in the other, sometimes in the wilderness like Ross Perot or John the
Baptist, but for Congress in the past 60 years, the Republicans have had a
majority in the House of Representatives for only four years. It's one of the
permanent ironies of our two-party system.

Now, what makes prophecy more dangerous then over this time is the third
figure, the independents. For at least 30, 40 years, we've always said "can't
say – roughly 45% Democrats, 35% Republicans about 10% independents and the
rest that dependable immortal minority that doesn't know anything, doesn't feel
anything, doesn't stand for anything". Sometimes those independents rally
behind a third-party man. This has happened on and off throughout this century,
though the main effect of a powerful third-party men has been to act as a
spoiler and deny the presidency to the main choice of the party they broke away
from, as happened in 1912 when the rebellious Theodore Roosevelt formed his own
party, ruined the chances of his former Republican friend and president and let
the Democrat Woodrow Wilson come roaring through the middle.

In our own time, in 1948, the incumbent president Harry Truman was up against
not one but two deserters from his own party, as well as the regular Republican
contender. In the result, he got less votes than four opponents combined but
that was what we call the popular vote – the total, not the figure assigned to
each state in the electoral college. We'll no doubt be going into that next
time.

But to come back to the independents and what's alarming or baffling about them
this year. When the primary elections were over in the late spring, a survey
was done of the party registration throughout the country. Of course, we
expected it would show much the same percentage of party allegiance as usual.
We were in for a shock. Roughly it came out 30% declared Democrats, 25%
Republicans and wait for it, 40% independent. As the summer and the fall and
the polls have gone along, we've had the honesty to ask ourselves, perhaps not
carefully enough, what is an independent? It's always been somebody, somebody
like me who puts down on the ballot form under party "independent", which of
course doesn't mean I'm necessarily going to vote for a man who calls himself
an independent candidate. Choice might be for one of the regulars or the
libertarian candidate, if there is one, or the teetotal candidate or the
vegetarian or anyone of the – I think this time it's 23 – people who are
running separate campaigns for the presidency. Most of them never get enough
petitions to get on the ballot in more than one or two states, Perot as we all
know did and so did the libertarian. The rest, if you're an ardent yoghurt and
lemongrass man, you're going to have to write his name in.

What has emerged from this staggering figure of 40% independents is that
they're a very mixed bunch united only by their scorn off or distance from this
time the two regular parties. And more and more of the polls have been showing
that amongst this mysterious 40% only a small minority considered itself what
you might call professionally independent, people who've always declared
themselves as belonging to neither the Democrats nor the Republicans. Many more
of them are disturbed regular party members who are not sure this year whether
to stay with their party or not, others say they haven't made up their mind but
expect to by next Tuesday morning. And somewhere in there, maybe a nucleus of
the deciding faction, people who march to the polls on Tuesday knowing full
well who they're for get behind the curtain and say "mm, ah" and change their
minds.

Anyone in the class remember the election of 1968? It was a Nixon landslide. It
came out a few weeks after the election, after several polls had been taken
around the nation that if the election had been held on the Wednesday instead
of the Tuesday, Hubert Humphrey would have been the handsome winner for the
Democrats. On election day itself, there was a Humphrey wave rising across the
country, it didn't rise high enough or soon enough and Nixon didn't just sneak
in, he thundered in, which only goes to show how dangerous it is to go on the
polls that are reported the weekend before the election.

Many times during this campaign, you'll have heard people warn anybody who's
cocksure about the famous year of 1948 and Truman's astonishing and totally
unpredicted victory, that battling bantam cock came charging up from behind.
That's the usual story. President Bush himself has said so and he's promised
he's going to do the same. Well, Truman did not come from behind and on another
count in another way, 1948 is a poor analogy. All the pollsters – there were
only three of them then – used a method of polling which the 1948 result
actually discredited and it was never used again. It was known and notoriously
known as quota sampling.

The interviewers were sent off and told to talk to say a 100 individuals
according to a predetermined ratio of men and women, city dwellers and
suburbanites, married and single, drawn up from the known census figures. The
interviewer had a choice of seeing people in the flesh or talking to them on
the phone. The fatal flaw in this method turned out to be this, it was easier
and more convenient to interview people who lived in pleasant houses, it was
easier still to interview them over the telephone who had the pleasant houses
and who had most telephones? Forty-odd years ago, it was discovered in
retrospect the answer was overwhelmingly the Republicans. The polls we now know
were heavily weighted in favour of Republicans and the Republicans, need I say,
were heavily weighted in favour of the famous prosecutor of gangsters, the very
able governor of New York, the anti-tax and the spend man Thomas E Dewey. The
other 1948 factor, which is so very different from today, is that the national
economy then was in thumping good shape, unprecedented numbers are employed,
America very much the world's credited nation.

Now this years' polling, a man whose curious speciality at the University of
New Hampshire is surveying polling methods for strengths and flaws has come on
one fault, which the other day he warned us about. He calls it the force to
choice question, the standard procedure of asking if the election were held
today whom would you choose? If they're not sure, they are pressed to say whom
they're leaning to. The result is that only about 10% come out undecided.
Professor David Moore believes that if people were allowed a choice of saying
also unsure, the percentage of undecided's including declared independents in
the voting population would be nearer to 35% than 10. And it seems to me that
it's those people especially the unsure who are unsure till they draw the
curtain who will decide.

The Clinton team, while trying to maintain an air of being about to move into
the White House, is haunted these nights by the thought of the last British
election, the second thought of those polled Labourites who paused and decided
that the devil they knew might be safer to pick than the tax-and-spend
opposition.

Some old timers maybe shocked to notice that I haven't talked about the issues.
Well, having read the plans, what the pros call the position papers of the two
candidates and driven myself into a fog of incomprehension, I can only say the
issues are even more complicated than either candidate makes them, but that
both of them have had the grim sense to realise that the issues as laid out in
their platforms – whether its enterprise zones in the slums or term limits for
congressmen, the health system, whatever – are too much for the voters. Better
simply pick two grudges' talking points and bang away at them. Both men have
done this shamelessly, incessantly, so that so far as Mr Bush is concerned, Mr
Clinton is a dubious character and will tax and spend the country into ruin,
that's all. And as for Clinton, Mr Bush is something of a liar and has no
ideas, that's all. From everything we see and hear on the telly, those are the
issues we'll vote on.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP