American education - 13 May 1994

Well as the Psalms or was it the Song of Solomon said the time of the singing
of birds has come and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land, it's that
time here too, but it's also the time of the marching of graduates and the new
voices of parents raised as much in protest as in pride, end of the school and
college year is what I'm talking about.

And two weeks or more from now and several thousand leafy campuses, the long
familiar scene will be replayed of troops of graduates in caps and gowns for
the first, and maybe the only time in their lives, padding along
self-consciously up to the college president or a local worthy or if they're
lucky a well-known novelist or athlete or senator and turning round and even
more self-consciously padding away clutching a scroll, which attests usually in
rather glowing language to their excelling gifts as scholars.

This scene is not restricted to universities and colleges; every high school in
the country except perhaps in the crack capitals of the slummiest cities has a
similar ceremony with paper gowns and cardboard mortar boards. It was in most
places and in earlier times and in many places maybe still is a joyous
festival, a family warmth and jokiness and nobody making a big deal over the
fact that young Fred over there and young Sally Jones here are lamentably bad
students and have graduated like many of their pals by the generosity of the
class teacher, more often by the teachers' sharp awareness that if anyone in
the class was denied a graduation certificate, all hell would breakout from the
parents.

There was always a good deal of what, well we in another country with a state
religion could safely call Christian charity, let's say here a good deal of
indulgence in this annual ceremony, a national demonstration of forgiveness and
geniality in the sense old Fowler meant when he said about split infinitives,
if in doubt, prefer geniality to grammar, but this year has seen after
gathering years of complaint, anxiety, frustration an outburst across the
country of protest against the whole public school system and its failures. In
general, against the prevailing low standards of scholarship and in some places
against new methods that have taken the place of the old, the three 'R's for
example.

First though, the low standing of American schoolchildren when matched with the
children of other countries. I hasten to say that other does not necessarily
mean other wWestern so called civilised or developed countries. In some tests
internationally applied in geography and science for instance two or three of
the countries of Western Europe, France and Britain in particular didn't do
much better. But time and again, we read the results of tests given to American
children and also to the children of Eastern Europe and the results are what
makes some parents frustrated and depressed.

Most recently, American students were found to lag well behind in mathematics
and science, students from Hungary, Slovenia and Korea, and to make the pill
more bitter still, the gratuitous information was added that today the general
proficiency of Americans in their own scholastic aptitude tests is way below
what it was 25 years ago. I think the first blow to American complacency about
its public school system came, oh seven, eight maybe 10 years ago when
throughout California white children born here were tested against the children
of new Asian immigrants, usually Korean, Vietnamese and Chinese, I'm talking
about the children who came here to California when they were say four or five
without a word of English. Ten years later, they were tested against
American-born whites of the same age. Result in most subjects, but especially
in science and maths the Americans got a passing mark, the Asians were
comparative whiz kids.

So of the many local movements to do something to improve the education of the
young, the most recent and widespread remedy beginning I'd say in the late '80s
with fundamentalist questions was to take the children out of school and teach
them at home. There are of course many obstacles to hurdle, many unsuspected
traps not the least of which is making your child into an oddity or when he or
she gets to college a social misfit, but where the parents are able and
conscientious, the results are rewarding. In the state of Washington in four
years, 3,600 home-taught children came out in the top third of a nationwide
test in the neighbouring state of Oregon nearly 70% home-taught did noticeably
better than the public school pupils.

Now for some more original forms of protests against the contemporary scene not
provoked by the thought of poor teaching and low academic results. There's a
school in the Midwest a public school, i.e. not private, that last autumn put
out a very remarkable command mandated as we love to say, it said that from a
certain Monday on all the pupils must wear the same uniform, did you ever hear
of such a thing a school uniform in a free country. After two terms of it, the
great majority of both parents and children loved it. Of course it had, maybe
still has a novelty value, but the parents were immensely relieved not to have
to pass on this idea, and that freak, every morning and the children on the
whole were happy to put a stop to the never ending contests in exhibitionism.

But this is America, the country remember with a Bill of Rights written, which
says Congress shall make no law abridging the freedom of the press or the right
of the people peaceably to assemble. That's enough for some parents. Freedom of
the press has meant a right to strip to the buff, it has meant painting
obscenities, to express your freedom, right of assembly, in some states it's
meant right not to assemble a seat belt, right of assembly surely in any
clothes you want, where is this a frothing parent frothed? Hitler's Germany?
Other more subdued parents are taking the matter up and are quite prepared to
take it to the courts, all the way to the Supreme Court to prove as one parent
put it, to prove that such an order does not pass constitutional muster.

In New York State, there's another school which has aroused the ire of
suffering parents, a school that does not teach muppets elementary arithmetic,
but as a father complains teaches concepts. The whole vocabulary of the
teaching is so far above the noggins of these bewildered children that one
irate father challenged the teacher to ask his daughter if she knew what was
two plus two. The general philosophical jargon that the school worked in was so
far above such crudities, but the teacher did put it to the child "what are two
and two?" The child didn't have the foggiest notion what she was talking about.

A more famous you might almost say mainstream progressive school if that's not
a contradiction is Dalton School in New York City where I like to think my
children got a pretty good enlightened education. Well about 10 years ago, the
school lent an ear to a rich lady who wanted to start a special programme for
learning disabled students. She herself didn't discover till she was in her
mid-50s that she was dyslexic, she had normal vision but couldn't interpret
written or printed language. So the school took on 14 specialists looking for
learning disabilities and curing them. The programme was a success,
suspiciously successful by which I mean the more the specialists looked for
learning disabilities, the more they found them. Over a period of three years
of testing it came out that of 215 five-year-olds, 77 of them, had trouble or
were – a favourite label – "at risk"– at risk of what of being helpless before
a book to read, helpless in other ways? It turned out that quite a bunch of
these 77, I don't know how many were really at risk of being treated by the
specialists for disabilities they did not have. In a nutshell, the tests grew
too precise and finicky and unscientific enough to haul in whole drafts of
children about to be stamped disabled.

Now this school has very many wealthy certainly comfortably off parents who at
the first word of a troubled child are going to rush off and pay any money to
some doctor who threatens to be helpful. Now understand there was nothing
remotely sinister or crooked about those disability specialists, their
intentions were honour bright, they had many successes they just suffered from
– what was it Talleyrand called the fatal flaw? – too much zeal. Finally, when
so many parents were being told that their child had potential visual motor
problems or worse sequencing ability deficits, imagine the headmaster reviewed
the whole business and said, "ooh enough", or rather he said, things got out of
hand.

By now apparently quite a lot of the disabled are found to be not disabled. It
all reminds me of an enthusiastic psychiatrist I knew oh 40, 50 years ago, an
expert in schizophrenia, he was an honourable man he had a sharp mind and a
gleaming eye and came to alarm us all by deciding that an amazing number of
children we knew were schizophrenic. He's long gone and all but one of the
children, a schizophrenic, I believe are middle-aged and doing fine and after
40 yeadrrs observation anyway have yet to disclose marked symptoms of anything
other than chronic cheerfulness.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP