An Indepedent Quebec - 15 June 1990

I sincerely hope that you're breathing a little easier after the settlement of
the Meech Lake Accords.

I pause. I must relieve you at once of any embarrassment – I can actually see
the blank faces, the look of guilty puzzlement which greets that sentence.

No need to feel guilty. I regret to say that any audience of listening
Americans would feel equally baffled, equally stupid. Because Americans know as
little about Canada as Britons or Europeans, perhaps less. Why this should be
so, I've never been able to work out.

Canada is the closest neighbour, is the chief trading partner of the United
States, like the United States, derives most of its laws, and many customs,
from Britain and talks American English.

It may be that Americans' woeful ignorance of Canada is a kind of compliment.
They look on it as almost another state, one of their own, as they look on one
of the big western states, Montana or Idaho.

They know it's up there to the north and it's big. I think they'd be surprised
to know that it's the second largest country, after China, in the world.

An old American sociologist who's taken a special interest in Canada says,
"Americans think of Canadians as Americans who live in another house across the
street, rather than in the same house, or in the same family compound".

When, if Americans ever think of Canada, and I must say that in 50-odd years of
listening to them I don't recall a single evening that turned into talk about
Canada, its people, habits, political system. When they think of Canada, they
most likely call up images implanted by travel brochures and by one famous
movie, musical, Rose-Marie – the good old Mounties, the Canadian Pacific
Railroad, the maple tree and its syrup, some vague picture of a great strip of
tundra, lakes and mountains.

Tourists will fondly recall, in the west, the splendid mountain landscape of
Lake Louise and Banff. In the east, the majestic float down the Saint Lawrence
River, and the quaintness of Montreal, Montréal, the surprise of
French-speaking Quebec.

Quebec, Québec, where by law all the public signs, items for sale, ballot
forms, printed ads of any kind, a ferry ticket, a pack of cigarettes, the
debates in the provincial legislature, must be in two languages, French and
English.

Quebec is the root of the present troubles, the centre of rebellion. The
province that 10 years ago narrowly voted down a move to separate from Canada
and that, just now, threatened to secede as an independent nation if the other
provinces did not agree, from now on, to look on Quebec as something special,
to grant it distinct status.

Over last weekend, the provincial governors met and all of them, except one,
agreed to yield to Quebec's demand to be considered a foreign-speaking entity
in the Canadian Confederation.

Now this may sound, when you first hear about it, a perverse, whimsical
political gesture, like say a movement on the part of the Welsh to ban the
speaking of English. Not at all. It's a heartfelt expression of the fear of the
people of Quebec, a majority of whom are French-speaking, that French will, as
in the rest of the provinces, begin to fade out.

The Canadian Constitution establishes both languages as equal in the whole
country and assumes that French will be the main language of Quebec. But the
birth rate there is declining and the new immigrants there, as elsewhere, are
usually English-speaking, accordingly Anglo-Canadians are beginning to dominate
the province's economy.

Last weekend's accords, which kept Quebec in the nation but gave it a unique
special status has not, by any means, weakened the threat of secession or
sweetened the bitterness between the English and the 60% of all Quebecois want
to separate from Canada.

The old separatists teach the young about what was, to them, a great day in the
history of Quebec. The day in 1967 when President, once General, De Gaulle, was
abruptly asked to cut short his visit to Canada after he gave a speech in
Montreal that shocked the nation with its final sentence, "Vive le Québec
libre!" – Long live free Quebec!

To the English-speaking majority of Canadians that was the day of mischief. I
don't suppose there's another old newsreel clip that's played more often on
Quebec television than that speech.

If the present majority of Quebecois in favour of secession, stays steady or
increases, then the Quebec Party, the Parti Québécois, will win the next
election, and its declared aim is to set up an independent nation.

This would not mean simply one odd man out. Quebec is a buffer state between
the land mass of middle and western Canada and the Atlantic provinces of New
Brunswick and Nova Scotia which, if Quebec left the union, would become
marooned, hundreds of miles from English-speaking Canada, rather like the
isolation of old Pakistan.

Canadians are well aware of the possible effects of this rift and many serious
Canadians doubt if Canada can then remain intact as a nation. A substantial
number of Canadians, not by any means the majority or a powerful force yet,
have said that the best thing left for Canada, if it broke up, would be for the
remaining provinces to seek to join the United States.

That alarming idea, as you might guess, has been the main item of news reported
on the American networks about this crisis of Canadian sovereignty.

Always, I ought to say, with the exception of public television's nightly
MacNeil-Lehrer News Hour which gave a whole week to this crisis and which is
unmatched by any other English-speaking news programme I know, for its clear
exposition of the news and issues around the world, and its thoughtful probing
of them, not by prominent journalists but by the statesmen and the experts
immediately involved.

Now, before any American gets heady with the prospect of Canada becoming a 51st
state, we ought to note that the Canadian opposition to the idea, would be,
just now anyway, probably overwhelming. Canadians do not think of themselves as
alternative Americans.

By physical association and by long, shared history as North Americans, they
have, of course, much in common. Their climate, for one thing, has made them
enjoy, or suffer, the same winter and summer extremes, and so the physical
devices to guarantee comfort, not to say survival, are much the same, by way of
clothing, transport, air-conditioning, home and office heating, domestic
architecture, snow ploughs.

And by long and close association with America and its teeming products,
similar preferences in foods, amusements, television. The four American
networks, the three commercial ones and the American public television network
are all available along and just above the 3,000 mile border where most of the
25 million Canadians live.

After a train trip once from Toronto to Ottawa, I wrote that the only certain
sign that I was in Canada and not the United States was that if you walked into
a railroad car and shouted, "Duncan" and "Stuart", ten men would leap up. Their
names would be Robert Stuart or Stuart MacNeil or Colin Duncan or Duncan Fraser
or some other Scottish combination.

And then moving into the fringe of the great wastes to the north, it occurred
to me then, and it was in the way of admiration, that only the Scots would have
had the gall and the guts to knot a lifeline along 3,000 miles of tundra, which
is why the four million square miles of Canada house only 25 million people and
the three million square miles of the country to the south support a population
of over 250 millions.

Canadians, too, have a system of government which, in their view, combines the
best of the American federal system and the British parliamentary system. They
have a Constitution drawn in many ways along the lines of the American
Constitution, with one important difference. The powers not expressly given to
the provinces are reserved to the national government – the exact opposite of
the American system.

Canada has a House of Commons, and also a Senate. But it's not so much pride in
the structure of their government that makes Canadians prefer to remain
Canadian, it's differences between the two societies which, in their view, come
down in their favour.

Canada is much more completely a welfare state. They spend much less than the
United States on healthcare, but it goes to the whole population. Some
provinces have moved, and others will follow, to strict laws which pay women at
the exactly same rate as men for the same degree of skill.

The trade unions in Canada are still a very powerful force, while in the United
States they have declined dramatically in membership and political clout. You'd
think that in a land which composes such a huge and nearby wilderness,
Canadians would be more zealous than rural and western Americans to assert a
right to bear guns. But Canada, across its whole length and width, has
extremely strict gun control laws.

If there's one thing more than another that would make the ordinary Canadian
think twice about joining the union to the south, it's the hard fact that the
murder rate is barely a quarter of the American rate. And the general crime
rate, while not negligible, is very much lower.

Now there is also, as you might guess, much ignorant prejudice and bigotry
against America. Overall, a rather complacent conviction that Canadians are
quieter, less materialist, more deferential to authority.

But popular prejudice apart, there are demonstrable good reasons for Canada's
pride in its system and heritage, to make it unlikely, even in the break-up of
the Confederation that it will, any time soon, become the 51st state.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP