US national Holidays - 28 November 1997

In the good old days that never were – by which we usually mean in the days of
our youth – I used to do an annual talk about the last Thursday in November,
which is, and has been for many years, proclaimed by the president to be a day
of thanksgiving.

For what, foreign visitors used to ask. A question that is now asked only by
American college students who know little or no American history. Another catch
for the unwary is to declare that Thanksgiving Day is, along with Independence
Day, Labor Day and Washington's birthday, a national holiday. Technically,
actually, as we English were fond of saying, there are no national holidays.
The choice of public holidays belongs to the states. Each legislature may
decide.

You will forgive me if I now remember and must tell you about how I alone, or
as they say in the New York Times "this reporter" made George Washington's
birthday a true national holiday which it had not been until 1956.

On the last day of January 1955, I was sitting down to think up this letter. It
was to be a character sketch or profile of the father of the country, himself,
George Washington, something I had, weirdly, not done before. I found myself
writing "he, alone among all eminent Americans rates a national celebration of
his birthday throughout every state and territory of the Union".

Well, even so long ago, I'd been a reporter long enough to learn to have second
thoughts whenever I wrote a superlative. "The" only eminent American, etc.
These talks were occasionally listened to by zealous parsons and retired
librarians in Brighton or Bombay whose main occupation in life was to pour
through encyclopedias and almanacs and pounce on any dubious item a hectic
reporter had grabbed from his memory against a deadline.

I thought again. I, too, poured through the finest print of the latest world
almanac. Under National and State Holidays, I read, 22 February, Washington's
birthday, a legal holiday in all the states and territories except Idaho.
Except Idaho? Idaho, larger than Portugal, 86,000 square miles with its 21
million acres of forest, its 5 million cattle, 2 million pigs. The great timber
state of the Pacific north-west. Too proud to honour George Washington once a
year? An extraordinary exception. Something, I felt, must be done.

So I sat down and wrote another letter. This one to the governor of the state
whose baked potatoes are famous throughout the world. Well, the nation, anyway.
"My dear Governor, in preparing a weekly broadcast done by me in New York and
transmitted throughout the British Isles and thereafter to Europe, Africa, Asia
and Australasia, I came across a puzzling statement, that the state of Idaho is
the only one in the Union that does not recognise the birthday of George
Washington as a legal holiday. This is an aberration I simply hate to have to
mention in a talk three weeks from now I hope to devote to the immortal memory.
There is time yet to correct this evident misstatement, one so gross that I
fear its circulation around the British Isles alone, not to mention
Switzerland, Hong Kong and the Scilly Isles will dreadfully dim the lustre of
the great state of Idaho. Will you, dear Governor, be so kind as to deny this
ridiculous error or say how it came into being? Anxiously yours..."

Five days later, I received by special delivery – which was something in those
days from 3,000 miles away – a splendid letter bearing the embossed seal of the
state of Idaho. The letter read, "Dear Mr. Cooke, the question which you
present in your letter of January 31st is now before the legislature and a bill
is pending and may be law by February 22nd. Perhaps in your broadcast you will
be in a position to include Idaho with the other states of the Union. Very
truly yours, Robert E. Smylie, Governor". There was a rapidly inscribed
postscript in the Governor's own handwriting. It said, "The bill is now before
me for signature. It will have my approval and February 22nd will be a legal
holiday in Idaho. R.E.S." That was quick work.

And let's not be mean about how it was done. Let's not think of the salty
dialogue, the frothing telephone exchanges between the governor's mansion and
the Speaker of the Legislature. And the chairman of the board of Idaho Potato
Exporters Inc. The patriotic vote was taken and thunderously ratified and there
was more rejoicing over one state that repented than over the, then, 40 and 7
just states that needed no repentance.

I believe, though I'm not going to stick my neck out, that George Washington's
birthday is the only national holiday, in fact, celebrating an individual. How
about Lincoln? The almanac tactfully says, "In most states". I don't think
anything formal has been done throughout the southern states, which for very
many decades declared the birthday of the southern commander, Robert E Lee, to
be a public holiday, but not the man who, during the Civil War itself, was
known, in the south, as "the evil one". I don't believe the question was ever
put to the governors of southern states as I put it to Governor Smylie.

But about 15, perhaps more, years ago, a solution was achieved which called
for, as the fat man said, "The most delicate judgment". It was decided to avoid
for ever the great public inconvenience of having two national holidays so
close together, Lincoln born 12 February and Washington the 22nd. They are now
merged and celebrated together on the 22nd. That way the president can say with
a straight face that all the states celebrate Lincoln's birthday and the
southerners can say surely they are celebrating the Virginia born on the 22nd?

But Thanksgiving which we are just getting over or recovering from, is a
holiday everywhere. It is the great American family feast. The standard dinner,
usually set out in mid afternoon, assembles the famous bird the Pilgrim Fathers
had never seen before, the turkey, and the vegetables they learned to grow from
the Indians, notably the pumpkin and a sauce, made from a berry that grew wild,
the cranberry, over the sand bogs of Cape Cod, where the Mayflower, blown by a
storm far north from its intended landfall in Virginia, landed on the beach. In
the words of a famous Yorkshireman, William Bradford, "they fell upon their
knees and blessed the God of Heaven who had brought them over the vast and
furious ocean".

Well, they had a rough year of it. Some went back. Some committed suicide. Many
died of disease. But most worked and planted and survived through to the first
harvest. And it was then, with a pack or pride of Indians as guests, that they
put together a dinner of these new edibles. It was then they called the first
celebratory meal "thanksgiving".

Well, it's still there every fourth Thursday in November and only a few old
families in the midwest, with German or Scandinavian roots I dare say,
substitute the goose for the whacking great-breasted turkeys. It's served in
the richest houses and I see that the shelter for the homeless of West Harlem
had an order for 30 turkeys. In Atlanta, volunteers fed 30,000 homeless.

A few things have been added this year. Medical warnings mainly that were bound
to come from all those years fretting about cholesterol. After about 40 years,
I suppose most Americans who can read and run, run in fright, know that the
thing to avoid is fat. Animal fat. Avoid saturated fats. Go for polyunsaturated
fats. That, we were told years and years ago, would greatly reduce the risk of
a heart attack. Well, now, just in time for the eager consumers of turkey,
sweet potatoes, pumpkin pie and ice cream, now came the urgent word that it's
not how much fat you eat, but what kind. That's new. What kind?

Well, a study has just been published, an impressive study of 80,000 nurses who
with half of them as a control group were studied over 14 years. The result?
There's something called trans fat. Formed when liquid, brace yourself,
vegetable oils are processed to make hard or semi-soft spreads which we'd been
told were wonderfully better for us than butter.

"Well forget it!" is the advice of the eminent New England Journal of Medicine.
A stick of margarine is the chief villain. 21 grams. Tub margarine, 11. French
fries? Perilous. But the great news is vanilla ice cream, less than half a
gram. Cheesecake also. Whole milk. Never mind low-fat, skimmed or whatever.
Whole milk, one tenth of one gram. This report came out 48 hours before the
great cook-in and was carried by the wire services and the TV networks. Lord
only knows what effect it had on the Thanksgiving dinner of the 80 million
families who drove over the hill or flew 3,000 miles away to get it. Not
forgetting the thousands of troops and scores of naval and air force crews
assembled in the Persian Gulf.

I ought to say that, apart from considerations of health, which are ever
uppermost in the concerned American breast, I've not heard an ethical whisper,
not even a whimper of protest, from vegetarians or from anti-game groupies
about the slaughter of, at last estimate, 120 million turkeys. There must be
some people who take a moral stance about eating the noble bird?

Anyway, just in case, President Clinton, last Wednesday afternoon, on the White
House lawn, performed a ceremony which President Truman, another wily
politician, invented. The stroking and blessing of a great 60-pound gobbler.
The solemn proclamation of a presidential pardon and stay of execution and an
order to transport, under Secret Service protection, the pardoned bird to a
retirement home in Virginia. "So that he", as the presidential pardon reads,
"so that he can live out his days in dignity".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP