US/USSR handshakes - 18 July 1975

There was something touching and hopeful, and I thought, rather grim about the
headlines which told us that on Thursday night, Russians picked out American
tourists on the streets of Moscow, and gave them joyful bear hugs by way of
saluting the successful docking of the Soviet and American spacecrafts.

One American news magazine, days before the successful link up, published the
surprising sentence "that handshake between Thomas Stafford and Alexei Leonov
is in a very real sense the major objective of the mission". I always suspect
sentences that begin "in a very real sense", because they usually mean the
writer's not quite sure of himself, but hopes to bully you into what he hopes
is true. And both in the Moscow bear hugs and the handshake in space, what we
are being asked to see is the triumph what we have, for so long, called,
detente – a vague word, which in English, I suppose you could translate by
relaxation, release of tension, a dissolving of fear and suspicion.

Everybody will know what I meant, when I said, the sight of ordinary Russians
and Americans embracing in public, was touching, and hopeful. Heaven knows the
ordinary decent people of all countries have sighed and yearned during the past
30 years, for an end to the watchful distrust with which American and Russia
have eyed each other and to the massive armaments they have been building to
ensure their security. And in spite of the corruption of governments and
corporations, and the ranging violence of our time, I'm still hopeful enough to
believe that in every land on earth, there is a body, of ordinary decent
people. Whether that body can then make itself successfully heard is another
question.

But many of you maybe puzzled by my saying that in those pictures of the mutual
bunny hugs – a bear hug can kill you – there is also something grim. What I
meant, to be quite blunt about it at the start, is that the bunny hugs on the
streets of Moscow may very well be greeted in the Kremlin with the grin on the
face of the tiger. It is possible, and many of us would long for it to be true,
that Mr Brezhnev and his colleagues deeply hope for an end to mutual suspicion
and are willing to let other nations go their own way without instruction or
subversion from Moscow.

And if this implies an unfair suspicion about the long-range motives of Moscow,
it’s true that they can point out that lately there has been precious little
evidence of goodwill on the part of the Americans, what with the disgraceful
interference of the CIA in the political fate of other nations, not to mention
this week’s disclosure that American oil companies have been spending millions
of dollars to bribe political parties of every stripe, including the Communists
in other nations, so that they will still be in business no matter who comes
out on top. It looks like six of one and half a dozen of the other.

But – and it’s a very important but – the revelations about the near-criminal
activities of the CIA and the briberies of the oil companies, have been forced
into the open, not by foreign agents or refugees or journalists, but by the
Americans themselves, and mainly by investigating committees of the Senate of
the United States. Whatever else is wrong with America, there is no disposition
on the part of the elected representatives of her people to hide the mote in
her own eye. There is no more worrisome or vital institution in the American
system than the investigating committee of Congress. It never sleeps, and so
it’s always revealing a mess, somewhere or other – usually in its own
government and in American business.

Well, it's putting it very mildly indeed to say that there is no comparable
watchdog over the Soviet government or the behaviour of its trade commissions.
Time and again the very useful United Nations' surveys of life, and business,
health, industry, armies and navies of the member nations, they always end with
blanks and the footnote "No figures available for the Soviet Union and the
People’s Republic of China".

For 30 years, the Soviet Union in particular has gone on preaching peace,
deploring the aggression of others and insistently protesting its devotion to
democracy in the hope of our not noticing that whatever else they have in their
country, democracy is not it. Even Hitler didn’t act so mealy-mouthed about the
language of government. He said that democracy stank, and away with it.

So people all over the world argue about the intentions of the Russians, not on
agreed facts, but on the basis of what they like to think must be true. From
time to time some powerful Russian figure, a scientist or a writer, escapes or
is such a haggling nuisance at home that he is allowed to leave. This happened
with refugees from Nazi Germany and the distinguished ones, the Einsteins and
Thomas Manns and the like, spoke out in their new lands and they gave
frightening testimony about the outrages in their homeland which – and this is
worth remembering – which the ordinary decent body of Germans hadn’t heard
about, or didn’t want to hear about.

I vividly remember what happened in the late 1930s when these distinguished
exiles arrived in the United States at a time when Americans were fearful that,
if there was a European war, they’d be dragged into it. The arrival of people
like Einstein was highly uncomfortable for those Americans who hoped that
Hitler might be bought off or, somehow, neutralised. President Roosevelt was
almost blatantly, pro-Ally from the start, so he had no compunction about
inviting Einstein to the White House.

But a lot of people protested the invitation, not because Einstein was a malign
figure – on the contrary it would be hard to imagine a more loveable political
innocent, a more Disney-like teddy bear – but Einstein bore witness to the
persecution and the obscenities of Hitler’s Third Reich. He made it harder for
isolationalists to say that Hitler’s outrages had been exaggerated or to
believe that buying him off was an honourable thing to do.

Well, history has a habit of repeating itself in extremely uncomfortable ways,
and there has appeared in America a Russian refugee, not a teddy bear, not a
political innocent, but an extremely articulate, some say, a great, writer, who
on the subject of Russian aims and intentions, is keeping about as quiet as
John the Baptist. He is Alexander Solzhenitsyn. A year ago, all of us rejoiced
when he came out, and his book The Gulag Archipelago was read with almost
reverent respect by people of all political views. So long as Mr Solzhenitsyn
kept his frightful revelations in print, and between hard covers, he was a
great man.

But then, about a month ago he came out with a terrifying article which was no
more reasonable or contemplative in tone than the blast of the trump of doom.
It was about the third world war. He said that the third world war was not on
its way, it was already well along, and the Russians were winning it all along
the line.

He listed all the countries that had succumbed to Russian pressure, one way or
another, since the second war. He made a pitiless count of the treaties with
the west which had been broken or ignored. He noted the penetration of Russian
arms, and influence, across the Mediterranean, into the Middle East and Africa.
The so-called uncommitted world, he saw already, as a very committed and
uncomplaining and, in the United Nations, a jubilant Russian satellite.

Well, it was to students of political science, shall we say, a bit thick. It
was a very distressing piece because it didn’t suggest, it proclaimed, that the
western world, is already doomed. Well an article is soon forgotten and pretty
soon we heard from Dr Kissinger and Mr Gromyko about fresh hopes for the arms
limitations talks. And then coming up there was the great cooperative effort in
space – I ought to say that the space link-up did not produce general rejoicing
in America, there is no question that the Americans are way ahead of the
Russians in space technology and some people, conservatives especially, thought
that $250million was quite a price to pay for teaching the Russians a good deal
about space techniques they would like to know.

By an unfortunate coincidence, the spacemen were strapped in their crafts just
as Alexander Solzhenitsyn surfaced, very visibly, to make a public address
before 2400 members of the national industrial trade union, the most powerful
labour body in the United States. At the very moment that we were all ready to
let bygones be bygones and believe fiercely in the goodness of the
Soviet-American get-together, Mr Solzhenitsyn has the nerve to get up in a
public forum, denounce Communism as a slavish tyranny, deplore Soviet-American
friendship as an evil sneer, and warn us all again that sooner or later people
who cherish their liberty cannot truck with a system that is unflaggingly
dedicated to suppressing liberty wherever it dares to raise its voice.

Mr Solzhenitsyn, in other words, was a nuisance. He was an embarrassing
nuisance to not only to the White House but to political moderates, and to
liberals who have praised him, because he suddenly became the darling of the
right, of the Reagans and the Goldwaters, and the hard hats who have always
applauded any abuse – not only of Russia, but of any regime anywhere that calls
itself socialist, or liberal.

But, the melancholy mistake made by many liberals was to say that because Mr
Solzhenitsyn was suddenly embraced by the right, he is therefore a rightist
reactionary. This is a mean insult to a brave man. Maybe, let us pray, the
Russian-American handshake in space does signify an era in which, since we have
to get along with the Russians, we shall manage to do so without finding
ourselves out-armed, out-tricked and out-flanked by them. But whether that is
possible or not, we still have to face the contradiction between the Russians'
beautiful gestures and the shuddering facts of the kind of life their system
imposes.

We, too, can embrace the Russian in a bunny hug, provided we take care to see
that in the process, we are not being frisked. And meanwhile, though Mr
Solzhenitsyn is an embarrassment, we'd better admit that he is the same sort of
embarrassment, in a comfortable time, as Savanarola, and Thomas Jefferson and
John Milton.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP