Montgomery bus boycott - 20 January 1995

In reply to a constant query, how about Washington DC? Well, when the
victorious American rebels had beaten the British and invented a nation, the
first Congress looked around for a place to call the capital and eventually
agreed to set up a neutral zone, a hundred square miles, a peninsula between
two rivers, which would be ceded to the new federal government by the states
the rivers ran through, Maryland and Virginia.

It was to be called the District of Columbia, subsequently George Washington's
name was added as an honorific. It was to be independent of the states, to have
a mayor and a local government but its budget would be controlled by the
Congress. It still is, to the chagrin of some residents who would like to have
the district declared the 51st state. But most citizens of Washington DC don't
mind overmuch, since most of them, literally over 50 per cent, are government
employees anyway and since their bread and butter come from the Congress, they
rightly feel that the money to pay for it should come from the same source.

One of the district's privileges, some say grievances, is that it's the only
American territory for which the president and Congress can legally designate a
public holiday. There are in this country, legally, no national holidays. Such
proclamations are left up to the legislatures and/or governors of the 50
states. In practice, there are 10 holidays, starting with New Year's Day and
ending with Thanksgiving and Christmas. Of the other seven, only two bear the
names of American heroes or say, historic American figures. Washington, right,
all agreed. Jefferson, no, Lincoln, no. For many decades after the Civil War
the Southerners were not disposed to honour their detested conqueror and, in
general, Lincoln's birthday is not celebrated in the South.

The other hero's birthday has been declared a public holiday by 49 states. New
Hampshire, for some unexplained reason, has never passed an Enabling Act and
last Monday there was a troop of angry protesters outside the State House. The
name is one that 40 years ago was unknown to the entire white population of the
United States. In that year, 1954, a 27-year-old Baptist parson, a black,
finished up his theological studies up north, at Boston University and took up
his first ministry in Montgomery, Alabama, up to then known in history as the
cradle of the Confederacy. It was where the South set itself up as a separate
nation. So, that young black man could not have gone to a town more sacred to
the white population of Alabama or one less receptive to anybody about to stir
up trouble, especially racial trouble, The young man, as anyone who tried to of
business in this country last Monday will already have guessed, was the
Reverend Martin Luther King.

The mad, the wild suggestion back then in the early '50s, that this 27-year-old
black would become the only one of his race, the only other American throughout
American history, whose birthday would become a national holiday, is
inconceivable and even now it's bizarre and wonderful to me, who as it happened
got in on the start of the rebellion in Montgomery, that became first a local
protest, then a Southern black movement, then a national movement of blacks and
whites, as powerful as abolitionism had been, in the slavery years. A movement
that always swirled around this one young parson, whose words would in the next
30, 40 years, sound a battle cry to black populations throughout the Americas,
the West Indies and in Africa itself.

How did this come about? How did Martin Luther King, national leader, hero,
martyr come about? I suspect that a quick unannounced quiz of the great
majority of Americans would produce the rather nervous response that the
Reverend King, as they say in the South, was a Civil Rights protester after the
Second World War, led protest marches in the South, was murdered and on the eve
of his assassination made a speech, played over all the time on television with
the ballad refrain, "I have a dream".

It all began, as I say, in a scruffy part of town in the capital city of
Montgomery, Alabama, about 40 years ago. I'd heard and read about a bus boycott
that had been going on for five months, so in the spring of 1956, I took a
train down there to see what it was all about and soon had an outline of the
story from several sources on the spot, white and black. On a day then in early
December, four negroes, as we said then and as I shall say throughout this,
which is a period story, four negroes went aboard a city bus and sat in its
forward section, a flexible area marked off by cards that snapped on to central
poles according to the ratio of blacks and whites aboard. The bus driver asked
them to move back into the so-called coloured section. Three of them complied,
a woman, a seamstress in her early 40s, refused. The driver acted in accordance
with a city law which could be flouted only at the loss of the bus company's
working franchise. He asked her again, then he called in two policemen, who
arrested this anonymous and later to be immortal, Rosa Parks.

That afternoon, thousands of printed handbills dropped on the doorsteps of
coloured homes, urging a boycott of all the buses to start two days later. Am I
saying the scene on the bus was a set-up and the boycott organised months
before? Of course. The organiser, a parson name of King, flew in and out a
couple of times a week, having bought station wagons from neutral outlanders.

I'd not read anything about the bus company's side of the story, so I thought
it a good idea to go and talk to the city line's manager. I found him in his
office at the depot, south of the railroad tracks, alongside a patch of negro
shacks. Long lines of empty buses were gleaming in the sun. He said he'd been
in the business 38 years and I've known all the coloured families hereabouts
that long. His name was Bagley. His account tallied with what I'd heard but
carried it a little further. Once the boycott started, the mayor composed a
committee of negroes and bus company officials. The negroes wanted four things
âmore courtesy, abolition of the white and coloured markers, a policy of first
come, first served and some coloured bus drivers. The company said yes to first
come, first served and urged an immediate change in the law.

The city council refused, then the district attorney moved in, a grand jury was
called, it indicted the leaders of the conspiracy, that is the organisers of
the boycott and they were subsequently convicted. They, three coloured parsons
were now out on bond pending an appeal. Twice a week they held rallies for
morale at the Mount Zion African Episcopal Methodist Church, in a very
shambling coloured section of town. I went into this church that evening and
found five or six hundred negroes crooning their old gospel harmonies and
heaving in rhythm. From time to time a brother or sister would rise and begin
to testify, improvising a prayer from a string of King James Bible sentences
and sometimes chanting through strangulated quarter tones. An old man who was
an elbow away from me suddenly got up and shouted: "Oh Lord, stay close at
hand, when my time has come".

For over an hour this crooning and swaying and humming and testifying went on
until a powerful baritone gave the cue for a battle cry and at once the whole
huge chorus sang Old Time Religion. There was a rustle of gowns at a side door
and out came the leaders, the convicted three âthe Reverend Simms, the Reverend
Hayes, the Reverend Powell. One of the Reverends lifted an arm and proclaimed
the coming of the leader. God looked down, he boomed in a bass voice, worthy of
an Old Testament prophet. God looked down and chosen a man, young, dynamic,
wise and Christian. There was another fuss or rustle at the side door and there
appeared the chosen one, a young, slim, bland man with solemn good looks. The
entire church rose at him and the enormous shout might have signified the
second coming. He was the Reverend Martin Luther King.

Immediately the boycott started, after the first of the rallies, there was some
violence, a couple of coloured homes were burnt, but then the whites accepted
the rallies like revival meetings, which in form and feeling, they truly were.
So out of this small, inconclusive scramble and the bi-weekly church rallies,
grew the rise of other protests in other states and defiances, murderous
retaliations, marches, police dogs, jail for most leaders, including the man
who got cut and scraped at the head of many marches, the Reverend King. And
over 20, 30 years, vast changes in the life, education, status, political
power, the whole self-image of the blacks. Never vast enough for honest
egalitarians and so long as the ratio of white to black is nine to one, not
likely to be enough. Great changes nevertheless over a continent, it sprang
from Rosa Parks and the boycott of Mr Bagley's buses.

Out of all this there's one picture I cannot erase from my memory. Just before
the first of the negro rallies, Mr Bagley was warned not to let his son, a war
veteran, go ahead and open up a petrol station on the edge of the coloured
section of town. Mr Bagley, as he said, paid the man no heed. On the contrary,
he got a coloured friend to suggest to the Reverend King that he might, at one
of the rallies, announce the new ownership. So he did and the negroes rolled up
in droves to christen the new pump. When I left Montgomery, the pumps business
was 80 per cent with coloured folk, filling up their tanks to give glory to God
to help young Mr Bagley and to maintain the boycott of his father's buses.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP