Harry Bridges - 6 April 1990

Last weekend, the mayor of San Francisco, Mr Art Agnos, ordered all flags on
city buildings to be flown at half mast, in honour of an Australian, Harry
Bridges, one of the most militant of America's labour leaders during the
industrial union battles of the 1930s.

In San Francisco they were literal battles, during which, on a July day, two
men were killed and over 100 wounded. Marshal law was declared and, at
midnight, the National Guard moved in. The senior senator from California wired
Washington, "Here is revolution".

It was not quite that, but it was the most violent side-effect of a general
strike initiated by this same lanky, jug-eared, hatchet-faced Australian, then
in his early 30s. And then, and for many years thereafter, to be held up by
businessmen, farmers, editorial writers and all conservatives throughout the
nation, as an arch Communist triumphant in our midst.

Harry Bridges died at 88 last weekend and Mayor Agnos, in proclaiming the flag
lowering ceremony said, "Harry Bridges' death leaves a void that can never be
filled. He was a legendary figure in the labour movement whose courage and
devotion to principle will never be forgotten. All of San Francisco mourns this
loss".

Well, I can only say that the lowering of the stars and stripes in San
Francisco was a symbolic act as astonishing as the toppling of Lenin's statue
in Bucharest. In Romania, the sainted revolutionary leader is, after 45 years,
detested and overthrown. In San Francisco, the detested revolutionary is, after
55 years, mourned and sanctified.

Harry Bridges was born in 1901 in a suburb of Melbourne and was soon out of
school and working as what in American is known as a store clerk and in England
and Australia as a shop assistant. He might have been there for life if he had
not, one day when he was 15, read in the papers an obituary on Jack London, the
San Franciscan novelist who, in 40 short years, had been a sailor, a railroad
bum, a convicted vagrant, a Klondike gold rusher, a war correspondent, a lone
sailor across the Pacific in a ketch, a labour agitator and, for the last 20
years of his life, a Marxian socialist. Also, in 17 years, the author of 50
books.

There was a coincidence of history that, I don't think it's fanciful to say,
would have attracted a young Melbourne lad, hot for adventure, to the San
Franciscan novelist more than to any other. Only three years after gold was
discovered on the American river in California, gold was discovered in the
hills to the west of Melbourne, and the migrants came rushing in from many of
the same places that, within two or three years, had quintupled the population
of San Francisco – from Germany and Russia, and China and Switzerland and
Liverpool and, always, the Cornish Jacks.

The life of the two cities were strikingly similar, both before and after the
gold fever subsided. First, the bubbling stew of races and types, the air of
adventure and opportunism, the boozy tall tales of foreign parts and then, when
the gold had given out, an unwieldy population of stranded outlanders and for
the employers a great pool of labour available at any price the employers cared
to set.

Jack London had written about just such things in his native city and Harry
Bridges had seen them all about him in his native city.

Reading about such a society by night and living it by day aggravated in a
restless boy the itch to take off for foreign parts and see how the rest of the
world lived. He was only 16 when he sailed off to work on first a freighter,
then a tanker. He was twice shipwrecked. Once, he stayed afloat on a mandolin.

He roamed for just under three years and sailed into San Francisco in his 19th
year on a three-masted barque making a port call. Young Harry Bridges gave the
first sign of what he was to become by having a row with the skipper about the
working conditions of the crew, and of seamen in general. He quit.

He mooched around San Francisco for a while, had no permanent job and drifted
off to Mexico where he worked as a rigger in the oilfields. Pretty soon,
though, he felt the itch for the sea again and he went aboard an American
merchantman.

In 1921, a year after he'd arrived in San Francisco, he sailed into New Orleans
in the middle of a dockers' strike. He immediately joined the picket line, was
arrested and jailed overnight. The strike was broken. He thought that the
national labour union, the American Federation of Labor, had let the workers
down. He joined the new radical union, the grandly called Industrial Workers of
the World and the famous, or infamous, "Wobblies".

Now, at that time, 1922, and for many more decades, longshoremen – stevedores –
were hired according to an unchanging procedure. The "shape up" -– the men came
shuffling to the docks an hour before sunrise. They lined up and some were
chosen to work the ships and more went home and some stayed around all day.

For the rejected ones, there was only the labour they might pick up on a lucky
day. There was a minimum wage but no union, no maximum working week. You might
work six hours a day or 14. Harry Bridges decided to change all this but the
shippers' agents and the dock foremen were well entrenched, and it took Bridges
11 years to dare to organise, in the pit of the Depression, his own
longshoremen's local.

Within six weeks of the founding of what he called the International
Longshoremen's Association, most of the dockers joined up. It was now that
Harry Bridges became a figure of national fame – concern, at least.

Brushing aside the efforts of the parent union, he called a strike of his own
local. All the way up the coast to Seattle, the ships lay at anchor. The ports
were immobilised. And so, obviously, were the importers and their retail
stores.

In July 1934, Bridges resolved to force open the port of San Francisco, with
the help of police convoys. It worked for a day and a night. The next day,
however, was 4 July and the strikers and the company men and the police paused
to celebrate in a parade the Declaration of Independence, the land of the free
and the home of the brave.

The patriotic pause helped the strike breakers get thoroughly reorganised and
on the morning of 5th, there was wholesale dumping of cargoes, overturning of
trucks, looting, arson, charges against the police with stones, bricks. At
last, guns. It was by that midnight that two men were killed and 100 wounded
and the day became ever afterward known as "Bloody Thursday".

It was at that point, that very day, that Harry Bridges made a connection that
was to dog him for most of his days. The Communist Party, which was livelier in
those Depression days than at any time before or since, called for a general
strike, and Bridges took the cry to his own union. The truckers joined in.

Two weeks later, San Francisco had its first, and last, general strike. And it
was the headline news story around the nation. Bridges came to find his own ILA
membership too timid and reorganised it as a radical, renamed union, through
which, in time, he came to get what he'd always wanted, and more – an agreed
working week, pensions, recognition of his union as the only bargaining agent
and, in the '60s and '70s, agreements on mechanical loading and container
prepackaging.

By that time, in the '70s, a new generation was calling him a "partner of the
bosses". He, who throughout most of his life had been denounced, far and wide
as a Communist. In the 1940s Congress had voted to deport him as an alien
Communist – he was still an Australian. The Supreme Court, however, ruled in
his favour.

At the time of his militancy, he frankly welcomed the Communists' help, he
rarely, if ever, failed to follow the Communist line. "We are," he kept crying,
"in a class struggle." At the same time, he said over and over, "I neither
affirm nor deny that I am a Communist."

Now this was years before McCarthy, before the Second War and it was a time
when, in a country where labour is not a political party, but a bargain
basement where both political parties must trade. The Communists in the '30s
pursued a covert strategy of infiltrating every sort of union under the guise
of being liberal New Dealers. Many very ardent New Dealers didn't really
believe there was such a thing as a Communist.

One such innocent was the liberal president of the Screen Actors' Guild, one
Ronald Reagan, who was appalled to discover that Communists were running his
union, using intimidation, blackmail, damaging homes, writing a speech he was
to deliver to a committee of Congress. The result was a reaction of outrage and
the birth of a new-born conservative.

Harry Bridges knew well enough who his allies were and he never minded much the
national hue and cry against the Communist from Down Under. So 30 years later,
when the radical dock workers called him "the bosses' partner", what happened?
Nothing unnatural, really. The fellow travellers of the '30s turned into
moderate Democrats, the militant student radicals of the' 60s, the notorious
Chicago Seven, turned, mostly, into brokers and yuppies.

They used to say in the late '30s that a liberal was a socialist with a wife
and two children. Harry Bridges, when he died, had a wife, four children, five
grandchildren and four great-grandchildren. Down the years, the New York Times
said, "He had mellowed".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC.

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP