The 1988 presidential election - 11 November 1988

Last Tuesday morning, on a brilliant day with all the scarlet maple leaves gone
brown underfoot, but the various oaks still fluttering gold against a blue sky,
we went off, as we do once every four years, round the bay and up a country
road to the little schoolhouse and took our place behind no more than a dozen
old folk, senior citizens or who are retired and can afford to wait till the
early rush is over.

A large, comfortable old lady, technically known as a poll watcher, handed us a
pen and checked our new signatures against the old one and in our turn, we went
between the curtains of the voting booth and pulled the lever that closes them
and faced a vertical row of seven printed names, or rather seven groups of two
names, candidates for president and vice president of the United States.

From the top down it read Democrat, Republican, Liberal, Conservative, Right to
Life, Libertarian, National Alliance. Now these are separate parties, though
some of them were running either Dukakis-Benson or Bush-Quale.

The Libertarian party candidate was a retired Congressman who wants, among
other things devoutly to be wished, to abolish income tax altogether and to
abolish American foreign policy in the sense of fetching home the hundreds of
thousands of American warriors abroad. His national vote was negligible.

The National Alliance party is more interesting. Its presidential candidate is
a woman, a black woman, and she was at once the first woman and the first black
to appear on the ballots of all 50 states as a presidential candidate. She and
her followers are embittered defeatists of the Reverend Jesse Jackson and
remained outraged, or sore at least, at his being pushed offstage once the
Democratic convention was over.

Her programme was simple and severe, summed up in the slogan "Dump Dukakis",
the idea being by voting for her to deny the governor black votes in key
states, ensure the victory of Mr Bush and so begin to mobilise the
counter-revolution in the Democratic party in the interests of Jesse in '92.

I don't think it was ever going to matter much how many black votes she took
away from the governor. Four years ago, the Democrat Mr Mondale took 94% of the
black vote, it didn't help him. And whereas President Reagan took 6% of the
black vote, this time Mr Bush took 11%. There was, in other words, in the big
cities a slight but helpful move of blacks towards the Republican party.

All right, so we're looking at a war with seven vertical rows, each with a
little lever at the left edge. Horizontally there are 12 separate slots, the
first is for president, vice president then follows if a United States senator
is up for election or reelection, his name and his opponent.

After that, we move on to the state government, you have to choose a state
senator and in your district an assemblyman, the assembly is the New York lower
house. Then you have a list of judges to elect for the state Supreme Court and
then for district attorney for civil court and so on.

Most people bring a little newspaper cutting with them with their thoughtful
choices ticked off so they don't spend the morning behind the curtain, but
that's not all, there is a lever and another printed line at the top not of
names but of propositions, that's to say of issues that affect your state and/
or your county, which are to be decided by a referendum.

On our wall there's one, to float a bond issue to pay for extending and
improving the maze of freeways and motorways and other roads on Long Island. A
second would borrow a hefty sum to protect the water supply of Long Island,
which comes exclusively from aquifers and which is declining.

In New York City, there was a proposition setting out a procedure to declare
the mayor incapable – not, of course, necessarily old Ed Koch, but some other
mayor who might in specified ways go round the bend. Every state has at the top
of the voting machine wall, these state-wide propositions and everyone of the
3,000-odd counties of the United States is entitled to draft its own, so you
see voting, especially in a presidential year, is not just a matter of closing
the curtain, flicking all the little levers against your chosen horizontal –
that is, party – line.

In some states, the very act of voting is so arduous because of the number of
offices to be filled, but mainly because of the knottiness and complexity of
the propositions that a great many people are stricken with pre-electoral
fatigue and don't vote at all.

California had a ballot this time, it took 20 minutes to read by a fast reader,
it had several propositions expressed in legal jargon so dense, if accurate,
that people demanded and in two cities got an allowance of 10 minutes each
inside the booth. It was not enough even for sharp lawyers and the time limit
was waived. No wonder the California vote was especially late this time in
coming in.

Of course, because of the three-hour time lag it's always midnight eastern time
before the polls close up there and the three television networks found
themselves this year squeezed in an ethical corner. There was a resounding
outcry around the nation four years ago when the election result was clear and
was called hours before the polls had closed on the west coast.

This year, the networks took a solemn or a respectable oath that they would not
predict the results in the west coast states until their polls had closed at
midnight, eastern time. However, if it was plain that the election had been
decided by the rest of the country while Californians or Oregonians and
Washingtonians were still voting, their sense of professional responsibility
would compel them to declare the election settled – and of course that's
exactly what happened.

And this reminds me irresistibly of a true story about the presidential
election of 1916. The United States was not yet in the First World War, the
Republican candidate was a majestic, bearded justice of the Supreme Court right
out of central casting – Charles Evans Hughes.

The Democrat was the incumbent, President Wilson who campaigned on the magical
slogan he kept us out of war. In those days, need I say, there were few states
that had voting machines though Thomas Edison devised the first model in 1869
and it took a day and a night to transmit to the east the results from
California, Oregon and Washington.

Justice Hughes carried most of the populous east and by the evening after the
election it was pretty clear that he'd won. He was staying at the Astor Hotel
in New York and a beacon on top of the New York Times building flashed red
indicating a Republican victory.

Two brass bands marched out from the Union League Club; a great crowd massed
outside the Astor and cheered the new president. Justice Hughes graciously
acknowledged the tribute and went to bed president. Some time in the very early
morning, a reporter who'd been waiting and watching for the western returns
telephoned the Astor and Justice Hughes. He got a butler. "I'm sorry sir," said
the man "but the president is still asleep."

Said the reporter, "better wake him up and tell him he's not president".
California had come in and tipped the electoral vote to Wilson, the man who
kept us out of war. The following April, Wilson asked Congress to declare a
war, which it did, on the German Empire and its allies.

More than any other state, I believe, California passes many of its laws not
through bills put up to the legislature by its elected representatives, but
through these propositions or referendums, referenda, printed on the ballot.
And this time in no state has a proposition caused such a turmoil within hours
of its passage as California's proposition 103. It simply asked the voters to
approve a 20% cut in automobile insurance, which is of course compulsory. It
doesn't sound like a call for a revolution, but in a state that is 800 miles
long, has five climates and almost twice as many motor cars as any other single
state, this proposal pinched the insurance companies where they live.

There are 25 million people in California and 15 and a half million
automobiles. Imagine a Britain with 56 million people and 34 million motor
cars. The insurance premiums are high. For a single-person registration $1100 a
year would now go down to $900. The consumer groups are rejoicing, the
insurance companies were howling.

By the dawn's early light of Wednesday the 9th, one of the biggest companies
announced by nightfall that it was withdrawing from automobile insurance
altogether. The sixth-largest company in the state announced it will be
"impossible for us to operate at the premium levels mandated by Proposition
103". There was talk of wholesale dismissal of insurance agents; the industry
has already started to draft a court challenge setting out its outlays in huge
damage awards and medical expenses.

California has no worse of an accident record than any other state. In fact,
according to an AA study, the safest drivers in the country are California
women between the ages of 21 and 26, but with those 15 million cars humming
around, the insurance companies have a case. I gather from friends that one day
after the election the hubbub over Proposition 103 has drowned out most talk
about the deficit and about Mr Bush's plans for his administration.

Since I went out on a limb last weekend and laid out what I took to be the real
reasons for Mr Bush's coming inevitable victory by 41 States to 9, I
miss-guessed Minnesota. I don't feel any compulsion to rehearse them over
again, but I must report one voter's amazing, wholly unpredictable, reason for
voting for Governor Dukakis.

Tuesday evening, I was in our small local supermarket. At the counter, two
oldish ladies, one plump with a foreign accent, the other wizened. The wizened
one was nattering away at the plump one like a woodpecker "Why, why, why," she
kept shouting, "Why could you possibly vote for Dukakis?".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP