The social effect of TV violence - 22 October 1993

Twenty-one years after the surgeon general of the United States decided that
movie and television violence can provoke violent behaviour, a Senate committee
summoned to Washington on Wednesday the president of one of the big three
commercial television networks and the chairman of a pay cable network, others
will follow.

These hearings, which like all Congressional hearings are held to collect
evidence for the purpose of framing new laws, the hearings had been set
sometime ago, but two grisly incidents happened during the past week that
strengthened the contention of several senators on the panel that the dinning
repetition of violence in the movies, even more on television, does provoke
violence in life.

The other day, one teenager died and two were critically injured when they
imitated a scene in a movie about college football, it's called The Program.
And at one point two young Hellions proved their manhood by lying down in the
centre of the dividing line of a two-lane highway. This is a rather primitive
sort of Russian roulette; the hopeful theory is that cars will go swishing by
in opposite directions barely brushing the brave or idiotic prostrate figures.
In the movie they made it. In life, one boy was killed and two critically
injured.

The other incident was more naive, more chilling still. There is a a TV cartoon
series Beavis and Butthead in which one of the characters likes to play with
matches. One devotee of this series is a five-year-old boy, his mother's quite
certain that he got the idea from the cartoon series. He played with matches
long and successfully enough to see his baby brother burn to death. Now
oldsters will readily testify that this problem now directed at television
shows first came up decades ago with comic strips, newspaper comics. Children
with concerned and noticeably austere parents were forbidden to look at the
comics, which for very many children were the only part of the newspaper they
yearned after.

Anyway, the dreadful incident of the five-year-old arsonist is the first
example I can recall of provocation by a cartoon character.

After the comics, radio became the alleged stimulant to wicked or loutish
behaviour and in the 1930s I knew several families, parents not much older than
me who simply banned radio sets from the house. All I noticed from close
observation of their children was that they tended to be not only priggish but
alarmingly out of touch with the life around them, that is outside their
immediate family. Then there was or perhaps running concurrently with
widespread complaints about radio, there was also a grouch spanning the
Atlantic about the movies. The big hullabaloo came roaring up in the 1920s
before sound, the talkies, came in, so the seducing factor was visual.
Moreover, the protest wasn't about screen violence not until sound and the
gangster films, but about nudity and S-E-X as we were told to say before the
small children.

The first rumblings of family protests in the United States anyway against
barely disguised sexual situations on the screen soon coincided with dreadful
revelations, which the very popular fan magazines dreaded to publicise but
bravely did so, revelations of behaviour among some famous movie stars that we
today being determined to avoid all moralising might call "easy going" but
which people, ordinary people and families as well as parsons and politicians
called downright immoral.

There were in the late '20s and early '30s some very murky divorce suits among
the stars, and proved sexual orgies were still a rash of drug deaths, one
exotic screen siren and her popular husband star both died of cocaine
overdoses. It's odd to think back to it now, cocaine to two or three
generations at the beginning of the century, it was a sort of quirky forgivable
weakness of Sherlock Holmes. We never heard about it in life until this wave of
Hollywood scandals in the '20s, which was mimicked with similar dire results,
deaths, suicide in London's Mayfair smart set. Then we never heard about it
again until the 1970s and 10 years ago the news of its hold on street gangs and
on the first generation of Wall Street yuppies. Somehow, I don't know why, the
drug menace, except as a street pest and a provocation to the downfall of pop
singers and the like, has generally been used in the movies as a cautionary
tale, a warning – not so with guns. And the Senate committee's hearings this
week were mostly about guns.

Sex in movies, anything short of the act itself, has long been allowed and on
the pornographic television channels there is no limit. Anyway, the Supreme
Court along with the judiciaries of all the Western countries I believe all has
given up on censoring or restricting pornography and has a rough time trying to
define obscenity even.

In this country, the sainted First Amendment to the Constitution that
guarantees freedom of speech has been stretched to take in and sanction
anything and everything, but the essence of the Senate's concern and its anger
is guns. No wonder in a city true too of New York and other cities where one
schoolboy in five carries a gun where the London figure of 22 homicides a year
is out-blasted by our 1,890 homicides. A country in which the leading cause of
death for youths between the ages of 15 and 24 is homicide.

Now to go back to the result of the popular campaign against Hollywood
immorality led in the early 1930s to a so-called Legion of Decency, which
developed enough clout to force the industry through its ruling body to police
itself, which it did with ludicrous primness in the early years misconstruing
the idea of morality to the point where bad girls were compelled in the movies
always to come to a bad end. Nobody, no married couple, could be seen in bed
together except in two-reel farces: it was all right for Laurel and Hardy but
not for Mr and Mrs America. And if a man truly, wedded or not, kissed his wife
in bed, he had to keep one foot planted firmly on the floor and so on and on
till the code was killed by its own absurdity.

When the first protests were heard about the narcotic effect on children of
violence on television, the argument was joined between two bodies that
expressed themselves firmly, dogmatically as the ruling experts on such things
– the churches and the psychiatrists. The churches were as always all for
banning explicit violence, the psychiatrists asserted there was no proof that
screen or television violence incited to violence in life, rather they assured
us screen violence acted as a purge and not a stimulant.

I remember one splendid old codger, a professor of English literature no less,
going along with the psychiatrist delightedly applying to Al Capone and the St
Bartholomew's Day killings what Aristotle said about Greek tragedy, through
pity and terror affecting the proper purgation of these emotions. Mmm.

Well, the psychiatrists held the floor for many years and naturally the movie
industry and then the television boys were eager to quote and applaud their
testimony but, about a quarter of a century ago at the latest, social
scientists, prisons, doctors, posters, began to make studies which resulted in
the surgeon general statement, which was both a positive statement and a
warning that many people young especially were incited to a particular forms of
violence by watching particular programmes and that the spate of gunfire on the
telly had played a bit part in either stimulating or frightening ordinary
people to buy guns and psychopaths to use them. By this time, I do believe
there's no question about the truth of it.

This week, the network chiefs took a verbal beating from two senators but more
so from the most important and eloquent witness of the day namely Miss Janet
Reno the new Attorney General of the United States. The television chiefs had
put up a defence about as persuasive as the tobacco industry's spokesmen when
they earnestly declare that more research needs to be done to establish the
alleged connection between cigarette smoking and lung cancer and emphysema. One
executive almost jokingly assured the committee that there's no murder on
Monday nights, none on Thursday both evenings mainly given only on his network
to sports.

This was too much for Miss Reno, she left her prepared statement and with tears
of anger deplored television violence that is ground into us, day in and day
out. You have to have been a prosecutor she said, she was the District Attorney
of Dade County, Florida, practically a showplace of night time violence in
life. You have to have seen the fruits of violence, the broken mother, the
scared brothers, the frightened neighbours, the weeping families. You'd never
see this after violence on television – guns solve everything. She ended with a
warning the television industry, network, cable syndicates had better clean up
its act by next January, if it does not, she proposed an action that has so far
never been contemplated quote "if immediate voluntary steps are not taken and
deadlines established, government should respond, the White House will work
with the Congress to make new laws". Whether that can ever happen is a large
question. The industry immediately calls censorship, strangling the First
Amendment, a police state in the offing. It has been the American experience,
so far, even on matters as horrendous as rape and/or extreme fictional
violence, that even when a scoundrel claims the protection of the First
Amendment he usually gets it.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP