1984 and the nuclear threat - 1 January 1984

The end of any year is a time when journalists envy the rest of the population
for a simple reason that may not occur to most of you, namely you are not
called on either to write a survey of everything important that has happened
since 1 January and, better, you are not required to pontificate and say what
is likely to happen in the New Year.

Journalists obviously are by their calling more likely than most people to be
able to recite a roll call of events, but they're not better equipped than
anybody else to predict anything, no better than old Moore's Almanac in this
country, the Farmers Almanac or – in every country – the weird and bafflingly
popular breed of astrologists.

Well, all that has changed. I suppose for the first time in human history we
really are able to say, without shame or fakery, how most Americans feel about
life, what they consider to be the most promising and the most threatening
trends at home and abroad. I don't think it's possible to make too much of the
startling novelty of the scientific public opinion poll.

I spent some days of the holidays leafing through history books of eminent
reputation. What I was ferreting out, in a leisurely fashion, was how the
people at large – as distinct from statesmen and kings – felt about events,
about the conditions of their work, about military threats from abroad and so
on.

I regret to tell you that historians until, say, the Second World War could do
no more than make large vague guesses; they didn't admit, or even know, that
that's what they were doing, they told us by hindsight what was bound to
happen, they quoted the newspapers – that is the opinions of one editorial
writer with easy access to a grocer or a coach driver – they expanded the
prejudices of foreign secretaries and kings and bankers to cover the
population. Wars happened because two or three men in one country thought that
the neighbouring country or the one across the Channel was getting too powerful
or was making threatening noises. The vast majority of the people never knew
how factory workers felt about life until they started to throw bricks.

As late as 1942, Winston Churchill – criticised for refusing to pay much
attention to the Gallup poll – retorted by saying, "I read in the papers that
leaders should keep their ear to the ground, I don't think the British nation
would look up to a leader who was detected in that somewhat ungainly posture".
Well, as I say, we can today tell quite a lot about what is on the minds of a
nation, what they hope for, what they fear, how their opinions break down into
percentages on such vital matters as the role of government, the freedom or
licence of the press, the prospects of nuclear war and what our leaders in
America what President Reagan, most of all, ought to do about it.

I don't remember a time when we've been subjected to or privileged to receive
such a blizzard of surveys on popular opinion. By the way, quite a lot of
people say several million Americans will be fretting just now about very
little except their own survival.

You've all heard about the worst December since 1933 – thousands of miles, the
main body of the American land groaning under appalling blasts of snow and ice
storms and grotesque temperatures in which people fumbling for their keys or
just nipping next door were frozen to death.

But before this happened, just before this happened, the pollsters swarmed
across the nation by telephone, by house calls, producing statistical samples
that speak for the whole and I hope there's nobody still complaining that a
poll of 1200 citizens cannot possibly be representative of the variety of types
and people's and opinions of the whole country.

The late Dr Alfred Kinsey used to say – a little prematurely, I must say –
about 30 years ago, that it would soon be possible to discover the balance of
American attitudes on anything from simply talking to a sailor in Time Square,
a shopkeeper in Seattle, a housewife in Dallas, a fisherman in Maine. We're not
quite there yet, but 1200 matched types across the country are amply sufficient
for an X-ray of public opinion.

On the matters nearest the heart and home – getting and spending and working
and eating – this is the breakdown by Lou Harris, who has the most remarkably
accurate record: more than half of all Americans expect inflation to stay low,
about as many expect unemployment to go on dropping, exactly 50% expect the
economy to expand.

Now since all these things were promised by Mr Reagan the day he took office,
it's not surprising that 47% believe the Reagan economic programme to have been
a success. It is surprising that this view reflects a whacking 20% increase
over a year ago. The polls don't yet go on to say that a majority of American's
expect Mr Reagan to be reelected, but since it's practically unheard of for
most of a politician's promises to come true within two years, the day cannot
be far off when, saving some colossal blunder in foreign policy, the polls will
show Mr Reagan pulling easily away from the Democratic hopefuls.

However, along with these gung-ho notes, the Harris poll sounds some bleak,
even contradictory, notes. Half the people say their no better off than when
Reagan came in, 69% see no relief from high interest rates, more than half
expect more people to have their home mortgages foreclosed and to see more
people go hungry and 72% expect big business and the rich to be better off
still. This is, incidentally, a theme that the Democrats bang away at as party
gospel (it always has been) but again, if the homeless and the poor visibly
increased and this charge could be made to stick, Mr Reagan might find himself
derided and rejected as President Herbert Hoover was on the same grounds.

There are two matters of immediate and continuing interest to everybody who
lives in a democracy which have dominated the surveys. One is the aching Topic
A, the arms race, the likelihood of nuclear war, what to do about it.

The other is the very serious question of the people's belief in, or
disillusion with, the power of government to destroy freedom. I imagine that
every country with democratic pretensions has printed realms of comment this
Christmas about the approach of George Orwell's doomsday year, 1984. We too
have had our deep ruminations from double-domed intellectuals telling us
peasants what to think about Orwell's book and his hint of awful trends to come
like newsspeak and double think and Big Brother watching and policing our
lives.

But I doubt that elsewhere, not in England I think, has this nightmare and the
prospect of it been put up to the mass of ordinary people. One survey put it
bluntly, "Do you worry that the totalitarian state in Orwell's 1994 is a
possibility?". You might think I should have guessed that a majority of any
nation had not only never read the book but had never heard the name.

The range of answers was extraordinary and, I dare to say, extraordinarily
intelligent or aware. A great majority see the invasion of privacy as scary,
about 30% believe that government control of thought and opinion is a real and
frightening possibility in the near future. Most people questioned saw
computers as a present danger, they note that already corporations and local
and national governments can find out everything they need to know about
anybody they want to collect money from. The majority opinion was best put by a
black shop girl, "I don't think our minds will ever be controlled by a
government but I can see our lives becoming terribly constricted by
technology". A majority, too, believed that in this country anyway, the human
spirit would resist and checkmate the computers.

On the larger, the universally nagging subject of the nuclear threat and
Russian-American relations, they together constitute the number one problem
confronting the United States and it is the problem on which the people give
the president his lowest score.

Only one American in four believes Mr Reagan is doing a good job in avoiding
the chance of war, more than three-quarters believe that this country must take
some of the blame for the present grim state of American-Russian relations. A
remarkable 88 Americans in 100 agree with the suggestion that the Russian
people could be our friends if their leaders had a different attitude. This
does not lead people to a different view of the Soviet Union, but they don't
like the president's emphasis on its evils.Sixty-four per cent think the
Russians are just as afraid of nuclear war as we are.

The numbers of people who are worried about nuclear war have risen by 10% in
the past year and the increase in anxiety is matched by a more dramatic rise in
the number of Americans who do not believe that the United States can contain
Russian influence everywhere in the world. Ninety-three per cent conclude that
picking a fight is too dangerous in a nuclear world; more than three Americans
in four want Mr Reagan and Mr Adropoff to meet, not sometime or in the near
future, but now.

Whatever else these swings and pressures of public opinion may do in the New
Year, I for one hope that they will at least refute a notion which is very
widespread in Europe that Americans are a united, belligerent pack of 220
millions insensitive to negotiation lined up in a body behind the president and
the keepers of the Pentagon. They are a divided and anxious and thoughtful
nation, just like you.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP