Gorbachev’s Japanese investment trip - 19 April 1991

On Wednesday, in Tokyo, Mr Gorbachev did not so much address the Japanese
parliament, the first Soviet leader ever to do so, he was begging, beseeching,
imploring his audience, let's not lose time, don't hold back from taking part
in these great projects!

And what are these great projects?

They all come down to one operation required of the Japanese, to bail out a
bankrupt communist state. Of course Mr Gorbachev didn't say it quite that way.
He pointed to a vision which the Japanese could turn into reality of throbbing
modern factories, a great range of domestic appliances, a wealth of electronics
and other consumer goods, and together the two countries could produce timber,
natural gas, oil, et cetera, et cetera. And how were the Japanese supposed to
join in these great projects? They were to put up the money. Vast sums in
investment.

Here in fact was a communist leader, in much trouble, speaking at this point
for we are not sure how many of the Soviet peoples, begging the most
conspicuous and aggressive of capitalist nations to rescue the Soviet Union
from collapse. Or in Mr Gorbachev's all but declared purpose to save it for
communism. With a little sharper writing of Mr Gorbachev's speech and a little
more swollen rhetoric, it could have been a scene from a novel by George
Orwell, if he'd lived long enough to know that by 1984 the world had not
succumbed to totalitarian slavery.

Considering the joyful domestic scene Mr Gorbachev was conjuring up, Soviet
households humming with every sort of electric gadget, bursting with crammed
refrigerators. This would be of course, after the ordinary families had been
well supplied with bread and soap. Contemplating Mr Gorbachev's vision, it was
hard for American on lookers not to think back to an earlier scene between a
Soviet leader and a Western statesman, especially since this very scene had
been played over last Sunday evening, to illustrate a point Mr Richard Nixon
was making in a long political interview.

By way of identification, I ought to remind latecomers that Mr Richard Nixon is
a former American president. The man I talked about in 1974 – he had just, in
shameful circumstances, resigned from the presidency – I talked about as a
character of Shakespearean complexity and pathos, pitiable, sympathetic and
gone for good. I was wrong. Mr Richard Nixon is now America's foremost elder
statesman. He has just returned from a magisterial visit to the Soviet Union
and several Western capitals. His advice is much sought and cherished by
leaders of every political stripe.

Well, the scene recalled by Mr Gorbachev's forward-looking picture of the
prosperous Soviet family and its humming electronic household was a scene in
Moscow in, I think, 1958, between Mr Nixon who was then vice-president of the
United States and Mr Nikita Khrushchev who was, without any challenge, the
leader of not only the Russians but of all the Soviet peoples.

Mr Nixon was being politely shown around what we should call, maybe used to
call, an "ideal homes exhibition." Proudly Mr Khrushchev steered Mr Nixon to an
ideal kitchen, the well-equipped kitchen that one day sooner or later, would be
available to the average Soviet family. In those days – indeed, until barely
two years ago – the Soviets allowed you to see on television only what they had
filmed. They clearly had filmed the kitchen meeting between the two leaders not
as something which regrettably had to be shown, but as a dazzling revelation to
the West of what a Soviet home might come to look like.

The pathetic giveaway was that that kitchen was itself, by Western, and
especially by American standards, pathetic. Like an American kitchen of say
1910. Though even at that, I don't remember seeing the good old American
icebox, which winter and summer in every part of the country, the iceman came
two or three times a week to refill.

Mr Nixon, then the dark-haired 45-year-old vice-president, tried to hide his
amusement at the demonstration of this bare, rudimentary electric kitchen. He
couldn't restrain himself completely. He had the gall to say smilingly, to Mr
Khrushchev, that every American family of modest means had a kitchen, at the
very least as good as, better than this relic from a Mack Sennett comedy. He
didn't say Mack Sennett, I'm saying it. He implied, trying very hard to imply
without scorn, that here was another example of how very far behind the Soviet
Union was in what were then known as domestic utensils, in, we should say,
consumer goods in general.

Mr Khrushchev exploded in sudden anger – he was a great finger-wagger and he
wagged away in Mr Nixon's face like a metronome. "Let me tell you," he ranted.
"You may think you're far advanced, but five years from now, we overtake you.
You," with gestures, "will be here. We will be reaching for the ceiling, there!
" Then Mr Khrushchev dissolved his sudden fury in a bout of staged laughter,
and Mr Nixon staged a hearty response.

Mr Khrushchev had the rude candour to mention then, and at a later time, that
soon the Soviet Union would bury the Americans. It was taken by people easily
inflamed, to mean physical burial in warfare. Later Soviet leaders explained
good-naturedly that Mr Khrushchev had meant bury economically.

So now here we are, 33 years later, and the Soviet leader, perhaps I should say
"a" Soviet leader is ravishing the Japanese parliament with a picture of a
great social project. The project is to give the ordinary Soviet citizen
something like the choice in consumer goods that the Americans and the Japanese
have today. Mr Gorbachev says the Soviet Union can't possibly afford this
project itself. "There are," he said, "stormy times and the Soviet economy
faces disintegration. There is much social instability which accompanies the
painful transition from one type of economy towards another".

The New York Times says, not in quotation markets, market economy. I didn't
find the actual phrase in Mr Gorbachev's speech. No doubt he has used it and
will again, but he's made it clear to his own supporters and to the hardliners
who are said to back him, that however full-blown a market economy there comes
to be, it must be run by the Communist Party. This, I believe, is at the core
of his conflict with Mr Yeltsin and others.

And also, I don't find in his Tokyo speech any mention of the dreaded word
"communist". However, the Japanese knew well what they were being asked to do:
finance the transition, that's what. They were not impressed. The law makers
praised his sincerity. When he was done, he went on to talk to 600 business
leaders. Before he started, the president of the largest Japanese trade group
warned Mr Gorbachev not to expect much because the economic conditions and the
infrastructure, in your country, are not there. Not enough. Another tycoon said
afterwards that you couldn't expect foreign investment from a country whose
official bureaucracy is in chaos.

Several of them noted discreetly that Japan and the Soviet Union are still
officially at war over the ownership of several islands to the north of Japan,
in the Kuril chain. For most of the past 200 years they were Japanese territory
but in August 1945 when the United States dropped the bomb on Hiroshima, Stalin
thought that was a tactful time to declare war on the Japanese. And he seized
these islands. A week or so later, the Second World War was over, and among the
prizes that passed to the Soviet Union were the islands.

Japan and the Soviet Union have never signed a peace treaty because they still
dispute who has the right to them. In delicate discussions about their fate, Mr
Gorbachev conceded – it's the first time I believe a Soviet leader has gone so
far – conceded that it might have been a mistake to seize the islands. But, he
said, by this time, the Russian people at any rate, if not all the Soviet
citizens, think of them as their own.

I don't gather from the reports that the Kuril Islands and Mr Gorbachev's hopes
for a massive loan were discussed as a quid pro quo. The Japanese business
leaders, at any rate, politely pointed to a more obvious obstacle to Japanese
investment: the Soviet Union owes Japan $400 million in payment for Japanese
imports. Of course in the contemporary world the fact that you owe someone a
million dollars is no handicap to cadging another million. Indeed, it can be a
help. Your prestige is in direct proportion to the size of your debt. It's only
if you owe somebody $200 and you can't pay it that you run the risk of a
stretch in the pokey.

By the way, we recently here were permitted to ponder the interesting ordeal of
a tycoon of splendid proportions who is pressed for money. On several large
properties he owns, hotels and the like, he's two or three billion dollars in
debt to the bank. Therefore the bank has made him another loan, of say half a
billion, so he can pay the interest on his original loans. Meanwhile the bank
has been very tough on him. They've reduced his living allowance to $10,000 a
week.

Perhaps Mr Gorbachev should put up for sale the Kuril Islands he doesn't own,
say $400 million. Then he'd be ready to tap the Japanese for a couple of
billions investment in the great social project he says is under way in his
country.

So far, the Japanese, either in business or in parliament, are resistant to
this approach.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP