A history of Washington DC - 24 January 1997

When the country's famous television anchormen – and the top ones are men,
though there are many talented ladies in waiting – when they go to cover a
Washington story, they always say, "Reporting tonight from Washington".

Not quite always. Once every four years, when the next president is about to be
inaugurated, on the morning of the great day, they announce they are speaking
"This morning from the nation's capital".

Since I mentioned last week that, by the time of Jefferson, the Congress had
stopped looking around for a capital city and had purchased a site which is now
Washington, a listener wants to know, what do I mean by "purchased" and why
wasn't Washington the capital city from the start?

This seems a good time to explain the peculiar way it came about, one of the
earliest national capitals that was invented as a place not for living but for
the periodical conduct of government, like today, Brasilia, say. Especially was
it not, as all the great capital cities of the Earth are, towns that became the
hub of the nation's life because of a natural advantage, a great port, the
intersection of travellers' routes or whatever.

The question of where the new republic was to place a capital city was a very
delicate problem. The North had carried most of the debts of the War of
Independence but didn't propose to take on the costs of constructing a capital
city. At the same time, the Bostonians, who had cradled and bred the revolution
felt touchy about letting the centre of government go south. In the end, both
sides agreed to set aside a neutral zone of about 100 square miles, the costs
not to borne by any state but by the federal government. It would be called a
district. The District of Columbia. And in the end, the Congress agreed that an
ideal place would be a plot of land, a peninsula between two rivers, which
would be ceded to the federal government by the landowners. Part of Virginia
and part of Maryland.

Now, who was to design and build it? A commission originally appointed a
notable soldier and a famous surveyor. (By the way, he was a black man.) They
began to draw up the outlines of a city when a Frenchman appeared, who'd been
innocently directed to assist the two architects, one Pierre Charles L'Enfant.
A very interesting character. A Parisian, who, like many another Frenchman,
most notably the 19-year-old Marquis de Lafayette, was inflamed, thrilled, by
the colonists' scores and at the age of 22 enlisted in the American
Revolutionary Army as a volunteer.

He was an army engineer and he must have done some pretty impressive work
because, though he was captured by the British and held for four years, the
moment he was released, Congress made him a major of engineers. He went home to
France but he was too excited about the prospect of life in the new republic
he'd fought to create that he returned here, settled in New York and, when
Congress chose this city as an interim capital which, good listener, is why
George Washington was inaugurated here, he was promptly commissioned to make
the old City Hall worthy of a national government. Its total recreation is
there today. And mighty handsome it is. One of the very few 18th-century
buildings left in this city.

So when the deal was made to create a capital city, President Washington hired
Pierre, Major L'Enfant, to design it. Unfortunately, as I said, there was
another soldier and a black surveyor already there as chief architects. "Very
well," said President Washington, "then the major will assist you". The major,
still only 34, must have been something of a charmer, or a very powerful
martinet. His assistance took the form of tearing up the plans of the originals
and laying out his own, vastly grander, design.

What he had in mind, he said, was that the plans should be drawn on such a
scale as to leave room for that aggrandisement and embellishment which the
increase of the wealth of the nation will permit it to pursue, at any period,
however remote. Mostly, he thought of Versailles and produced a master plan
which astounded the natives and appalled such as Thomas Jefferson and his hope
for sights and sounds and institutions that would reflect only republican
simplicity.

Nobody in America had seen avenues 200, 300 feet wide but L'Enfant created
miles of great diagonal avenues crossing the rectangular network of streets.
So-called "circles" would produce majestic vistas down the avenues in several
directions. And, incidentally, as a point of tactics, allow birds'-eye view for
look-outs and, down below, the placement of cannon.

For the first half of the 19th Century, L'Enfant's radiating vistas and grand
avenues were a joke to visiting Europeans for they remained unpaved and, in
winter, presented miles of bog and mud. But the great turning point was the
Civil War, when the place was packed with government, with soldiers,
contractors, lobbyists and, ever afterwards, civil servants – half the town's
population today works for the government – pressure groups, fixers, political
hangers-on and lobbyists, lobbyists.

One man more than another filled L'Enfant's austere and regal plan with the
foliage that today festoons the city. A man named Alexander Shepherd, the
city's first boss when it first ventured on its home rule, the city council
that ran things with a budget controlled by Congress. He built the roads, the
sewers, got pure water running, paved the streets, gas lines. But, which was a
lucky thing for the growing population and for all of us who came afterwards,
he had a passion for, an obsession with trees. And for his long term in office,
he stayed on a planting rampage with sycamores, lindens, willows and the great
variety of American oaks. It has guaranteed that Washington should be, and
remains, one of the leafiest capitals on Earth.

This is the picture, I believe, held in the mind by most travellers and people
on the east coast, from the blossoming cherry trees of early spring to the end
of the golden fall. The summer is an inferno. The winter, damp and grey and
shivery, but mild, by the perishing standards of the rest of the country.
Rather like London. I say most travellers and people on the east coast because
it will be no news to sociologists and humbler observers of the human scene
that the vast majority of Americans have never seen Washington.

It occurs to me in passing how about the stereotypical pictures set solid in
the minds of the not quite equally vast majority of Americans who have never
been to New York City. Certainly the early and middle 20th Century and a goodly
stretch of the '70s and '80s have imprinted an indelible roaring city of
skyscrapers, bustling speed, ill public manners, homeless squatted in Grand
Central Station, much street crime, splendid museums, every sort of food cooked
by humans anywhere on Earth and gabby cab-drivers, usually Italian or Irish who
talk a sort of stage Brooklyn and say "[foist] of all".

Well, new studies have appeared in the past two months painting a true picture
of New York that has astonished even the natives. The most striking figure is
the decline in the incidence of crime, especially of violent crime. So late as
1990, the city registered 2,200 homicides. In 1996 it had 975. New York City is
now, on the nation's disgraceful roster of crime statistics, 63rd.

This dramatic change has happened entirely during the reign of the Mayor
Rudolph Giuliani. It may be an accident, but not to him. It all happened, as
they say, on his watch. So, he's like a president during whose term the economy
is robust and stable. He claims the prosperity always, though the national
economy, its ups and downs and wobbles, has nothing much to do with any
president.

On another aspect of New York, how about those talkative Irish and Italian
cab-drivers? They are non-existent. Taxi driving is a first job, what they call
an entry profession. And you can correctly guess the largest influx of a
particular nationality by talking, if he has a syllable or two of English, to
the driver. Well, this is the list of the latest swarms of immigrants recorded
by country of origin from the most newcomers to the least. Number one, the
Dominican Republic, way at the top. Two, former Soviet Union. Three, Chinese
from Taiwan or Hong Kong. Next Jamaica, Guyana, Poland, the Philippines,
Trinidad, Haiti, India and on and on and down to Korea. No Europeans mentioned
in this list except at the bottom, a couple of thousand Irish.

No wonder the place feels and sounds very different from the New York City of
the 1930s, or of the old Warner Brothers' movies which provided a pretty
accurate, if rollicking, reflection.

As for the drastic drop in crime, the best guess is the hiring of thousands
more police to adopt what the city calls a dazzling new strategy, what they
call community policing. What we called in my boyhood, the local copper on the
beat. And, the mayor says, the 24-hours-a-day computer tracking of crime, its
habits and its districts, the ability to sniff out places where crime is most
likely to happen. This could be true.

I leave you with a postscript about Washington. I forgot to mention last time
that it's bankrupt. They never have figured out a way of making the city
solvent. The original agreement not to have the city dependent on any state,
which means it can't go begging to a state legislature, has meant it has to go
begging to Congress, which never grants enough.

The present mayor of Washington once said, "Apart from the homicide rate,
Washington is one of the safest cities in the country". Which is not quite as
hilarious as it sounds. In this spacious and ordered 100 square miles, there is
a small, compact quarter, very slummy, and entirely black, which bears 98% of
Washington's ferocious reputation for homicides.

An old lady of my acquaintance, watching the jolly fuss and pomp of the
inaugural parade last Monday, said the president could have done himself a
power of good if he'd had the simplest possible swearing-in ceremony, had
cancelled all parades and banquets and balls, and handed over the $38 million
they cost to the budget of the bankrupt nation's capital.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP