1985 Mexico City Earthquake - 27 September 1985

Turning off the telly the other night after watching brutal scenes of rubble
and grief it struck me that perhaps the most embarrassing assignment a reporter
could ask for and get would be the Mexican earthquake.

What is there to say about it? I consulted, via the tube, the absolutely top
reporters of the big networks. Every one of them worth his salt and his
prodigious salary was rushed down there because you can’t just have an
anchorman sitting in New York seeing the pictures relayed by satellite and just
talking about it, can you?

Well yes, I think you could, but I can’t imagine a network vice-president in
charge of news who would dare to keep his top man home. So what did we see and
hear? We saw the star standing in front of a collapsed hotel or hospital, then
a shot of a weeping mother or wife, another shot of rescue workers tossing
girders and planks or carrying stretchers and back to the star having to shout
above his normal studio pitch and saying mainly isn’t it awful.

The only good that has come out of the nightly scenes of disaster and
homelessness is the word which both the American government and the network
reporters have stressed over and over – not to clutter the airlines and the
rescue chains by sending food or blankets but to send money to the Red Cross or
Care or some other institution whose daily business is hunger and calamity.

In the short run the most useful thing that an ordinary citizen – or even a
news commentator – can do is to help by way of slipping a cheque inside an
envelope. In the long run, which the business sections of the papers are
beginning to ponder, there’s the truly daunting question of what happens to
Mexico’s billions of dollars' worth of debts.

The country’s economy was already in crisis. Its government has twice this
winter deflated the value of the peso and there was no prospect that in the
foreseeable future it could begin to pay the interest on its debt. Today the
long-term fear is that a collapsed Mexican economy could drag down Central and
much of South America.

However, I don’t think it’s any help to anybody to go on about what might
happen. A side-effect of the two earthquakes has been to bring up in a very
contemporary form the question who is to blame, even now, for an act of God.
Only five days after the disaster a bunch of Mexican intellectuals, mostly
writers but also including some architects, is beginning to mutter and snarl at
the government and charge that much of the damage was the responsibility of
architects and developers who violated the building code.

The leader of this group, known as the Group of 100, went as far as accusing
the government of corruption and inefficiency. An architect from the Mexican
College of Architects said that judging from reports he’d had from two to three
hundred of its members there was a very high possibility that many buildings
were poorly built and with the wrong materials.

I should guess that that could be said of any big city, but what we have here
is an extension of the current mania for citing professionals – doctors are the
worst victims – for malpractice. We’ve got to the point, I think, in our
bedazzlement with technology, with the miraculous calculations of computers,
with heart transplants and by-passes and the like that we get mad when
something goes wrong or we are not guaranteed a perfect cure or the delivery of
a perfect baby.

In this country, in the two most populous states of California and New York
obstetricians have to pay the highest malpractice premiums of any medical
specialists, something between 60 and 70 thousand dollars a year. That goes out
before they’ve earned a penny for themselves and the second penny for the
internal revenue service.

The mania has spread to the most improbable litigants like the fishermen who
recently sued the weather bureau for failing to predict a storm that capsized
their boat. I guess that, if they’d all survived, their suit might have failed.
As it was, some of them died and the survivors successfully carried their case.

Which reminds me, the weather bureau just now as I talk is giving us hourly
warnings about the approach of a top-notch hurricane, Hurricane Gloria, with
winds of over 150 miles an hour. There was a time, not many years ago, when the
bureau would have taken the risk of pinpointing the spot on the map on the
Atlantic coast where a hurricane was likely to strike but with their new and
justifiable sensitivity to damage suits the weathermen have flatly warned
everybody who lives along the mid-Atlantic coast from North Carolina up to
Northern Maine – that’s about twelve hundred miles – to keep an eye or ear out
for what is simply called a most dangerous hurricane.

This means anybody living anywhere along the coast of North Carolina, Virginia,
the District of Columbia, Maryland, Delaware, New Jersey, Long Island and the
seashores of Connecticut, Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Maine. In other
words, don’t say we didn’t warn you and your lawyer too.

In all the statistical detail that ballasted much of the reporting of the
damage in Mexico City there was one figure that caught my eye and made me think
that whatever may be the ratio of doctors to city dwellers down there there
must be a very great scarcity of lawyers for the poor.

This is the shocking figure. The population of Mexico City, the heart of the
capital, is second only I believe in size to Shanghai. It’s over nine million,
but with the industrial suburbs and the endless bedraggled petticoats of that
enormous smog city there are about 18 million people and over 10,000 factories
and an annual death rate attributed to diseases caused by industrial pollution
of 100,000.

I pass this on from the usually very reliable source of a television network
news bureau. It seems incredible when you compare it with the mere hundreds of
workers in many American states who are involved in suits against various
industries. One hundred thousand a year. If half of the surviving relatives
sued I should think they would bankrupt several thousand of those smoking
factories and that picture brings us to a bitter and still unresolved quarrel
between the United States and its northern neighbour, Canada.

For several years now, and with increasing and understandable testiness, the
Canadians have been protesting about the sulphur dioxide emitted by power
plants in the American midwest amounting to something like 20 million tons or
more that goes up into the atmosphere every year and then when the prevailing
south-west wind blows and combines with rain-packed clouds descends farther
east and north as acid rain.

Of course it comes down on the north-eastern states of the United States, and
New Hampshire for one has done a deal of complaining, but the first victims in
point of time are the Canadians. They want something done about it. They’ve
been wanting for years.

President Carter commissioned the National Academy of Sciences to study the
causes and possible cure of acid rain and it came up with the blunt conclusion
that 20 million tons of emitted sulphur dioxide a year is about 10 million tons
too much, if we were to go on protecting the soils, the crops, and hence the
food supply and the health of people in the north-eastern United States.

This was not a doomsday report – not to get excited just yet – but that study,
now about eight or nine years old did say that new technology was desperately
needed to replace or modify our coal-burning systems. So what happened? There
was, as you may know, a changing of the guard at the White House.

The Reagan administration came in and for a time it was clear, I believe, that
it suffered from an ideological distaste for environmentalists. They were
usually Democrats or worse who had been kicking up a fuss for years about
polluted lakes and rivers and the strip-mining of lands that adjoin the
national parks and so on, but the environmental protection agency was there and
not going to be disbanded, and Mr Reagan appointed a new head who looked at the
acid rain problem and said yes, the answer was to control the emission of
sulphur dioxide.

Still the administration couldn’t really believe that anything so drastic was
called for. Perhaps a new and more careful study should be undertaken? So there
was another hefty research effort, same conclusion. Of course when you’re the
President of the United States and a commission you’ve appointed tells you that
the vast industrial heartland of the country had better mend its ways, it seems
to be saying that you’re going to have to cut in half the present efficiency of
thousands of factories pending some new technological breakthrough.

President Reagan couldn’t believe it. He was genuinely concerned, but
sceptical. So he appointed a special man, a special envoy, so-called to work
with the Canadians on the problems of acid rain. The president wanted to know
if it really was a fact that the noxious but precious and profitable sulphur
dioxide really did what all these commissions and experts had been saying it
did. It does, said Mr Lewis, and he’s now suggested that about $1billion
dollars had better be put up to stop it.

We on the northern Atlantic coast don’t worry much about acid rain, since most
of it is dumped first on middle Canada, but we Long Islanders have recently had
our own small but wounding experience of pollution. I must have said before now
that one of the noblest inhabitants of the Atlantic water that laps the south
shore and of the beautiful protein factory of Peconic Bay is the striped bass,
an incomparable eating fish.

There have been no striped bass this year. By edict, they spawn in the Hudson
River and the Hudson River has polluted their young. We were advised in the
spring not to eat any striped bass in the waters at the west end of the island,
that is close to the city and the Hudson.

Need I say that nobody’s going to look at a fish and ask him where he came
from. So the commercial fishermen have thrown back any haul taken even at our
eastern end. Better safe than sick.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP