Gingrich and Roosevelt - 17 March 1995

A young politician, a new Congressman, a Republican who last January was bright
eyed and bushy tailed and now is bleary eyed and weary sagged into a deep chair
the other twilight and he said: "Tell me, how many more years left to the end
of the 100 days?" The answer was April the 15th.

Now since both the question and the answer may puzzle more people than it
amuses, let me start by talking about this slogan, which became a cliché 30 or
more years ago, but which is revived every time a new Congress is sworn in.
First though, which 100 days was the Congressman deploring? Well in the wake of
the Republican landslide last November with the Republicans in the majority in
both Houses for the first time in 40 years.

Mr Newt Gingrich, as you must know by now stood up on his first day as speaker
and flourished a rolled document as it might have been Magna Carta. He called
it a contract with America and through a spurt of preliminary rhetoric he
promised, as all party rhetoric does, that the days of reckless spending and
taxing and bureaucracy and gridlock – created this time by the Democrats – were
over and the days of Republican wine and roses were about to dawn. The 100
days, that's what he said. Now why, why does every administration declare the
day it comes in that its great policy changes, its own splendid reforms are to
be enacted in the 100 days.

The thing started, well the actual original phrase came from the prefect of
Paris and was spoken in June 1815 of Louis the 18th, when the King returned to
the capital, he had to flee from the oncoming Napoleon: "A 100 days Sire have
elapsed since the fatal moment when your Majesty was forced to quit your
capital in the midst of tears." But in all the following history books about
that explosive period, there was always a chapter entitled the 100 days and it
referred to the far more dramatic three months and more, between Napoleon's
escape from Elba, his march across Europe, his defeat at Waterloo and his
abdication, which by the way was 16 days over 100.

However, the stirring phrase came to be applied to American history after
Franklin Roosevelt had come to the White House, when he'd at once called a
special session of Congress and, as it happened, poured through a frightened
but willing Congress a riptide of legislation the like of which was never seen
before or has been seen since.

I remember especially just having arrived from England and a torpid coalition
government disheartened and divided under the impact of the depression and the
woolly helpless rhetoric of Ramsey McDonald in decline. I remember the tonic,
almost the narcotic effect of being here in the winter spring of 1932/3 and
seeing with what speed and daring and imagination a floundering democracy could
be revived and set on the run.

A huge public works project reaching across the entire country mobilising
millions of unemployed in the building of bridges post offices, dams, hospitals
and a national double laned highway system. The federal insuring of bank
deposits, a national system of welfare and relief which took in the homeless
and even the quarter of a million boys and girls who were nomads. A federal dam
and all its attendant spillways and power stations to bring electric power and
control flood waters over a region the size of England. Issuance of a new
currency, re-opening of all the banks and by presidential fiat, the compulsory
closing of all banks Roosevelt felt had a wobbly past and no future. A new
system for loans to homeowners everywhere, a bill adjusting farm prices across
the country and providing subsidies for growing some crops and not growing
others, an expensive cushion we're still plagued with, and which the
Republicans would like to abolish except that so many Republicans come from
Midwestern and Western farming states, that will raise Caine if nothing else,
if anyone dares to touch their subsidy. But all this, this special session took
just 100 days.

Well Mr Newt Gingrich saw himself as Franklin Roosevelt resurrected – he said
so – and he promised that his contract with America, his laundry list of urgent
legislation would be rammed through a submissive house in exactly 100 days. Mr
Gingrich you know is a very lively and articulate historian, a professor of
history and on January the 20th, no later, he saw ahead and could decipher in
the historical writing on the wall an indelible chapter entitled: The 100 Days
of Newt Gingrich.

Well I ought to say that Roosevelt rammed his pile of legislation through both
Houses in record time. I said the 1933 Congress was frightened absolutely of
that winter, the outbreak of the second American Revolution. More than one
third of the whole workforce unemployed, one family in three or four with
nothing coming. Only in pre, just pre-Hitler Germany, had I seen anything like
the face of depression across the whole of America. Roosevelt dared to say in
his inaugural speech that he might have to take steps beyond the Constitution,
which he did. The authority to dictate prices and wages forbid strikes, impose
subsidies, float a currency, discipline the banks and the rest of it were all
acts of national socialism presided over however by a benign dictator. And he
got the authority to do it all from one of the first bills that sailed through
that nervous Congress: the NRA, the National Recovery Act, which would in three
years by the way, was declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court.

Mr Gingrich has proposed nothing as remotely radical as Roosevelt was allowed
to get away with, he stays entirely within the democratic structure and
discipline of government, which includes, he will soon be grieved to see, the
necessary approval of the Senate.

It must be said that the new laws have gone hurtling through the House in a
burst of activity we've not seen since 1933, but whereas both Houses were
equally eager to say 'amen' to Roosevelt, only the House this time with its
near fights and shining eyed newcomers was willing to say aye to their leaders
radical initiatives. I won't begin to list the raft of laws that have gone
through – we're only at day 74 I believe – and when the 100 days are up will be
time to say: how stands the contract with America? By that time, much of it
will have passed over to the Senate, which believe me is nothing like so
bloodshot an institution as the House.

For one thing the merits of the new legislation apart, the Senate has a more
stately pace and is proud of its more circumspect approach to new laws and
particularly to panting crusaders. A good deal of the oxygen will be removed
from some of the House legislation and apart from the Senate's traditional
pace, the Senate has had time to reflect on the public's reception of some of
the House bills, all of which have tried to obey Mr Gingrich's and indeed the
Republican campaign promise to decentralise as much of the government as
possible, to make massive spending cuts in federal programs that subsidise the
health of the rich but also the maintenance of the poor single mothers, but
then, by dispensing block grants, to leave the running of these things, of
welfare and other social services to each of the 50 States.

There has been a huge outcry over the abolition of federally funded school
lunches, which the Democrats have represented as a piece of typical heartless
Republican thrift. All the Democrats have been able to claim since the
Republicans took so much of their campaign rhetoric away from them, is that
they're fundamentally more compassionate than, well, anybody.

The Republicans hasten to point out that the block grants given to each State
to handle as they saw fit, would provide actually more money than the Federals
spent. First, school lunches, the responsibility of being fair and
compassionate with the young was up to each State. It dawned on some
politicians rather late in the day that the chief peril to this new system, if
the Senate passes it, will be in the dangerously wild range of standards of
nutrition say, the States will be free to set.

And old famous American doctor who led the campaign in his time to establish
the Federal Food and Drug Administration, he told me long ago that in his young
days, indeed into his middle-age, the disparity between the standards of public
health demanded by the different states before they had a Washington watchdog
was frightening if not, he said, outrageous. Thus the middle western farming
dairy estate of Wisconsin settled mostly by Scandinavians and Germans, had he
maintained, a standard, a rule book of public health measures unsurpassed in
the Western world. Whereas in a south-western state, which shall be nameless,
the Public Health Commissioner was a failed doctor who on the side protected,
for a fee, a wealth of illegal brothels. And it doesn't take much imagination
to speculate on the sort of daily lunch that might be urged, say, on a state
where one of the chief industries was the manufacture of junk foods. It remains
to be seen in much of the new legislation what the effect on popular opinion
will be if the Senate gratifies most of it.

So far the evidence of the polls already suggests a shocked backlash from the
original euphoria that greeted the Republican landslide, and never forget that
the landslide was just more than 50 per cent of the one third of the registered
voters who actually voted in November, so the landslide was that of one sixth
of the voters. That small peep of triumph has been amplified by both parties
into the voice of the people, a misleading trick. A better sense of what most
people felt all along is now available in a late poll, which shows that since
Mr Gingrich proclaimed the Republican escape from Elba and started the
triumphal march, President Clinton's popularity has gone up from 38 to over 50
per cent. Watch it Newt, Louis the 18th may yet return!

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP