The 1997 United Parcel Service strike - 22 August 1997

It's been a long time – 16 years – since the word "strike" was the only topic
of one of these talks; it must reflect either a remarkable stretch of
drowsiness on my part, or an even more remarkable period of tenderness in the
relations between labour and management.

Well, it's neither. From time to time, I've remarked on the slow, steady
decline in a number of union members among the nation's whole workforce. How
different from the embattled 1930s when the National Craft Union merged with
the National Industrial Union and became a mighty bargaining force and how, at
the peak of Labour's organising power, 36% of America's workers of all kinds
were union members. Today, the figure is 14%.

And if you ask why should the once all-powerful American Federation of Labor
and Congress of Industrial Organizations – the clumsy name! – how could it have
lain down so meekly for so long with the Chief Executive Alliance? The answer
is, I believe, not only simple but true, one permanent result of the fierce
labour-management battles of the '30s was that the benefits labour had battled
for – minimum wage, pensions plan, health benefit systems – became, in the
post- war boom, part of the regular contracts of corporations whose former
chiefs would have fainted at the mere mention of any social service to be
provided by them and not by the government.

In the 1930s, Europeans, British labour leaders especially, I recall, were
always startled that these benefits were still being fought for, often bloodily
30 years after the war had been won in Britain, 50 years after Germany's
Bismarck, who remember started the labour revolution that was copied by Lloyd
George and Churchill in 1906 and 30 years later in America was called Mr
Roosevelt's New Deal.

But you have to remember that for a span of 50 years certainly America, or
rather America's big employers – the rising giants of iron, copper, coke and
steel, the so-called "robber barons" – could always call on something denied to
European companies: a seemingly endless invasion of slave labour. Well that's
putting it crudely. Let me put it more sensitively.

We're talking about the time of the 1870s through until the crash of 1929. The
steel industry provides a good example; it really got going with a new big pool
of labour from central and southern Europe. If the Italians went on strike, an
innocent big batch of Romanians was on hand. And when the Romanians got settled
in the steel mills and after a few years began to learn a thing or two about
wages, shorter hours and struck, the newly-arrived Hungarians would be drafted
first as strike breakers, then as employees. This rough-and-ready system
obviously worked only so long as Europe kept shipping in new supplies of cheap
labour, but time would teach even the latest refugees that the ones who'd come
before had acquired certain benefits.

There was a fierce and infamous steel strike in Pittsburgh. The gentle roly
poly steel king, Andrew Carnegie, was off resting in his castle in Scotland, so
the strike had to be handled by his tougher partner in the steel business,
Henry Frick. This one strike was proving difficult to break because the newest
immigrants who'd been expected to move in and take the strikers jobs, held out
for the same reforms, benefits that the resident workers were striking for,
which moved Mr Frick to make a bitter, immortal remark "The immigrant, however
ignorant, however illiterate, always learns too soon".

I don't suppose American employers, the rulers of the great industries in their
heyday, were more cruel than most, but the fact that they could depend for so
long on this regular breaking tidal wave of cheap labour, of thousands and
thousands in every city of penniless refugees from pogroms or from grinding
poverty, it really made the big industrialists feel they were doing a public
service by employing new immigrants.

And to the public in general, the strike, whatever the pretext, was an
ungrateful act. Strike breaking was thought to be almost a civic duty of the
captains of industry and often they could confidently call on the National
Guard, if not the army, to put down what was legally a riot. As a very bizarre
but true reflection of the general public attitude to labour, I should mention
that we're talking about a time when the United States Supreme Court could rule
in all sanity that the Constitution protected the right of small children to
work 16 hours a day.

It seems, more than a century ago, a whole civilisation, since those were the
prevailing attitudes between the workers and the boss and when the public was
not even consulted about the wrongs and rights of a strike.

Today, well as Mr Ellington said, "there have been some changes made". The
prosperity of the 1960s was so impressive that its lessons, put in the context
of the benefits of the unions once kept striking for, was well learned, no need
for massive union organising, so nothing has happened since the Second War on a
national scale like the great steel and railway and mining strikes of the
1930s. Even during a severe recession during Reagan's time, more and more
people – eight million in two years moved into their first jobs. The big unions
might have been non-existent.

The last big push for a national union strike ended in a disaster, August 1981.
It involved PATCO, a union either so docile or its members so affluent that
most of us had never heard of it, the Professional Air Traffic Controllers
Organisation suddenly struck, demanding a $10,000 rise and a four-day week. It
sounds pretty brazen until you learn about the harrowing conditions of their
work.

This was, though, the rare case of a strike against the government. The air
traffic controllers are employees of the government, pledged not to strike.
When they struck, 80% of the domestic flights were in the air and everything
seemed to be going the controllers' way. There are 22,000 daily civilian
flights; they require 12,000 controllers to guide them safely up and across and
down and the Secretary of Transportation said "It would take just short of two
years to train as many as 9,000 new controllers".

But President Reagan looked on the strike as a dereliction of public duty; he
was boiling mad. All right, he said in a fitful moment, I'll fire the lot!
Preposterous, we said. Chaos has come again, we said! He called on the retired,
on military pilots, apprentices, supervisors, every sort of qualified retired
professional. Planes did not drop from the sky. Half the regular flights were
resumed at once, then three-quarters, in time the lot, to the pride of old
Republicans who remembered the glory days of Frick and Harriman and Rockefeller
and Carnegie. President Reagan became the first successful strike-breaking
president in 30 years.

But now during the past fortnight, we've had a strike in the old "Give 'em
hell" style, the United Parcel Service Company versus the teamsters. UPS
delivers the staggering percentage of 60 of all the handleable goods posted
across the United States and the strike did grievous damage to thousands of
small businesses, had hospitals throwing blood max out for lack of new blood
and inconvenienced everybody.

Much of the company's business is done at night or in rush hours and they have
to have about 40% of their workforce part time. The union wants them all in the
long run to be full time. The arguments on both sides are amazingly complex.
The company yielded beyond the union's wish in rates of pay and the numbers of
part-time men who will move into full time. The union yielded to a five-year
instead of a three-year contract.

The teamsters you've surely heard about before, usually in a bad odour, they
represent all the people – the truckers, packers, drivers, middlemen – who
carry most freight, goods that were once transported by trains. More, perhaps,
than any other union, the teamsters could bring the internal commerce of the
United States to a halt quicker than any other body. Today, the teamsters echo
the cry of a new AFLCIO leader that labour has awakened from a long sleep and
is back in fighting trim.

The president of the teamsters claimed a victory in similar terms. This he
said, is an historic turning point for working people in this country, American
workers have shown they can stand up to corporate greed. He brought up the
point, which is being made quite often by newspapers and in public talk, that
many corporations are using huge profits to reward their retiring CEOs rather
than sharing them with the employees.

In the new UPS contract, the employees will be in charge of four-fifths of
their own pension funds. There's no question that the settlement is very much
in the employees' favour mainly, I think, because for once a big strike rallied
general public support, 60% of the people supported the union's case, less than
40 the company's.

The last big company versus union strike was the baseball players strike of two
years ago. Never was there a strike less calculated to jerk a tear from a
suffering public who had little sympathy with downtrodden workers whose low
average earnings were a million dollars a year.

The UPS strike may or may not be a turning point in labour relations and in the
ballooning prosperity, but people who don't take an historical interest in the
economy are nevertheless beginning to shake a little at the length and
undisturbed joyfulness of the stock markets. Life of Reilly!

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP