Three Mile Island Accident - 6 April 1979

Who would want to be a politician, a president or a prime minister? No sooner
does Mr Carter get a very much-needed boost in the opinion polls by his triumph
in the Middle East, than the nuclear reactor in Pennsylvania develops a
hydrogen bubble, the temperature inside the container goes out of sight and the
federal government begins to think of evacuating a million people, including
the population of Harrisburg, which is the capital of Pennsylvania.

I hasten to say two things. First, that, as I talk the situation seems to be
safe, if not yet, under absolute control. By the time some listeners hear this
the reactor may have cooled and threaten no harm to anybody ever again. But, as
I talk, the chief of the government's Nuclear Regulatory Commission says all is
going well but he cannot say the emergency is over till the high temperatures
have fallen off.

The second thing is that I know no more than any of you about the significance
of hydrogen bubbles in nuclear reactors. This weekend all of us have become
instant experts in the field in which there are no instant experts – so I don’t
want anybody to feel that I am more qualified than the next man to assess the
dangers of radiation or the efficiency or inefficiency of this particular
nuclear reactor design.

What I can do, is to feel and report the pulse of popular prejudice one way and
the other, and to pass on some well-grounded facts about what is likely to
happen to the standing of nuclear energy in the United States. I notice that,
whether qualified or not, simply everybody has an opinion about the accident at
Three Mile Island. The very name, which none of us had ever heard before, will
pass into the public memory along with such other names as Little Rock, Dallas
and Chappaquiddick.

There have been some very good programmes on television of two sorts. First,
NBC put on an hour show last Saturday about the structure of nuclear reactors,
how they worked, and how this particular one appeared to have gone wrong. Then
there have been many televised discussions between experts who disagree, mainly
on one side the government, nuclear people in the company, managers, on the
other, groups like the association of, so-called, concerned scientists.

Unfortunately for you and me, these debates or discussions are better and
better the more complicated they become. It is, in a word, an immensely complex
subject and the ordinary doctor, or physicist for that matter, is no better
equipped to give a judgement than the ordinary grocer or farmer. But, as I say,
this fact doesn’t stop farmers and doctors and journalists, actresses and
jockeys from airing strong and dogmatic opinions. And I have noticed from my
peering and reading, that practically nobody switches sides – in other words,
the people who are against nuclear reactors on principle or, I suppose, I
should say, on instinct, feel that their fears have been justified.

The scientists who are for it go on saying that nuclear power has to be... but
we have to go back to square one, learn more about the behaviour of nuclear
reactors and then devise stricter safety standards. The government is shaken –
I mean the government nuclear experts. They admit that they had never
anticipated this sort of accident that it was, for a time, out of control and
extremely dangerous if the container walls had given way and spewed
radioactivity into the atmosphere. And the last word we had before this
broadcast was that the power plant, would have to be decontaminated and
overhauled before it would be put to work again, and that this process will
take at least two years, and maybe four. Our two senators on the Senate’s
nuclear energy committee think it will never open again.

When the first scare was reported, many nuclear demonstrators, especially
people who lived near other nuclear plants in other parts of the country, began
parades urging the closing down of the neighbouring plant. Protestors in
northern California kept it up for a couple of days and nights till Mr Brown,
the governor of California, ordered one plant of the same design as that at
Three Mile Island, to be closed. The governors have the power to do that.

What is not arguable is that the whole nuclear power industry in the United
States, has suffered a shattering setback. The government simply arrested all
plans for new construction – if only the government recognises the enormous
force of public opinion, and of course, the architects, the corporation
presidents, the nuclear researchers, everybody who is in the business of
building nuclear power plants, and operating them.

The company that designed the plant at Three Mile Island has several more of
them around the country and in those places, as you can imagine, the public
pressure to close them down now is very great, whether or not there has ever
been the faintest breath of a suspicion that they weren’t thoroughly safe.

When all the technical instruction which television and the newspapers have
been feeding us has been forgotten, the public will remember that at Three Mile
Island the radioactivity behind the four-foot thick walls of the concrete
container was measured at a hundred times the lethal dose. The reflex attitude
of Americans – and maybe non-Americans in other countries – the reflex attitude
of people who live close by a nuclear power plant is if it didn’t happen at
Three Mile Island, it could happen to us. And we now know, of course, they are
right. The chances maybe a hundred to one against it happening, a thousand to
one. They were such in Pennsylvania, but as long as there is a remote
possibility, the power industry will be regarded not as an aid, but as a threat
to life.

Of course the industry goes on. There are lots of people who say it shouldn’t.
Suppose though, just suppose, that all the nuclear generating facilities in
this country were to be shut down – what then? Well, there’d be a lot of
unpleasant surprises in store for us all. I don’t think think that many people
knew before last weekend that 13% of all the electricity in America is produced
by nuclear plants. Thirteen percent is a statistical average: in three big
regions of the country, New England (which is twice the size of old England) in
the south east (about the same), and in the city of Chicago about a half of all
the electricity comes from nuclear plants.

The companies involved don’t dare imagine what would happen, they can only say
limp things like we'd have to replace this generating power or... it wouldn’t
help our customers in any way. What they mean is that large sections of the
country would have to institute blackouts and brownouts, there would be
drasticreductions of power throughout the nights. And nobody cares to predict
what would happen in midsummer when about two-thirds of the country lives
through a continuous searing heatwave, and the air conditioners are buzzing
away in half the homes of America.

What many of the "anti-nuke" protestors, as they are called, don’t figure is
alternative sources of power. Nuclear energy is still, to many people not
merely sinister but an unnecessary new-fangled luxury. They assume that we can
get along very well with the old sources, and if you ask what they are, they
answer is coal and oil. Well, America sits on a bed of coal but I don't think
America is about to start a massive new exploration of coal, or be able to
recruit legions of new miners. We have come in fact to rely on oil, and as one
nuclear manufacturer says, "Where are you going to get that oil – from Iran
maybe?"

So the accident came at an embarrassing bad time, when the United States can no
longer expect to import all the oil it needs, not since the organisation of
OPEC. In other and blunter words, the black eye that nuclear power has just
received, throws the United States more than ever on the mercy of the Arabs. I
think the other thing to notice is the effect of the Pennsylvania accident
abroad. All of western Europe, except the poorest countries, is committed to
nuclear power, and producing it.

On the same day that the Long Island Lighting Company's request to build two
nuclear generating plants was suspended indefinitely by a New York State
Commission, the Swedish Atomic Energy Inspection Board shut down two plants to
repair leaking cooling system that I believe nobody on the outside had known
about. In West Germany, which has 13 nuclear power plants, there were organised
protests by environmentalists to close all atomic plants.

And the effect in poor countries, or what we now call "developing countries",
whether they are developing or not, can be imagined. As an editorial in an
Argentine newspaper put it, "the lesson from Harrisburg is that even in a
country with highly developed scientific and technical skills like the United
States, nuclear accidents of tremendous danger are possible". Or as a simple
soul, a lady in a small town in Pennsylvania put it, "I don’t know about that
stuff, that nuclear seems to me so powerful man can’t tame it right". I think
that puts in a nutshell the attitude of the anti-nuke people and the fear of
the experts, and I should think it’s a universal attitude.

Well, maybe, not quite universal. The one calm, complacent voice is heard from
– wouldn’t you guess it, Moscow. I don’t know how thoroughly the Pennsylvania
accident has been reported in the Soviet Union. I would be surprised to hear
that it had been extensive, for the Soviets are always the first to guess the
likely effects of frightening publicity on an a national audience. They have
not made a point of reporting to their own people several known accidents to
their astronauts and a few years ago they had an earthquake which was about two
points higher on the Richter scale than the one that destroyed San Francisco.
We heard about this only from Western astrophysicists.

Well, they have spoken out about Three Mile Island. The deputy minister of
electricity was interviewed by the national paper, called Truth. "The truth
is," he said, "that such accidents were likely to happen because of the
slipshod attitude that exists where, as in this case, private interests are of
paramount importance."

All the same, I’ll bet the nuclear inspectors are off on their secret rounds
with new orders in their hands and a sinking feeling in their stomachs.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP