The business of sport - 23 October 1992

As for Topic A, I think I shall lay off it one more week in order to satisfy
even the lady from Dorset. She you may remember was the correspondent who wrote
to me years ago, after I'd done three talks in a row about the presidential
primaries of that year and said, "May I make a humble suggestion, instead of
telling us now who might be president, would it not be wiser to wait until
November and tell us who is right on." This time I want in the brief lull
between the presidential debates and the fateful 3 November to hail a flash of
light that appeared the other night in the middle of the dark tunnel from the
point of view of sportsmanship and manners, the dark tunnel of professional
sports.

As a regular fan of several sports, two in particular, I, like I suppose
millions of other fans, have come to deplore in the past 20 years or so, the
obliterating of most other values in sports by the value of money. I did a
talk, it must be 10, 15 years ago, lamenting the unquestionable fact that
tennis now thanks to the spoiled brat behaviour of players too famous and too
wealthy to be thrown out of the game. Tennis had now joined boxing and
basketball in this country and baseball as a sport whose public is hostage to
the fortunes the stars earn.

It is predicted by the truly knowing ones that baseball over this coming winter
is going to have to handle a crisis it has not seriously faced before, very
like that of the United States itself, simply a crisis of income and outgo. The
attendance at baseball games except at weekends has fallen drastically in the
past two years. Of course, the telecasting of the games has much to do with
that. In the early days of television. the late '40s the early '50s, the
baseball clubs used to ban the broadcasting of their games within a 50-mile
radius of the stadium they were being played in. This raised more Cain than
income.

And in the fullness of time, baseball as much as football, American football
came to depend for it's sustenance, for the prosperity of the clubs that is, on
television advertising, baseball and football on beer commercials as much as
anything. The beer companies and the motorcar companies – as also the soft
drink people – pay the networks millions to get in their evangelical appeals
between the innings and the clubs, of course, share in the take. But
increasingly, the clubs have not been getting back from the television
advertising enough to offset what they are paying out to players – even 10, 15
years ago, signing a player to a four-year million-dollar-a-year contract will
have been breathtaking.

We do not catch our breath these days when we read of deals – transfers should
probably call them – in which a player who's been doing fine lately is traded
to another club on a five-year contract which will pay him $20 million. Where
does any club get several $20 million to spare? They've been saying year after
profitable year that the networks and their willing sponsors would provide, but
in the long sluggish recession even President Bush has come to admit grudgingly
that things could be better, though not as great as they're going to be if he
can only sneak back in a week from Tuesday.

In the recession, finally the lovely fat-cat sponsors are beginning to grumble
and say they've had enough. The going rates in the current World Series
championships was $325,000 for a 30-second advertisement. Next season will be
the last year of a contract that has brought the baseball clubs $1.4 or 1.5
billions. That's $1,450,000,000 from one network and one cable channel, which
has national exposure that broadcasts nothing but sports. No more of that sort
of money.

To turn a knife in the wound, the beer companies are facing a big lobby,
several lobbies – environmentalists, school heads, parents, doctors, churches –
urging that beer advertising should be banned from all television as spirits,
hard liquor and cigarette ads have been banned for many years.

Several recent surveys about the ballooning drinking habits of college
students, men especially and high school students have only served to reinforce
this campaign. One or two of the most persistent, I suppose, popular beer ads
are beguiling, that's what they're meant to be, to beguile you in to believing
that, along with this delicious magically brewed by an ancient family beer, you
get also a night on the town among dazzling skyscraper nightclubs and the
smashing girls who'll be there to at least pour the beer for you. A simple
little television play, but the companies say worth ten times all the
advertising in newspapers and magazines and on billboards. If the beer people
quit or are made to, the groan from the baseball owners will sound like the
last trump.

Well, I hadn't meant to go into the coming financial plight of what we're
entitled to call the baseball industry, I'll polish off this little piece by
saying that the crisis was brewed in the first place not by the brewers and
their enemies, but by the deserting fans. The grim basic fact is that the young
males between the age of 12 and 17 who used to constitute the solid nucleus of
the loyalists sitting out there. In the past three years 25 in 100 have stopped
going, whereas three in 10 of them have switched to watching basketball, which
is the most popular of all American spectator sports.

So we've pattered along this dark tunnel and noticed the potholes in the
roadway, the cracks and the water leaks in the walls, what was that long bright
light more like a shower than a flash that appeared in the Canadian sky or sky
dome rather last Tuesday night? It was a brightness that will not be forgotten
for many years.

The cause or inspiration, for it came on the previous Sunday when the second
game of the World Series championships was played in Atlanta Georgia. Let me
throw in briefly for the uninitiated, which I take it is most of us, that the
current season came to its end two weeks ago, when out of all the competitive
joisting of the two baseball leagues, there emerged two teams, each the
champion of its league who met starting last Saturday for – you might call it
the Cup Final. They played for the best, the most of seven games. What was
unique about this year's championship was the presence of a non-American team
to meet the Atlanta Braves, the Toronto Blue Jays. Twice before they had got to
the play-offs in their league but gone down, but this year for the first time
in the history of the game part of the World Series battles would be played on
foreign soil. Toronto here they came.

The second game was played on Sunday and like the first was in Atlanta. Now
before each game, the national anthem is sung and played. This year of course
there would be also another novelty – two national anthems, very touching. But
last Sunday very lamentable, very embarrassing and to the Canadians quietly
infuriating, as part of the opening ceremonies, a Color guard of the United
States Marines marched in carrying the American flag and also the Canadian flag
but the maple leaf was upside down.

Looking back on it now, it is not to be believed that they had assembled back
there under the stadium dressed down in marching order been given the cue and
hip-hub into the majestic stadium, the spreading SkyDome without spotting their
gaff or clanger. It was, of course, intentional, but also dumb. One American
sportswriter hit the nail in writing, "the inverted maple leaf confirmed
Canada's worst suspicions that the Yanks don't know much about geography or
national flags for that matter and are particularly dumb" regarding Canada.
That was the bad news.

Now for the happy, good, the bright light in the SkyDome came Tuesday, the
third game of the series, the first ever in Canada. It's odd, by the way, that
for baseball and for tennis it's two Commonwealth countries that have the most
modern spanking and the most majestic and impressive stadiums, the other is in
Melbourne where they play the Australian Tennis Open.

Anyway, Toronto SkyDome as well as having a glassed-in circular terrace where
you can dine and watch the game and other amenities has the blessing of a
retractable roof, which on rainy nights and wafting off the snowflakes last
Tuesday closes over to the relief and the comfort of everybody.

Well, on Tuesday evening too, of course, there was an opening ceremony. Again
and surprisingly, not a Canadian but a United States Marine Color Guard and
stood at attention while the message from the commandant of the United States
Marine Corps was read aloud over the resounding loud speakers. The United
States Marine Corps wished to apologise to Canada and Canadians and had
requested the honour of presenting the Canadian flag, they marched in bearing
two standards, the Canadian flag with an upright maple leaf fluttering
alongside the flag of the Corps itself, notice, no Stars and Stripes.

It was a rousing moment and the 50,000 people rose to it and thundered
applause. The thunder boomed again and reverberated through the night skies as
the commandant's word came in once more saying that the Marines had requested
that the American flag be born by a Color Guard of the Royal Canadian Mounted
Police, "would everyone now please stand during the singing of the two
anthems". The crowd roared to its feet and quickly demonstrate their acceptance
of this graceful apology came in lustily on the Star-Spangled Banner.

The great hero of the Toronto team said it crisply, "I thought it was classy",
so it was. It made the following game, which was and will remain a baseball
classic all the more joyful to watch, but what will not be forgotten was that
moment when the Mounties rode in bearing the Stars and Stripes for triggering
the lump in the throat and the moist eye – it was as much of a cue as the mass
singing of My Old Kentucky Home when the horse troop towards the gate at the
Kentucky Derby.

Next week, stay tuned, something even more moving – a presidential election.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP