The US budget - 9 February 1986

One morning last week, the president invited to breakfast his own party leaders
from the house and the Senate and the opposition leaders in both houses.

There's nothing novel about this. I'd guess that almost every breakfast the
president eats, except on Sunday, is what they call a working breakfast. And
before any big piece of legislation's coming up, it's normal for the president
to have both sets of leaders in and hash over the prospects for the bill the
president has proposed.

Special attention should be called to the word "proposed". The president is not
a prime minister, though most presidents often wish they were, in the sense
that a prime minister, once elected with a halfway decent majority doesn't so
much propose a bill but throws it down like a gauntlet, or an accomplished
fact. It's going to be passed. Let the Opposition fume as they may. And when
they get themselves a prime minister, they can do the same. Quite different
with the American federal system.

Unlike a prime minister, the president does not live, work and have his being
in the legislature. He's a separate institution. He's not even allowed in the
Senate or the house, except by invitation for certain prescribed occasions. He
has no power to make into law anything that is simply approved by a majority of
his own party. So, every time you read, "Reagan will cut social programmes,
increase defence", it means he would like to. The bills he draws up with the
help of his close advisors and the appropriate Cabinet officer are embodiments
of wishful thinking. What he's saying to the opposition is, "Please! Be kind!"

Well, that breakfast was called to talk about the coming year's budget, which
the president, by invitation, came to Congress and presented this week. The
seating at the breakfast table was interesting. Not at all like those
get-togethers at the summits where the Americans sit on one side of the table
and the Russians on the other and they grin or glare at one another as the
fancy, or the facts, take them.

The president was in the middle. On his left was Senator Dole, his key
money-man in the Senate, chairman of the Senate finance committee. Next to him
was Senator Byrd, the Democrats' leader in the Senate. At the president's right
elbow was Tip O'Neill, the Democrats' leader in the House. And on his right,
the Republican house leader. Friend and enemy, politically speaking, evenly
distributed.

The big man here, when the budget's in question, is not the president, but Mr
Tip O'Neill. Not to confuse things, he's also the Speaker of the House which is
not, in America, a neutral chairman but always the leader of the majority. Mr
O'Neill was the big man because the Constitution gives the lower house, the
House of Representatives, the sole right to originate money bills. And the
terrible albatross that all Republican presidents in living memory, all but
one, have had to stagger under is the Speaker of the House. Because for 46 of
the past 50 years, the speaker, and therefore the majority, in the House, have
been Democrats, temperamentally and ideologically opposed to the Republican
president before he unpacks his bags and moves into the White House.

So, since every such breakfast at the White House is a political event, the
first man in to offer the president a warm handshake was his sworn enemy, Tip
O'Neill. This great lumbering, shrewd, wry man with a face like a giant
codfish. Appropriately enough, since he comes from Boston, whose prosperity
back to colonial days was based on the bean and the cod. When Tip O'Neill
shakes the president's hand, no matter how warm the accompanying smiles, it's
like two boxers shaking hands. They step away. No bell rings, but the fight is
on.

And the other morning, the fight was on so quickly and with so little
preliminary sparring that a Republican senator present moved in as voluntary
referee and said, "Please! Stop beating up on each other!" The president
started it, outlined his budget, announced he was going to cut some work and
work training programmes. And dropped a sidelong remark, as he can't help
doing, that some people preferred to stay out of a job and on welfare out of
sheer laziness. Tip O'Neill exploded. "The president's economic ideas", he
said, "were a bunch of baloney. Which might go over big at the country club,
but not with the rest of the American people."

This nasty little exchange was significant because it exposed two opposing
prejudices that are not particularly American. They raise their ugly heads
wherever, in the western and no doubt the Asiatic world, wwo opposite
temperaments come together, the conservative and the socialist. The Republican
and the Democrat. The Free Marketeer and the Government Interventionist. These
two opposing jabs have been standard procedure in any political, emotional
exchange since the Great Depression. And maybe before.

When I was a boy, a Tory quip which had, by then, all the novelty of Annie
Laurie, was that if you gave bathtubs to working people, they would only fill
them with coal. The responsive line was that all Tories sat in their clubs and
dreamed up policy over bottles of burgundy and fat cigars.

The word that needled Tip O'Neill was the word "lazy" applied to the
unemployed. The counter-punch that hurt Mr Reagan was the phrase "the country
club". They flared up precisely because there's something in both remarks. Not
much, but enough to spark a touch of anger.

Well, this little spat is nothing to dwell on but it does show that even among
men whose days and nights are spent with the complexities, the tedious and
enormous problems of government, in a mainly industrial democracy, these little
roots of bigotry lie deep. Of course, since they're both good politicians, it
was soon over. The anger, I mean. But not the opposition to what the president
in essence proposes.

Let's look at how the president and Congress go to work on a money bill. The
president does no more than draw a preliminary sketch. Very bold it is. Which
first the House will re-draw. And then the Senate will say, "There's too much
fat there, let's trim the biceps!"

Since the House and the Senate never have agreed on the final drawing, they
take both versions to a joint committee of both Houses, finance committees. And
they fiddle, and underline and rub out. And compose a final version. Almost
always very unlike the President's charming, simple sketch, not quite final.
This committee composite then goes to the House floor where 435 members do a
little more dodging and stippling and say, "All right! That's it!" This then
goes to the floor of the Senate which increases the biceps and reduces the
stomach and when the whole 100 members of the Senate have voted, you have a
portrait of the American budget.

Well, you see by now how much simpler it is to talk and write about the Reagan
budget. It is not the Reagan budget, nor was it the Carter budget or the
Kennedy budget. It is the Congress's budget. And the deficit is the result of a
congressional habit over many, perhaps 40, years, of borrowing money when you
didn't have enough in the till.

But it has to be said that most legislators, I should say all Democrats and a
surprising number of Republicans, believe that the enormous leap in the
national deficit was made in the past five years, mainly by the increase in
military spending. Not actually more as a percentage of the budget than in the
Carter years and considerably less than in the Kennedy and Johnson years. And,
this is a far more plausible first cause, by Mr Reagan's successful
determination to cut taxes. I say "successful determination" because he was
successful in getting the Congress to increase defence spending and cut taxes,
for which most of the Congress now blames him.

That's inevitable. In their political campaigns, the Republicans always get in
a mention that the United States goes to war only when a Democrat is in the
White House. And that's true in the literal sense. That America got into the
First World War under Wilson. The Second under Roosevelt. Korea under Truman.
Vietnam under Kennedy and/or Johnson. When you're running for Congress, you
don't go into causes.

So what is this president's first bold sketch of the budget? Submitted for
drastic revision by the Congress, he proposes to raise military spending by
about 6% and to cut social programmes by about 7%. But since the military
accounts for only 25% of the budget and social programmes for 64%, the cuts are
more drastic than the increases, and are meant to reduce agriculture price
supports, Medicare and other health programmes for the old, community services,
loans for rural housing, work training programmes, arts programmes, and about
30 more welfare programmes.

In previous years, the House, with its large Democratic majority, could simply
dismiss the president's budget and shape its own. This year, however, there's
an axe hanging over Congress. It is a new law. It's a bi-partisan bill
sponsored by three men but generally known as the Gramm-Rudman Act. It was
passed by the last Congress which says that if the budget the Congress passes
does not bring the deficit down to $144 billion from 220 by 1 October, then the
controller general, an unelected official appointed by the president, can slash
indiscriminately across the board the military, welfare, farming, the lot, to
bring the deficit down to that required 144 billions.

Now this law, which Congress may well come to rue, could be challenged as
unconstitutional, on the grounds that the Constitution gives only the House the
right to initiate money bills and that the controller general is outside the
Congress and outside the Constitution.

At any rate, this axe would deliver brutal cuts to everything and the president
could then say, "So YOU cut military spending to a perilous point!" And the
Democrats could say, "YOU cut social programmes to the point of a general
revolt of the poor, the blacks, the old, the disabled, the dispossessed et
cetera." To which the President could retort, "It was YOU, not I, that passed
the Gramm-Rudman axe!"

The president isn't running for reelection this year or ever again, but the
whole House and one-third of the Senate is running one month after the
Gramm-Rudman axe would fall. So even though there doesn't seem the faintest
chance that the president is going to get all the military increases he wants
and cut the social programmes as deeply as he wants, the handle of the axe does
seem, just now, to be in the president's hand.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP