America’s recession and Russian nuclear security - 20 December 1991

Good morning. When you're writing a letter home say, it's always a bad sign if
you have to fish around for a funny story or a pleasant bit of gossip to ease
the pain of the bad news to come. Sitting down with the determination to pass
on a little Christmas cheer, I found myself in this quandary. But lo, on
Thursday morning, what do I read in a piece by a distinguished economist,
making a point which I don't think has occurred to most of us, that among the
industrialised nations the worst economic showing of the year has been
performed by Germany and after Germany wait for it, Japan.

Where have we been all this time while Mr Kaletsky was totting up the end of
term marks? Most of us who are native English speakers – that's an acceptable
form to multicultural dictators – have been batting our eyelids enviously in
the direction of the two giants and apologising for our own wretched
recessions. Promising Mr Kohl the new headmaster of the EC comprehensive school
that we mean to do better next year. But, Mr Kaletsky says almost airily in
passing, that, America and Britain are recovering from recessions that clearly
ended in the middle of this year.

Mr Major, Mr Bush are you listening there below? Our recessions ended last
mid-summer. Mr Bush, for one, will be thrilled to hear this, he's been saying
it since September but could get nobody except his own budget director to agree
with him and finally this past week he agreed grumpily with the rest of us,
that things were pretty awful and he allowed his press secretary to say that,
quote, "The people of this country know that the economy is in trouble and it
doesn't make any sense to play games". The games presumably are the ones the
White House has been playing since, since last spring. The favourite being
called, let's pretend in five rounds:1, there is no recession; 2, if there is a
recession we shan't know when it started until several months after it ended;
3, yes there was a recession that ended last August; 4, no, it didn't end but
it will soon; 5, go back to square one, there is a recession and we don't know
when it will end.

Well, I was considerably bucked up by Mr Kaletsky, and his clearly ended in the
middle of the year, but next morning the big story carried a shocking headline:
General Motors to cut 74,000 jobs in North America. Twenty-one factories to
shut over five years. I ought to say that General Motors says nothing about any
cutbacks in its plants in Europe, where it has substantial operations and has
regularly made a profit on its motorcars. Not so in the United States.
Profitable computer and electronics services cannot offset the huge loss of
$2.2 billion in motorcars in the first nine months of 1991.

Almost in the same breath, actually in the same piece, we read almost casually
the similarly desperate remedies being applied by three of America's most
formidable and, most of us I'm sure have always thought most triumphant
industries. IBM – I did a goggle-eyed talk on their first great computer over
40 years ago. IBM, International Business Machines, says, it will lay off by
the new year 20,000 workers which will make 85,000 in the past five years.
Eastman Kodak – was there every such a jolly giant of industry as Kodak – will
eliminate 6,000 of 80,000 employees who mean to take early retirement. And
Xerox, mighty Xerox is trimming its workforce by 2,500.

The day that these melancholy figures came out the appointed grand wizard of
the economy the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Mr Alan Greenspan who
even in the worst of times wriggles his way out of plain speaking through
marvellously tangled undergrowths of jargon. Mr Greenspan on Wednesday said
that, consumer confidence had collapsed and that the chance of a rebound in the
economy early in the year had been checked by the financial excesses of the
1980s. Now he's telling us, it's something when the chairman of the
government's central bank deserts his usual incomprehensible double talk and
joins the rest of us in blaming the wild times of the 1980s which at the time
we looked on just as Herbert Hoover looked on the 1920s as quote, "the final
triumph of the capitalist system over poverty".

Mr Greenspan made one final remark that you'd expect more from a psychologist
than a banker: "the economy," he said, "had been stalled by a fundamental fear
among Americans". And what was that? "Whether," he said, "the current
generation will live as well as previous ones". I wonder if that's the fear of
the current generation? The only glimmer of light I can see in this
never-ending tunnel is the recognition by president Bush that things do look as
bad as everybody outside the administration has been saying for months on end.
Now maybe he will channel into domestic affairs the remarkable energies he's
shown in the part of his job he loves and excels in, foreign affairs.

Maybe he'd better bend his energies inward because, it could be that America's
commanding influence in European and Middle Eastern affairs is over. Mr Bush
has said as much in refusing to play anything but a kibitzer's part in the
Arab-Israeli talks or in influencing the political outcome of the break up of
the Soviet Union and the other Communist regimes.

I believe that even Mr Bush's domestic political enemies think he's wise not to
act like a retiring colonial power, in the cracking up of the European
Communist empire. And by political enemies, of course, I mean mainly the
Democrats but it is ironical that the enemies who will applaud most noisily and
sincerely any non-interference policy are men of his own party, but the ones
way over on the right who have discovered a new or rather, rediscovered an old
American policy that is becoming loveable to many Americans who want to
recapture the flag-waving fervour of the old isolationists or America First-ers
who were very belligerently for American neutrality in the Second World War and
held some of them to the end, that Roosevelt had betrayed them, probably by
arranging the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, by taking the country into
battle.

These new America First-ers – and I'm thinking of Mr Pat Buchanan and Mr David
Duke – are certainly something I'd never expected to see again alive and
kicking. However, if they think that George Bush has had a change of heart and
mind and means to keep out of Europe and the Middle East and Asia on new- found
principle, they have an early shock coming this week. He saw how beguiling the
new isolationism might be to Americans who are hard pinched and he said very
firmly that the United States has no intention of retiring into fortress
America, even if that were possible in the nuclear age. "It will," he said,
"champion democratic regimes wherever they are genuinely inspired." I think
that means keeping a weather eye out for, what you might call democratic
pretenders like Fidel Castro who 30 years ago came to power on the promise of
an immediate democratic election which has not yet been called.

The United States still regards Western Europe as the frontline of the allies'
defence, and so far as the break-up of the Communist countries, the US –while
saying that the emerging political forms are their business – the US will do
everything by way of humanitarian help to prevent the anarchy and civil war,
which Secretary Baker has talked about this week as a prevailing fear,
especially in what's left of the Soviet Union.

Mention of Mr Baker, brings up one other fear which it requires no banker,
psychologist or politician to isolate and define. It is I should guess on the
minds of more Americans today than any other foreign topic or rather, at the
back of their minds – they're frightened to bring it up front. And it is the
fear of nuclear weapons on the loose.

I believe Secretary Baker was the first Western statesman to bring this up
months ago, since when it's been a preoccupation of a job that takes in so many
issues as practically to forbid preoccupations. However, he went off first to
Korea to see and to be alarmed by the nuclear potential of North Korea and this
came on the heels of the discovery by that dogged United Nations team, of the
still shockingly promising nuclear resources of Saddam Hussein. Now we have
27,000 nuclear warheads scattered through three new nations, Russia, Ukraine,
Kazakhstan. The control of these forces is, we are told, at present in the
hands of Russians which must have led Mr Yeltsin to give Mr Baker such a warm
reassurance that a central control will be maintained, will it. Who says his
government is the new permanent Russian government?

The really chilling thought, which I don't recommend at bedtime, is not only
that some powerful leaders in each new republic may demand control of their own
nuclear forces, but that any one of them, or disaffected Russian and other high
military officers, might take over or at least trade these widespread nuclear
resources by way of mines, artillery, missiles, bombs, for large and necessary
cash to ambitious dictators in the Middle East to go no farther.

Well this is one heck of a Christmas letter isn't it. But, just now I cannot
pretend looking out from America to have warm and cheerful feelings about the
world of politics. They, the feelings must be reserved for friends and such
members of the family you like, this week would be a good time to be grateful
for them, for the friends and likeable relations that is, enjoy them, and have
a happy time without straining for it.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP