Some memorable letters from America - 20 November 1998

From time to time, down the years, friends and strangers alike have asked me if
there were any particular talks that stayed in the memory.

Well, 52 years and 2,596 talks, that opens up a wide field and I can say that
the talks I'm most likely to remember most vividly turn out to be not so much
talks about serious or sombre happenings, declarations of war, say, infamous
assassinations, ceremonial occasions. Memory being the wayward and mischievous
thing it is, the talks that are most easily recalled, by me, are ones that
surprised me by the numbers of people who felt moved to respond.

And perhaps what keeps them impressed on the mind is the oddity, the weirdness
or the homeliness of the topics. It's been suggested on this occasion, which
many people have been generous enough to say, is a special occasion, it's been
suggested I should recall and re-tell of the gist of one or two of these
memories. Perhaps it's a good idea, since the swishing of that scythe at my
back suggests that maybe while there's any memory left, I should tap it.

The first that occurs to me is, I was frankly astonished to hear, the favourite
talk of the New York producer, who's been in charge here for quite a number of
years. It was a talk done about an American institution I had never seen
written about in books on American folklore. But it is as well-established as
baseball or the hot dog. It is the institution of the summer bachelor. The man,
who having seen his children off to summer camp, sees his wife off to the
summer cottage in the mountains or the beach house by the ocean and who, the
first or maybe the second weeknight that he's alone, tends to fantasise about a
situation, most vividly immortalised in a cartoon by the New Yorker's Peter
Arno, long ago.

It showed a portly, elderly gent with spotted bow tie, marching smartly down
Park Avenue with a very trig, well-endowed young woman on his arm. Coming up
the Avenue and just level with him is a majestic matron of about his age. "Why,
George Fitzgerald, " she cries, "Whatever keeps you in town?" I will not
blemish a family programme with any further comment, other than the thought
that one of the most profound of American maxims is; "I love my wife, but oh,
you kid".

I bring up this touchy subject because an item of technology is, I think, about
to produce a minor sociological revolution in the United Stats. The cause of
this one is the coming into general home use of the air conditioner. In the old
summer days, the summer bachelor went, thankfully, at weekends from the furnace
of his apartment to undressed days and what he thought of as cool nights in the
country.

Now he reluctantly leaves the cool, cool paradise of his apartment for the hot
days and the dank nights and the midges and the bugs of the country. Two days
ago, a Wednesday, I pressed the elevator, the lift, button of my apartment
house and as the door slid back it revealed the capacious frame of a neighbour
of mine from the 12th floor. He's a retired old gentleman, a notable fisherman
and a solid but saucy character.

I asked him what kept him in town in mid-week. "Are you kidding?" he said.
"It's like the basin of the Ganges out there. I retreated to this wonderful
apartment, and you know what? My wife showed up this morning. Hot damn."

"If this goes on, " I said, "air conditioning's going to play the hob with
fishing."

"Fishing, nothing, " he said, "it's going to play the devil with marriage."

Perhaps because so many of my talks have been done from San Francisco, I have
indelible memories of that haunting city, a likely place for dark doings,
especially on the cold summer nights, when the white Pacific fog whirls through
the vertical struts of the great red suspension bridge, actually twanging and
wailing like a harp played by the witches in Macbeth.

This talk was done really in answer to a regular tourist question. Why should
an island, only a mile across the water from the great white city on the hills,
be chosen as an impregnable prison, which it was for many years, as the place
to incarcerate the toughest incorrigibles with a record for most escapes?
Alcatraz is built like a battleship. It lies bang in the middle of San
Francisco Bay.

It housed, in its time, such monsters as Machine Gun Kelly, Limpy Cleaver, Gene
Colson, Al Capone. Before it closed in 1963 as too expensive to maintain,
20-odd men had tried to escape, five had been shot in the water by the catwalk
guns, three had vanished, presumed dead, 12 had been captured in the water or
desperately sloshing back to the island. The point is that that one mile and
tenth of water is a ferocious channel, slashed by riptides and gurgling with
whirlpools and the water of an unvarying extreme cold throughout the year. The
12 captured in the water were half frozen after a few minutes. There was no
record of anyone's ever making it until the case of Aaron Burgett.

He'd gone ten years with a faultless record. He was head of the garbage detail.
On the last day of September, he and a pal whipped a new guard with a knife,
tied him to a tree, stole some plastic laundry bags from garbage cans and
Burgett used his as a pair of water wings and took off. The klaxons sounded and
the San Franciscans felt the same old guilty thrill and perhaps the unholy hope
that one day the warden would get a postcard from Atlantic City or Miami,
"Having lovely time, wish you were here, signed Aaron Burgett". These un-civic
thoughts were frozen in their tracks, 16 days later. Many logs and much debris
float by the island. One such object on that day had an almost human look,
almost but not quite. It was the rather frightful remains of the corpse of
Aaron Burgett.

I have no difficulty at all in picking out one talk, from all the thousand of
others, which produced far and away the largest mail, from all sorts of people,
of every class and country. It was a very early talk, done in 1950 and I called
it simply "A Baby is Missing". The first day of spring that year came in in New
York City with showers of snow and the night of 21 March was no time to be out
– foggy and very raw.

But that night a young coloured woman, a Mrs Holden, was taken by her anxious
husband to an uptown hospital and was delivered of a premature baby. It weighed
2lbs 2oz and was put in an incubator right away. The doctors told the couple
all they could do was their best. Nine nights later, a bitter, freezing night,
the night nurse went through the incubator ward to see how the premature babies
were doing and the Holden baby was gone. The parents were called and arrived
half-crazed. The doctor, pressed to tell the truth, said that a baby taken
outside on such a night might live two hours at best. He drew a tentative
stroke across the baby's progress chart. A police siren set up its banshee
sirening, the tabloids reported a routine kidnapping, the FBI was called in,
they would have jurisdiction over local police if the baby had been taken
across a state border.

A month goes by and one morning a chunky coloured girl in her teens strutted
into the bus depot on 42nd Street and, of all things, she went up to a cop. She
told a rambling story. She'd had trouble of some sort up in Harlem and another
cop wandered by and said, "I know that girl. She lives in my hotel." So she
did, a seedy little place.

By the time the cops phoned the station house, the girl had vanished and within
24 hours the FBI men were stopping the traffic and dredging through bus
stations from New York City all the way down to New Orleans. But she'd not
taken a bus. She'd simply crossed the street and gone back into her hotel room.

Days later, two detectives found her in a tiny, squalid bedroom and she told
her story. She'd lately given birth to stillborn twins. "Please, " she said,
"leave me alone." Yes, she'd kidnapped the baby. She was frantic for a baby.
The detectives cast a roving eye around everything, tapped the tattered
wallpaper, looked under this and that. They knew as well as she did that the
baby was dead. They were on their way out with her, when from across the hall
they heard a thin, broken wail, like the complaint of a powerful kitten. They
broke the lock on a small door and opened up a room no bigger than a linen
cupboard or closet and the heat from inside came at them like a 10lb roast, and
there was the baby.

When it was returned to the hospital, it weighed 3lb 1oz, a gain of about 6ozs.
Now why? The cops were the first to ask. The doctors said, a miracle. An act of
God, said another. Well we all know that God helps them that helps themselves.
What had this forlorn, half-crazy girl done to nurture this miracle? All she
would say was that she'd hailed a cab at the hospital and shocked and had had a
row with the cab driver because she took her skirt off to wrap around the baby
and somehow got downtown to her seedy room.

But it came out what the detectives had seen in that tiny, steaming room were
three paperback books, The American Woman's Cookbook, a Bible, the New Modern
Home Physician, a little folding carriage with an electric blanket, a small
electric grill, a row of baby formulas and 12 bottles with those sterilised
nipples that pop up without touching, a pan of water, sterilising tweezers,
baby powder, cotton wool, baby oil and the essential feeding weapon for a child
that size, an eye dropper.

They brought the girl into court about a month or so later and two or three
very reliable psychiatrists looked her over and all agreed she was quite mad, a
certifiable psychotic. And since psychotics are beyond the intelligent handling
of life, not to say a threat to you and me, they put her away. The baby is, at
this writing, a year old and very fit and laughing its head off.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP