Alfred Knopf (1892-1984) - 31 August 1984

This is, or ought to be, even for people who take the world and themselves very
seriously, the one time when even God gives them a weekend pass from their
social conscience.

Labor Day weekend – three days when nobody, except of course all the people who
maintain the physical grid of our lives, is expected to labour. The Congress
has gone home, the Reagan team and the Mondale team are hunched up in their
separate dugouts, polishing up their weapons for the two-month onslaught on
each other which won’t begin till Monday.

Any family that is getting along even fairly well is at home preparing a picnic
or a beach party or a mountain hike and millions of people will be pouring out
to the baseball glamour. Since it’s just on or over 100 degrees across the
2500-mile stretch of the mainland from the Arizona dessert to the Atlantic most
of them, I imagine,will prefer to retreat to the air conditioning of the living
rooms with the blinds down and the beer on hand, to watch all the native heroes
sweating it out in the ghastly glare of the noonday sun.

Well, this brief, blessed pause in the politics and the public bustle of life,
allows me to do something I meant to do three weeks ago, an intention which was
unfortunately overwhelmed first by the Ferraro finances and then by the
Republican circus at Dallas.

A great man died, and since he was neither a movie nor a rock star, nor a
famous author, anarchist footballer or Central American dictator, you’re
unlikely to have heard of him. Let me introduce him by recalling a cocktail
party held many years ago, for a posy of visiting English publishers, book
publishers. The host, was himself a publisher and he’d invited the opposite
numbers of the British as guests.

That was the problem for one young Englishman who nudged his way through the
babble, to an old and artful publicity man who had set up the party, an old
roly-poly man who looked like a Chinese Buddha, but was actually once a
penniless Russian immigrant and now the very Richelieu of American public
relations. Asked what was troubling him, the Englishman said, "Well it’s all
very exciting but my problem is, I don’t know who’s who. I mean who is the
American equivalent of Faber & Faber, say, who is the Cassells man, who might I
avoid, who should I defer to, do you see what I mean?"

The old Russian always saw what you meant, even before you meant it. He dusted
the cigar ash from his legion of honour boutonniere and he said, "You don’t
need to spot every identity, all you need to know is the two ends of the
gamete. Now, if you look discreetly over in that corner, you see the tall,
laughing fellow with the glasses, he is in the book business. In the opposite
corner, the man who looks like the Archduke Franz Joseph, he is Alfred Knopf.
He is a publisher. In fact, he is the publisher."

Now this distinction between the old-time publisher wholly devoted to books,
and the new breed who have gone into the book business, as they might have gone
into banking or real estate, is rapidly growing so blurred that for some
listeners, that anecdote needs an explanation.

Authors are not marketed like promising movie starlets and must rattle around
the nation's television stations to try and assert a saleable identity
different from that of the other starlets and if they fail to do it, their
books within a month or two are marked down, remaindered and the publisher
writes off a tax loss, putting it down to amortisation of his product.

The American humourist Calvin Trillin once said that the shelf life of a
hard-backed book is somewhere between milk and yoghurt, and the fittest
publishers who survive are those who can collar the highest price for the
paperback rights. And if they are notably successful at this, they, sooner or
later, are bound to be bought up as subsidiaries of computer firms and movie
companies or conglomerates which see no reason to look on a book as a
marketable product different from a vacuum cleaner or a soft drink.

Even the firm, the Alfred A Knopf which, for 70 years or so, was as odd and
private a concern, as a tapestry designer living alongside a wallpaper factory,
was absorbed as a business into a larger book firm which in turn became owned
by an electronics corporation and then by a newspaper chain. But so long as
Alfred Knopf lived, and let us pray, long after he’s gone, the imprimateur of
the house of Knopf fits discerning and scholarly editors, its standard of
choice. Even its devotion to old typefaces will remain sacrasanct.

Now this special status, as of a man of such obvious distinction – think of
General George Marshall or of Robert Tyre Jones, I mean you would not think for
some time of calling by their first names – this special status was earned by
the very early impact on the profession of publishing, of a man of commanding
presence and formidable character. Alfred Knopf was the son of a father – he
had a German grandfather – who was a prosperous New York financial consultant.
A man, who from all accounts, set the example, or in the modern jargon, the
role model for his son. A moustachioed, imperious man who must have earned the
jocular title, which passed on to his son, of the last of the Hapsburgs.

The son, Alfred, graduated from Columbia University in 1912, and was treated by
his father to a post-graduate tour of Europe. Alfred was already steeped in
books, and meant to be not just a reader, but a maker of them. He was only 20
but he made it his business, to seek out Joseph Conrad and Goldsworthy and
Katherine Mansfield, and he listened to the gabby Frank Harris and decided at
once to be a publisher.

He came home, he was an accountant with a publishing firm for three years or
so, and at the age of 24 decided to go it on his own. His father set him up,
but only to the extent of a telephone and a desk, not yet a room. He bought an
English translation of four plays by Emile Augier. Emile Augier? Alfred was not
under the delusion that he was floating the Pickwick Papers. He liked this
Frenchman’s work and thought it ought to be published and for the next 60-odd
years, that was his guiding motive. Ten of his first dozen books were
translations of what he decided were promising unknowns, or the unjustly
neglected. Of course he knows well that somebody had to pay for the French poet
or the young Argentine novelist, or the history of the American fur trapping
trade that would sell no more than 2,000 copies.

So, as necessary ballast to the high-flying unknowns he published one or two
very popular romantic novelists, and in the early '20s, he had a windfall in
the cryptic thoughts of a Lebanese mystic, Kahlil Gibran, who for the past 50
years or more has been the Chairman Mao of successive generations of moony
undergraduates, aesthetic scribbles, flower people and other mooching brooders.
At last count, I believe Gibran’s The Prophet had sold 30 million copies.

But, from the 1920s into the 1980s, the Knopf list, over 5,000 separate titles,
is staggering in its majesty, intelligence, comprehensiveness and daring. No
writer of any promise or suspected distinction of any country or colour, no
poet, scholar or jurist, historian, music critic, essayist, ever went unread or
unconsidered. What set Alfred apart from all other equally catholic and
enterprising publishers was his assumption that a serious publisher owes it to
the world of readers to introduce them to the best that's being written
anywhere around the world.

Sixteen of his discoveries, or writers he banked on when they were either
unknown or favourites of a minority turned into winners of the Nobel Prize for
literature, including Knut Hamsun, Thomas Munn, Yasunari Kawabata, Sigrid
Undset, Gabriel Garcia Marquez. Twenty six others, most unknown when he first
published them, won the Pulitzer Prize. Never was there a publisher less
chauvinist, less insular – and through a time when nationalism was taking a new
and ferocious lease on life.

He published, early on, people who came to be classics in their native England,
America, Germany, Spain, France, Portugal Russia, Greece, Chile, Argentina,
Brazil, Korea (Kim Yong-ik), Egypt (Waguih Ghali ?) Finland, (Aino Kallas) and
Japan, the distinguished trio of Massur Koto, Shohi Orakur, Eigi Yoshikawa.
Without exception, these latter exotics were introduced to the English-speaking
world by Alfred Knopf, not to mention the more familiar eminences that he
either introduced us to or impressed on us early in their career such as
Elliot, Pound, Andre Gide, Albert Camus, Ilya Ehrenburg, Sholokhov, Wallace
Stevens, HL Mencken and, on and on.

In his late 80s Alfred no longer swept into his office with the terrifying
panache of the magnifico variously called the Shah, the Eastern potentate, the
Spanish Grandee. But he still said no as often as he said yes, pushing unknown
Davids against the Goliaths of the book business, lovingly chose for this book
or that a typeface designed by (Argust Jason?) in 1688 and in the next breath
alarmed his sales staff by ordering a first printing of 5,000 for some dense
but intelligent treatise on the First Amendment, or commanded a reprint, of
Gilberto Freyre's classic, long out-of-print account of the racial history of
Brazil, the masters and the slaves.

Towards the end, his great frame pattered into the office, but he still chose
his editors with great care, he regularly let out a blast at the bestseller
list, which he forever regarded as a species of fraud. And he could, until the
last few months, look up and contemplate with justifiable pride, his own
compound in a Third Avenue skyscraper, the private international zone which was
the house that Knopf built. Remember the name. Alfred, Knopf. Dead, at 91,
simply the best publisher of the 20th Century.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP