Gulf War censorship - 1 February 1991

At one time during the Second World War, when things were going very badly for
Britain, Prime Minister Churchill was strongly denounced in the House, most of
all, for seeming to ignore the widespread criticism of his conduct of the war.
He was told at one point that if he thought he was being made the butt of a few
enemies, he should just consult the opinion polls. A new institution – which,
after some trial and error in the mid-'30s had become the barometer of public
opinion that people turned to. Churchill answered this particular charge in the
House.

It was September 1941. The war had been going for two years. France had long
surrendered. Hitler was at the Channel ports. Britain was the lone, main
adversary, except in the east where Hitler had gone into Russia. Churchill
said, "Nothing is more dangerous in wartime than to live in the temperamental
atmosphere of a Gallup poll, always feeling one's pulse and taking one's
temperature. I see it said, that leaders should keep their ears to the ground.
All I can say is that the British nation will find it very hard to look up to
the leaders who are detected in that somewhat ungainly posture."

This response was greeted with laughter and applause. There were many men there
who, like Churchill, were men of strong opinions, who did not like these
new-fangled and, by now, well established, opinion polls. Because the polls had
embarrassing habit of contradicting what you believed most people felt. And
they still do. But nowadays no politician, especially one in power, dare ignore
the polls. Indeed, every political party has its own pollster, so that if one
of the opinion doctors on the outside forgets to feel your pulse and take your
temperature once a week, you have your own man who'll attend to it right after
breakfast.

The modern problem with polls has not been solved by any contemporary
democratic leader I can think of, except, perhaps, Mrs Thatcher. Which is,
should you act on your own convictions or on the evidence of the polls? In
other words, do you give people what they think they ought to have, or what you
know they'd like?

This morning, from the many polls that come at us, I saw one which says that,
because of the war, 30% of Americans are missing sleep at nights or feeling
anxious when they go to bed. Now the poll says, that while popular support for
the president and the war is very high, at 77%, it has dropped four percentage
points, and are you likely to go on supporting the war if it lasts several
months? The leading question if ever there was one. But the answer seems to be
from most people a resounding No.

It was Napoleon, I think, who said the morale of an army was three times more
important than its "matériels", the weapons. To an American president today,
and I'm sure Mr Bush and Mr Baker and General Schwarzkopf and General Powell
are more aware of it than anybody, what matters most, after the morale of the
army, is the morale of the people. The steadiness of public support for the
war. There are two reasons, related I think, why this is truer than ever it's
been during an American war. Vietnam. The president has said several times,
"this is not going to be Vietnam". A very simple, but ambiguous phrase, which
will be interpreted different ways by different people. From the comments of a
whole troup of Congressmen, I gather that they take it as a firm promise of as
short a war as possible, not the high-tech quickie it appeared to be during the
first few days, but not a war getting denser and more indecisive down the
years.

"This is not going to be Vietnam", however, can mean something to the military,
for instance, it can mean, and has been quoted as meaning, "this time we're not
going to let correspondents roam where they please and shove cameras and
microphones up against embittered men in fox holes". The Pentagon believes that
the lack of a firm, front-line censorship in Vietnam, the first war in which it
was not imposed, contributed to the rising wave of protests at home, to what
was eventually a tidal wave that washed Lyndon Johnson out of the White House
and settled only when the United States was ready, in a word, to capitulate.
How could this happen? How could random despatches about search- and-destroy
missions, about bombed out villages, have such an immense effect on students
and radicals all across the United States? The answer, I'm sure, is that
Vietnam was the first televised war.

During the First World War, there were despatches about the general appearance
of a field, a valley, covered with the dead. The enemy dead. Not until the war
was over was there a powerful, angry literature about the enormity of the
slaughter. And the grief. At the time we didn't see it. During Vietnam, we saw
villages on fire, terrified old women, bleeding children, strafings from the
air. We heard and saw, and this is the general's point, too much from our own
men who were bitter, disaffected, blasphemous about the war, and being there.

The official fear that the same thing could happen again this time was,
strangely, not mentioned during our six-week wait for the United Nations'
ultimatum to expire. Or during the first week of the war. I'm perhaps morbidly
aware of this because I brought it up on the eve of the war, and I have to say
it's been an anxiety filed away at the back of my mind, for many years. Two
years before the Vietnamese war was over, I did a whole talk imagining the
Battle of the Somme in 1916 being put on television. One or two of our own
television correspondents reporting it on the spot. And with no more censorship
than they suffered in Vietnam. I won't go over the grisly story, except to say
that it's inconceivable to me that with television the warring peoples of
Europe, in particular the British and the Germans, would have stood it for a
week. We're talking about a battle in which the British losses were between 50
and 60,000 in one day. When the battle was over, just over a quarter of a
million men dead or wounded. Of course we had no idea of this scale of
slaughter or the gruesome manner of it until the war was over.

Well, the conclusion of that whole talk, done over 20 years ago, was: "We, home
in England, were never in touch, nor was Field Marshal Haig, with the feelings
of the 100,000 men moving up into the graves of the 238,000. It raises the
profound question of whether any nation, not under a dictatorship, can ever
again fight a war with a steady spirit. And this, I believe, is something new
under the sun."

That's a bleak thought. The stress is meant to fall on "with a steady spirit".
Can the people's morale hold for very long under the emotional barrage of
television? That's what concerns me now. The men and women who are fighting
this war were in their cradles or shooting toy pistols when Vietnam ended. The
regular army officers who served in Vietnam are either dead or they're
colonels. And the colonels are generals. The young who served in Korea are now
in their late 50s or early 60s. Most Americans have no memory of Korea. All my
colleagues who as correspondents covered what I call the war, that is the
Second World War are dead. No. All except two. What I'm saying is, that to most
Americans, this is their first war. Of course none of them has the remotest
memory of war fought on this, the home ground, unless there's a veteran around
of, well, he'd have to be at least 145.

So this means that the very serious issue of battlefront censorship and the
related issues of how best can a war be fairly reported, how much have the
people a right to know beyond the demands of not imperilling one's own troops?
These issues have come up now for the first time. And, since the dawn of the
permissive age, which I take it came over the horizon in the early '60s, I
don't think we need a poll to tell us that a sizeable majority of Americans
believes it has a right to know everything about the way the war's going, the
good and the bad, the awful, the worst, and that censorship should be concerned
only with revealing nothing that might endanger or own forces or, otherwise,
help the enemy.

I doubt that too many people have thought that through. How about pictures of
bombers or tanks, clogged with sand, helping the enemy? What is the argument of
the correspondents who already complain that the Pentagon and the field
commanders are already exercising unduly rigid censorship? These lively
protests have come out in several military press conferences and are gaining
force in television and newspaper commentary.

Mainly, the complaint is that correspondents cannot go off in search of their
own story. That all field stories are written by a chosen pool of
correspondents and, as before, must be vetted by field headquarters. All
pictures we see are clearly marked as approved by US military/British military
and the very vivid pictures we get out of Iraq by Iraqi censors. They are
mostly horrendous pictures of bombed out rows of small houses. Saddam Hussein
had the wit, having expelled all other allied correspondents, to invite the
correspondent and the crew from Atlanta, from CNN, the station the whole world
watches, to stay and be his guests and show to us what he pleases. Mr Hussein
may think that by so doing, he's very cunningly assisting the effort of
debauching American morale but Mr Arnett, CNN's Vietnam veteran is no dupe. By
showing us only what Saddam wants us to see, we immediately see in our mind's
eye, everything he doesn't want us to see, including the destruction, after
20,000 missions, of any Iraqi military target whatsoever.

Whether what is not seen will occur also to the millions of Arab viewers is
another question. A poll of the Arab nations, at the moment, on our side, would
be interesting.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP