Reagan and the Iran-Contra scandal

Before he sat before the microphone on Wednesday, Ronald Reagan was, everybody
agreed, at the low point of his presidency.

The polls taken after the grave strictures of the Tower Commission showed only
something over 40% of the country believing him now to be an effective
president or, indeed, a president in charge. But the polls can only measure the
answer to a simple question, "Do you approve or disapprove the way in which
Ronald Reagan is handling the presidency?" They do not mention various moods in
which the answer is given, or the misgivings of many people who were still with
him, at any time during the six years.

Between last November and his election in 1980 it would have been, I think,
impossible to believe that some of his most conspicuous champions would so
bitterly lose faith in him. Of all his champions in the media, three men have
stood out as the most gifted, most literate, journalists and at the same time
as the most dedicated conservative Reaganites. They are William F Buckley,
George Will, and to a lesser extent William Safire.

As early as last December, Mr Buckley, who has been in print and on the air the
most brilliant of the president's advocates, looked over all the considerable
evidence available even then of the secret foreign policy being carried out by
Colonel North and Admiral Poindexter and their agents. Mr Buckley admitted that
the transfer of funds to the Nicaraguan Contras from the sale of arms to Iran
was a defiance of Congress, and the act that forbids such aid and then Mr
Buckley added, "I am certain that he did not know this, because he said so. I
am not yet ready to say that the President of the United States is lying to the
American people. If he is, he should resign his office tonight." That was in
December.

That's the question: the president's knowledge of the diversion of funds, to
which the Tower Commission could not get a positive answer apart from the
denial of the president himself. For the Tower Commission had no power to
subpoena witnesses, to seize bank accounts, to call foreigners as witnesses. It
concluded with its belief in the president's ignorance but had no notion what
had happened to all those missing millions of dollars.

That's something which will be gone into – is being gone into – by the staffs
of the two select committees, one in the Senate, the other in the house, which
will begin their hearings next month. It has to be added that before the
president’s speech on Wednesday, 51% of the American people believed he was
lying in that matter.

Last weekend, Washington was agog over an extraordinarily harsh column written
by George Will. Since the beginning of Ronald Reagan’s first term Mr Will has
been the columnist on whom the president could best depend to give his policies
and his conduct of them, the most telling intellectual defence.

It’s no secret that Mr Will, throughout those years, has taken the risk – which
is always considerable for any journalist, any reporter – of becoming a close
friend of a politician he has to report on, none other than the President of
the United States. Mr Will is even closer to Mrs Reagan. Sooner or later, a
journalist's intimacy with any politician threatens his own integrity as an
onlooker and a critic. Last weekend Mr Will was forced to meet that
disagreeable test.

In the knowledge that his commentary might very well mark the end of a
beautiful friendship, Mr Will began in this remarkable column by saying that
the president ought to feel deep gratitude to the Tower Commission for
describing the Iran-Contra affair as an aberration, and the president's
handling of it as his management style. Both characterisations, wrote Mr Will,
are too kind.

The Iran-Contra affair was not, he wrote, an aberration – it was a policy of
the same pattern as the Daniloff debacle, and the Iceland summit, of selling
arms to Iran and then bartering them for hostages, and it was, "self indulgent
folly that could neither be defended nor kept secret".

As for the phrase "management style", Mr Will saw it as a euphemism for a
character trait and that trait is a grave flaw. In sterner ages which spoke of
sin, the flaw was considered one of the seven deadly sins. It is sloth,
nowadays known as laziness. Mr Will recalled the president's bumbling
performance in his first debate, in 1984, with Walter Mondale. Then the
intellectually dishonest pretence that swapping the journalist Daniloff for a
Russian spy was not a swap at all. Then what Mr Will called the slovenly
preparation for the summit in Iceland. In the present, the Iran-Contra, affair
quote, "there were many important things Reagan was not told and that he was
content not to be told, furthermore there were things he was told but did not
absorb". Those failures reflect the low level of energy Reagan was investing in
governance.

What is being tested, Will insisted, in these next difficult days is his
character, not his capacities, by his actions and inactions. Since November,
Reagan has put upon himself a heavy burden of proof – he must prove he is still
interested in being president, as he contracted with the American people to be,
until 1989.

The third member of the conservative defence is the New York Times's William
Safire who must, however, be looked on as an unreliable loyalist because he is
an inquisitive journalist first, and a conservative second. He is an enormously
energetic and probing reporter who never lets his ideology blind him to
wrongdoing in his own camp. At the very beginning of Reagan’s first term he
questioned the integrity of an administration that could keep, as a close
friend, a crooner who had had close links with the Mafia, and Safire late
wrote, "the most obscene act of this administration was the award of the Medal
of Freedom to Frank Sinatra, on the same platform with Mother Teresa".

Mr Safire has attacked the head of the United States information office, a very
close friend of the president, for secretly taping telephone conversations and
then lying that he had done that. Mr Safire is not, you can see, the most
dependable publicist for Reagan conservatism and by now the administration must
have given up on him. As a friend, more threatening than many an enemy.

Well, last weekend Mr Safire too sent Washington into a tizzy with a column he
wrote attacking Mrs Reagan. At a time, Sapphire wrote, when he most needs to
appear strong president, Reagan is being weakened, and made to appear wimpish
and helpless by the political interference of his wife. He was referring, in
the main, to Mrs Reagan’s well-publicised campaign to oust Mr Donald Regan from
his job as the president’s chief of staff.

As we all know, Mrs Reagan succeeded in a spectacular way, and was influential
in having Regan succeeded by the experienced, the likeable, the honourable
former senator Howard Baker. He was the one, ironically enough, who put the
fateful, the ultimately damning question, to President Nixon’s aides who
appeared before the Watergate committee, "What did the president know and when
did he know it?"

It’s a question which still remains to be objectively and positively answered
in the Iran-Contra affair. And the burden of this scandal will not be lifted
once for all from the president's shoulders until all the evidence is in before
the Senate and the house select committees. Mr Safire went on about Mrs Reagan
in his rollicking, blistering fashion, accusing her of being a power-house of
patronage, controlling jobs, trips and honours at the United States information
agency, and expensive lead-ballooning of the White House staff with costly
volunteers. She is, he finally declared, an incipient Edith Wilson, unelected
and unaccountable, presumably, to control the actions and appointments of the
executive branch.

Edith Wilson was the second wife of President Woodrow Wilson and when he was
paralysed by a stroke, he sat helpless behind drawn shades in the White House
while Mrs Wilson, in all daily practical matters, took over his administration.
George Will threatened us with the same point, writing that unless the
president proves a revived interest in the presidency, quote, "there will soon
be corrosive comparisons with the last months of Woodrow Wilson's presidency".

I have gone into the lapsed loyalties of the president's most devoted champions
in the media to suggest the wider misgivings in the people at large in such a
town, which was surveyed on Wednesday night, as Peoria, Illinois, which gave Mr
Reagan a thundering endorsement indictment in '84 and which, on Wednesday
evening, were split down the middle of its continuing belief in him.

Well, that was the situation before the president performed his 40-minute
speech on, appropriately, Ash Wednesday. And what happened? He did not fall on
his knees and beg forgiveness, he admitted – because Mr Nixon admitted –
mistakes, not sins, not wrongdoing. He took full responsibility, he offered no
excuses, he admitted the affair had deteriorated into an arms for hostages
deal, he repeated that "activities were undertaken without my knowledge" – he
was implying that the transfer of funds to the Contras, and he was angry about
them, he dropped one of those simple, artful sentences that people will
remember, "as the navy would say, this happened on my watch".

Inevitably, the Republicans rejoiced that he put the scandal behind him,
inevitably the Democrats said, actions will speak louder than words. The fact
is that whereas Mr Reagan was once a mediocre actor, he is now a fine one, a
fine performer of his speechwriters' scripts, and what he did on Wednesday was
to do superbly what he does best, which is to put the best possible face on an
awkward situation, and do it with evident sincerity.

I should guess that his popularity will rise again, never to the old peak, but
will rise healthily for the time being. It could plummet down deeper still only
if the mistakes of the Iran-Contra affair turn out to have been enormities
about which he knew more than he at present admits.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP