The forgotten William Le Queux - 13 May 1988

On the lid of my piano directly looking up at me as I picked out this week a
couple of the old Irving Berlin waltzes there are three dragons – a large,
puffing father dragon, I presume, flanked on his flanks by two child dragons.

They are the principal decoration of a long oblong box, a gold lacquered box on
which the three gold dragons stand out sharply against medallions of black. The
box is what used to be called a cigarette box, an artefact of an earlier
civilisation by now almost as quaint as a hitching post or a codpiece. It stays
there, empty, because it’s decorative and because it was a present from a man
I’d interviewed, which in itself is a very rare bonus for an interviewer.

About 20 years ago, when U Thant, the very gentle man from Burma was coming to
the end of his term as secretary general of the United Nations, I had the
privilege of doing a television interview with him not, by the way, for
broadcast. It was a film that would go, and went, into the archives of the UN.
I’ve forgotten everything about it except one very slight, very off-hand,
exchange which to me was astounding and to the onlooking crew quite
incomprehensible.

The other morning after I’d read about the death, I suppose it’s true, of Kim
Philby who is being called ‘the master spy of the century", I was reaching for
the lush chords of Blue Skies and saw the gold box and the dragons as if for
the first time. I remembered that odd, that astonishing, passing remark of U
Thant.

We’d been talking about his early life in Burma. He’d gone to high school, then
to the University of Rangoon, then became a schoolteacher, then a headmaster
and so on. Before that, as a schoolboy what did he amuse himself with? He was
not much of a games player. What did he read at home? He was apologetic to the
point of shyness. He read, he said, history mostly. How about fiction? "I’m
afraid," he said, "I was the only boy in the class who did not read Charles
Garvice" and then, in a whisper, "and William Le Queux".

We chuckled, the crew looked stupid. Afterwards the producer, an enormously
well-informed member of the secretariat said, “For the sake of the script we
have to know about those names – Charles what? William what?" I wonder how many
people listening to me now have ever heard of Charles Garvice. I’ll bet nobody
much under 80, yet when I was a boy he was a novelist better known to most of
the British population than Thomas Hardy or HG Wells.

I can find no mention of him in any encyclopaedia, almanac or any other book of
reference. He wrote a great many slim novels palpitating with romance – what my
headmaster called with a snort “housemaid’s literature” of a sort which would
be quite different today. It would be infinitely more steamy, raunchy, feisty
or however else you’d care to describe popular paperback erotic trash.

In the 1910s and on into the '20s no such popular literature existed or at
least was offered for sale. Charles Garvice was the poor man’s – the poor
girl’s – Charles Morgan. Perhaps that’s another name that has slid silently
away into the oblivion that patiently but surely awaits all journalists,
however famous in their time. Charles Morgan in the '30s was the dramatic
critic of The Times – the London Times – but he also wrote a novel or two that
received prizes and were thought of, particularly in France, as being fine
examples of very high-toned contemporary English literature.

His most famous work was something called The Fountain. When it appeared here
the wicked book critic of The New Yorker wrote, as I can never forget, this
bland sentence, “To the casual reader the heroes of Mr Morgan’s novels appear
to be committing adultery. They’re actually in pursuit of the Holy Grail.”

Well, in a more florid but no less genteel way that would be true also of the
heroes of Charles Garvice. Even as schoolboys, schoolgirls, we superior beings
mocked at Garvice and never read him, but about, I should think, 20% of the
population did.

The incredible thing about U Thant’s remark was that it came from a Burmese.
Way off there, a million miles from our life, was a brown schoolboy ashamed to
reflect that he was the only boy in the class who did not read Charles Garvice
- some corner of a foreign field that is for ever England. The remark, as I
recall, greatly affected my subsequent conversation questions.

From then on, I assumed that U Thant had been brought up a child of the British
Empire and there, under the burning sun, had learned to recite in school the
poet’s picture of an English autumn, “Season of mists and mellow fruitfulness”.
My assumption turned out to be correct.

When the interview was over and we retired to his apartment on the 38th floor
of the UN building, I asked him again about William Le Queux. “That too,” he
said, though of course he knew what William Le Queux was all about, then with a
deprecating laugh, spies and cloaks and daggers and so forth.

So, well the gold lacquered box on the piano would never have flashed its
message to me the other morning if the death of Philby had not triggered the
name of William Le Queux. Ask any retired diplomat today – British, French,
American – and I’m sure that if they’ve ever heard the name of Le Queux they
would chuckle over it because his stuff was early spy melodrama of the most
lurid, preposterous sort, a good deal less credible than the incredible
exploits of James Bond, yet I discovered this only a few months ago.

This obsessed potboiler was responsible, as much as any single figure, for the
creation, the development, of Britain’s first civilian intelligence agency. He
is in Phillip Knightley’s classic history of spying, The Second Oldest
Profession, the unwitting creator of what turned later into MI5 and 6, SIS and
– by osmosis or imitation – the CIA.

Le Queux had a French father, an English mother, was educated in both countries
and in his youth learned also to talk Italian and Spanish. He was born in 1864.
He was, for a good stretch, a journalist, a foreign editor and a war
correspondent. He certainly roamed all over Europe over the turn of the century
and on into the years before the First World War.

Apart from his public persona as a journalist he developed a mystery man image.
He became obsessed with spying which he saw as rampant in central urope,
especially in Germany and German agents in Britain. All the espionage he dug
into and elaborated in his popular novels was dedicated to one end – the
invasion and conquest of Britain. This became a mania with him years before the
Germans began to alarm Whitehall by building a formidable navy.

He bombarded the Foreign Office and the War Office with hair-raising reports,
very confidential, outlining plans he said he’d picked up from the
under-director of the Kaiser’s spy bureau. Le Queux saw, in his lively
imagination, a huge and intricate network of German spies in England.

His stuff, his reports were so alarming, his prose so purple, his imagination
so aflame, that he was dismissed in Whitehall as a crackpot, a maniac with a
mission. He went so far as to send to the Foreign Office the transcript of a
secret two-hour speech the Kaiser had delivered to his army and navy chiefs.
There is no other record of this speech apart from Le Queux's record of it.

He followed this up with a long list of British traitors he said he’d had from
a German spy. “I was aghast,” he wrote “at the sight of it”. It included
officials of the Foreign Office, the Home Office, the Admiralty, War Office and
on and on. Nobody, rightly, would listen to him except an old and famous
soldier, Field Marshal Lord Roberts, a hero of the Boer War and then in his
70s. He helped Le Queux write a fanciful version of a German invasion of
Britain, foreseen as coming in 1910.

It was published in the Daily Mail, Lord Northcliffe’s first mass-circulation
paper. The Prime Minister and many members of Parliament condemned it as
sensational rubbish but it tickled and roused the paper’s readers and, in book
form, sold over a million copies in many languages. In 1909 a second book,
Spies of the Kaiser, did even better and finally infected the British public
with the fever of Le Queux's imagination.

The same year a sub-committee of the committee of Imperial Defence held a
secret meeting to try and lance the boil. It heard from a colonel who was close
to Le Queux and he repeated much of Le Queux’s fiction, that were 5,000 German
agents scattered throughout plotted districts the length and breadth of
Britain.

Well, the sub-committee began by finding no independent evidence of any spies,
they thought there might be two, say five. Eventually, through the colonel’s
forced-feeding of Le Queux’s gaudy statistics they came to believe a great deal
and set up a secret service bureau that would work independent of the Cabinet
departments, so much on its own that later, during the First War, Lloyd George
as Prime Minister never wanted to meet any of them.

It was a remote, dirty business not suitable for statesmen to know about but it
grew and flourished underground, having direct contact only with the service
chiefs. It was possible, even throughout the First War, for distinguished
Cabinet members to know next to nothing about it – the SIS, which in time bred
Kim Philby and more recently The Sandbaggers.

In a recent – here recent – episode of The Sandbaggers, Burnside the SIS
Director, says, “There are no James Bond types in this service”. Kim Philby’s
own physical manoeuvres may not have been as theatrical, but he was responsible
for the deaths of very many British agents and for adventures as secret and
murderous as anything dreamed up by William Le Queux, the improbable founding
father of modern espionage.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP