The American aqueduct scandal - 18 August 1995

In the long ago, when I was first appointed as chief American correspondent for
a British paper, my editor a small spiky haired Lancashire man with a mocking
eye behind beer-bottled glasses, he tapped the stem of his pipe against his
teeth and he pondered the first problem of my appointment.

Well I had lived in New York for nine years, I had children going to school
there, but chief correspondents lived in Washington didn't they? "Yes, well,"
said little Mr Wardsworth "I'd rather you stayed in New York." This was a great
relief to me, but why should he prefer me to stay in what my closest American
journalist friend called a third rate Babylon instead of strutting my stuff in
what all the radio and television commentators called the nation's capital? Mr
Wardsworth was quick to give his reason: "The danger of Washington," he said,
"is you might get to write like the New York Times." Now I leap in to say it
once that my editor had the greatest admiration for the New York Times, looked
on it as easily the best American paper, but he refined what he had in mind by
adding: "You could get to write the Washington jargon for Washington readers
inside writing for the insiders, New York," he said "is the news centre of the
country." I nodded enthusiastically and was ready to pack my bags. "Mind you,"
he said waving his pipe, "you're not there to report New York, the whole
country is your beat." That had been my inclination from the start and I was
off and running. I took him literally and thereafter every spring or summer for
many years I set off to drive across and around the country by various wayward
routes not on assignment to a particular story but just to report on the life
of the different regions of this continental country about, which in those days
almost nothing appeared in the British press.

And it was from the experience of those early days right after the Second War
and on through the Eisenhower '50s that I discovered the necessity, as well as
I admit the fun, of reporting the country sometimes from the other end so to
speak, from the West Coast instead of the East. It's true today that television
more than anything has blanketed the entire nation with at least, half, two
thirds of the same programmes. Here in San Francisco, I have a choice of 54,
only a few of which are special or indigenous to San Francisco as you might
well suppose. There are two or three Chinese channels, a Russian one, a new one
is entirely for and in Vietnamese and there are, as there everywhere through
the deep South, the Southwest, all California, many thriving Spanish speaking
stations.

Well I was saying, or implying, that practically whether you live in the United
States on a great river up the highest mountain, in the desert, on the prairie,
in any one of 100 cities you can see everyday the same soaps, the same news,
the same weather channel, the same commentaries and this new all embracing
medium would seem to stifle or at least weaken the strong differences that used
to exist between the life of one region and another.

However, every section of the country has some special local concern and there
have been in California, over the long run from its earliest day's, one
constant preoccupation: water. Indeed, this has always been true everywhere in
the West, before you could build a cabin, start a farm, plant a crop, the first
thing you had to secure was water rights and there never would have been a
sprawling metropolis like Los Angeles if a crop of pioneer businessmen hadn't
engaged in mighty battles with the farmers inland over the coast range of
mountains and into the valleys. The men who were the first recipients of the
melting snows from the High Sierra.

In the first decades of this century, Los Angeles posted its signs, Los Angeles
City Limits outrageously far from the city centre in order to attract
inhabitants, but then they had to bring in water to keep them there, so they
built aqueducts over the coast range up into the Owens Valley, which was at the
time, lush and fertile farmland. The Los Angeles aqueduct drained the water
away from these farms and piped it off to the service of the first sprawling
great city of the coast, the valley farmers thereupon dynamited the aqueducts,
they had dreary battles with the police and the state legislature and in the
end they lost as they were bound to do, to the impoverishment of some of them
and the embitterment of all of them.

After America got into the Second War, after almost all Americans of Japanese
birth or descent were rounded up and concentrated far inland in two or three
states, I went up into the Owens Valley to one such camp, politely known as a
'relocation centre', and there in this once gorgeous farmland were all these
pottering internees their faces wrapped around with handkerchiefs, bending as
they walked into a whistling great cloud of dust. The entire huge valley was
now windblown semi desert. On the way back to the coast from that memorable
trip I stopped at a place named Lone Pine, the name a shack or two and a petrol
station constituted then the whole town. I stopped for gasoline, for petrol. In
the mens' room over the lavatory, there was a square piece of wood nailed to
the wall and on it was inscribed – it had been done it appeared by a red hot
poker, – very crude lettering but the message, the emotion, was fine and
bitter, it said: "Please don't flush the toilet, Los Angeles needs the water."
The memory never faded from that built generation of farmers or from their
sons.

Today, the great aqueduct scandal is an item in the history books, interesting
and long ago. Now at the turn of the century, the Congress passed a law
promising cheap water to all farmers in the United States who lived on no more
than 160 acres, a quarter of a section. That was what in the second half of the
19th century, what the government promised any immigrant onto the prairie, gave
him free if he could produce a viable crop within five years.

The federal law of 1902 was intended to encourage and multiply family farms,
but since then, farm technology and the growth of great farm corporations have
put paid to the family farm and the old subsidies now go to the huge new
corporate farmers whether they live on a farm or a 1000 miles away, so how
about water in the West today? Well for once the West can mean the Western
world, and the plight it might find itself in when in about 20, 30 years the
expanding deserts of the world will be populated by more millions than there
are today, and most of them will suffer from a chronic shortage of water.

There was this week a meeting in Stockholm to face the strong likelihood of a
world in which the most populous regions will have the poorest storage systems,
and the most rudimentary delivery system in many lands: the pot balancing on a
woman's head. If this seems like simply the latest outcry of the doom and
gloomers, there was a further sobering report from the World Bank, which talks
about a huge problem, which they see not simply as a problem of getting water
efficiently to the people who need it most, but a problem of halting its
pollution and greatly expanding conservation measures everywhere. It's a
boggling thought so awful that most of us can't take it in or won't want too.

But I must say that if the rousing ideological performance of Mr Newt Gingrich
and his Republican House is anything to go on, the present American trend is to
abolish most of the controls that in the past 30 years or so have managed to
clean up polluted rivers, make the great lakes fishable again and guarantee
more people the use of a pure water supply. The wounding needle in the existing
legislation is that it punishes manufacturers for polluting neighbouring waters
and costs them great sums of money to cleanse their product and decontaminate
the land and the water they work in.

The fact that 70 per cent of all Americans think there should be more and
stricter protection of the environment then less is evidently not reflected in
the determination of the Republican majority to privatise everything in sight,
including water, or, should I say if that famous contract is anything to go on,
to emasculate as much as possible the governing power of the federal
government. There's a move 3000 miles away in Washington D.C. for a collective
of water districts to buy from the government, the 50-year-old federally run
central valley project of California, a great system of reversing the flow of
two great rivers, of controlling the Sierra waters with 20 dams, hundreds of
miles of aqueducts. And there are dedicated, what shall we say, privateers, who
believe this huge public resource could be better run by a board of private
persons than by the federals. We shall see!

I was in on the christening of the Central Valley project in the late summer of
1951, the opening over the pumping stations at a place in the valley called
Tracy I think, it was to happen right at the very end of the Japanese peace
treaty conference, which I'd been covering. I cabled my editor to ask if I
couldn't stay in California for the opening of this highly and rightly
publicised project. The reversing of the flow of the Sacramento on The San
Joaquin River and the harnessing and distributing of their power for the
farmers and the people of this vast 300 mile long valley.

What I didn't know was that at that moment, the Queen Mary was practically
listing into New York from the combined weight of all the sportswriters sailing
in to cover what they called 'the fight of the century', Sugar Ray Robinson
versus his British challenger Randolph Turpin. I knew nothing of this, but when
I sent a begging cable to that same shrewd little spiky haired editor
describing the Central Valley water project as the greatest hydroelectric
undertaking in history, he promptly replied in a brief cable: "Go New York
soonest, blood thicker than water in this country".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP