May Day protest in Moscow - 3 May 1991

On a May Day many moons ago, I found myself as the French say, standing on a
velvety lawn bordered by protective woods, a lawn that ran down to the edge of
a cliff which overlooked the majestic Hudson River. It was a splendid, a
privileged place to be, a handsome neo-Georgian mansion, amid gardens,
greenhouses, stables, farms, and many more manicured acres sloping towards the
river. A wonderful haven from the threat and turmoil of the city, only a few
miles to the south. William Makepeace Thackeray had once stayed there as a
guest, so had T H Huxley, the Italian musical tornado Toscanini had lived
there.

It had been bought some time I imagine very early in the century by a banker, a
partner of JP Morgan and this meant he'd done most of the loving cultivation of
the place. It belonged to his daughter during the time I'm talking about, some
time during the middle 1950s I believe, and she happened to be an Anglophile.
In a burst of transatlantic tenderness, she'd given the house, or put it on
indefinite loan to Britain to be the official New York residence of the chief
UK delegate to the United Nations.

So on that second day of May it was as his guest that I was there. I was not
the only one by about another 200 people I should guess. However, one of the
guests was Mr Andrei Gromyko, the seemingly perpetual Soviet ambassador to the
United Nations. Of all the famous and the fussy and the fashionable people
there it was Mr Gromyko that I was eager to bump into, I had a point to make.

That morning's papers had slammed across their front pages as always on the
second of May, mightily impressive pictures of May Day in Moscow in Red Square.
We'd seen the newsreel films on television the previous evening, of course, it
was always a sight that you'd not forget for many days and thoughtful nights.
The overwhelming juggernaut of Soviet military power, the endless platoons of
huge tanks, their elevated guns monotonously slicing the air across an enormous
picture blow up of Lenin. The cameras reverently panning the 100-200,000
gathered there, who made no more noise than the rustle of the wind over a
heaving ocean. And the party bigwigs, the general secretary in the middle, and
all the rest of them imitating his little wave, a funny listless gesture,
always as of an old man with a semi paralysed hand. Nowhere ever in sight was
there a dissenting figure, a protesting voice, an angry face.

Well I didn't have to go in search of Mr Gromyko, my host and an American
delegate I knew introduced me. I was going to say that after a little small
talk I put to Mr Gromyko my question. But I have to say, that of all the
diplomats I've ever known, Mr Gromyko was without compare, the total
non-performer of small talk. "So," he said, that was it. Seemed as good a
moment as any to plunge right in – I told him about the impressive pictures
we'd seen of May Day in Moscow. But, I said, there's one thing I always notice,
no protestors, I said, students, angry posters, placards. We saw them yesterday
in Paris, in London and here as always a hoarse crowd parading up and down
First Avenue, down with the Soviets and their satellites. Mr Gromyko gave out a
melancholy rumbling sound, something between a groan and a chuckle, "Of
course," he said, "this is very simple. You don't understand, there are no
protests, no dissent, because the people have nothing to protest about, they
are part of their government, they approve. So."

Well, in the past two years since, half a continent crumbled and the whole
system burst at the seams, of course we've seen practically nothing but
protest, hundreds of thousands in every capital square from Riga to Volgograd.
And a very simple truth we'd shunned or dismissed as naive, became very clear:
no system of government, however benign or awful in theory can exact total
obedience without the constant threat of torture or imprisonment. Under Hitler
the one sound that successfully made whole populations of decent people cower
and ??? taking of their children, their friends give in was the midnight knock
on the door of the SS.

And as it has come out during the past two years that the people of the Soviet
republics have grievously lacked bread and soap for decades. Why didn't we
know, why didn't they rise up and rebel? Well from all that we've read, much
learned explanation from experts who never dreamed of the collapse of the
system the same crude, simple truth emerges. Power was held by all those
successive Politburo and their presiding despots. Because of the brutal
dependable efficiency of the secret police who went by many names and wound up
as the KGB. Nothing will so successfully stifle the bravery of dissent in the
stoutest hearts than the certainty of being sent to prison, to a labour camp,
to a so-called psychiatric hospital.

Among all the hindsight, historians and analysing experts I have not read why
and at what moment are the KGB jibed, or somebody, some group somewhere decided
to defy them, but that was the moment when ordinary people could breathe again
and complain and be again the government. And in that moment the system blew
up.

Well, did you see on the box this May Day parade to a casual viewer who
remembers the old ones, there didn't appear to be great differences, but there
were. This year the rally was called by the official trade unions, the alliance
of democratic unions and followers simply boycotted it. There were maybe
20-25,000 in Red Square. The official published figure is 50,000. Even so you
could not get there without a special pass to be shown to the thousands of
police and KGB troops. There were two lots of demonstrators, hard-line
Communists waving portraits of Stalin and Lenin and anti-Semitic placards, and
then assorted groups, the majority waving nothing but protest placards. They
are against unemployment, poverty, hunger, rising prices, as aren't we all.

I've not seen any reports of a May Day parade in New York. We used to have them
regularly, and through the Depression years and on into the McCarthy years, a
nucleus of actual declared Communists swelled by waves of fellow travellers,
but those days are evidently over. I suppose there still is a Communist Party,
by golly there is I've just looked it up, it says here, Communist Party USA 2,
35 West 23rd Street. And the secretary, I can't believe this, it's rather as if
you'd looked up Communist Party USSR and it said, secretary Leon Trotsky. The
American secretary is Gus Hall, changed his name at some point from Arvo Kustaa
Halberg son of Scandinavian immigrants, was born in Minnesota, was a student at
the Lenin institute in Moscow from his 21st year, back here became a Communist,
1934. Has been the general secretary of the party since 1959. He ran for
president 1972 and 6. Yes, but is he a Gorby man or a Yeltsin groupie? No way
of knowing, as far as he's concerned there might have been no Communist
revolution since 1917.

Nearly 30 years ago he wrote a book called For a Radical Change. And as late as
1983 he wrote a book called Karl Marx, Beacon For Our Times. He's 80 years old
and by now a benevolent almost a revered old American. He must be the last
living American ideologue for you may have noticed for you may have noticed
we're living through the twilight or perhaps the dark night of ideology. Nobody
will confess to any principled belief other than vaguely conservative of
various stripes, or liberals of an angry sentimental sort.

The Democratic party has been looking, is still looking for a leader who has an
idea, a belief, if not an ideology and a crusade, and finally this week a
Democrat declared himself for the presidency next year. He is, it doesn't sound
very promising, a Greek American from Massachusetts, just like Governor
Dukakis. Massachusetts, the state whose economy because of its once lavish
defence contracts and microchip manufacturing was known as the Massachusetts
miracle … Today it is close to bankruptcy and when it goes seeking loans has
the lowest credit rating of any state in the Union.

Well Mr Paul Tsongas is his name, he was a United States senator and a highly
visible liberal. But on Tuesday he announced his platform, and you'll see what
I mean when I say, whatever happened to the ideologues and ideology, where now
is Franklin Roosevelt, Beacon for Our Times, where now is Paul Tsongas the old
fighting liberal? He's running, he says against mediocrity in Washington. Maybe
like Governor Dukakis he's also against incompetence. He sounds not unlike the
George Bush of 1988, he wants first to cut the capital gains tax, he's for
nuclear power to relieve the country's dependence of fossil fuels. He wants,
unlike scads of Democrats, a free trade treaty with Mexico.

He's also just like Ronald Reagan for the values of our ancestors. In his first
speech as a candidate Mr Tsongas said a sentence which I cannot imagine any
other candidate dreaming up. "In the Apache time," he said, "the word for
grandfather and grandson is the same, they understand linkage, they understand
honour, they understand mutual obligation." Ach so.

Now the number of voting red men, let alone members of the Apache tribe in
Massachusetts must be very small indeed, but since most white Democrats are
expecting to go under again next year and are really looking for a man for
1996, Mr Tsongas can't start too soon looking for all the help he can get from
the minorities.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP