Porgy and Bess - 7 July 1995

Summertime and the living is easy says the song. And it may be a sure sign that
this is a song of long ago when you recall that it was sung by a black woman
and it comes of course from George Gershwin's opera Porgy and Bess, which
opened in 1936 – and it's worth saying now that it opened to everything from
indifferent to very hostile reviews.

That's a long time ago and recently, I riffled through pieces written about it
today by enlightened young critics who weren't there. If they had been they'd
pretty certainly have been against it too. The original critics were
uncomfortable with a play written by a white author, a white composer, that
seemed almost alarmingly at home with lowly blacks, but had given them the
heroic status of opera, a sign perhaps of galloping liberalism.

But now, in pieces looking at Porgy and Bess 40, 60 years after it was first
performed, they tend to find in it, astonishingly liberal attitudes, and I can
only say I don't see it. What was new and admirable was a total lack of
condescension – and condescension was an absolutely dependable attitude at the
time from all whites of whatever political or social stripe – but now Porgy and
Bess lies in that kind of socially neutral limbo to which classic operas are
usually confined. We don't go to Aida to learn about the troubles of President
Mubarak and anybody wanting to guess how Japan is going to retort to President
Clinton's vague trade agreement – which is really a threat of a delayed tariff
– had better enjoy Gilbert and Sullivan's Mikado and then forget it.

What got me onto this? A piece written in the Washington Post – which is a good
reporting paper with a pronounced liberal not to say gloom and doom editorial
bias – a piece that's the only cheerful piece I've read on America for a very
long time. But what was impressive about it, was that it did not speculate or
write about our new friend, rosy scenario, it was in simple fact, the most
recent gallop poll. And I ought to say that I'm always relieved by national
polls. They most often show the mass of the people to be more perceptive, more
sensible about their society and the life around them, than what politicians
whip them into believing – and we've had quite a whipping season.

But during the summer break, Washington is the hot summer town of old – not I'm
afraid, the slumbering easy treading Southern small town I knew, with a sort of
small town ease and friendliness, and only a couple of famous restaurants
serving grits and corn fritters for breakfast, and snapper turtle soup and
Maryland fried chicken and Kentucky chess pie for dinner. All that's gone now
and the population has tripled, the government, that is to say the bureaucratic
population, has about quint or sextupled since Roosevelt's time and just as in
Moscow or London or Dallas or Dewsbury, the dishes immediately on hand are
pizzas and plastic hamburgers.

In this blessed pause from threats and jeremiads and bloodcurdling warnings
from both parties, and the personal, stimulating but rowdy one man band of Newt
Gingrich, it seems a happy time to be handed a survey of national feeling. And
as Detective Webb used to say, one that stays with the facts, "just the facts
ma'am." Well you must be champing by now for the neutral good news of the
gallop poll, but I wanted to colour in the social emotional background against
which this cool report stands out like St. George posed against an expiring
dragon.

Well the first question: earlier in American history, many people thought US,
the United States, was the very best place in the world to live, do you still
think it is or not? Eighty percent said it still was, 82 per cent whites and
incredible to me 74 percent blacks. I think this is thoroughly bad question
loaded towards a favourable answer - many people thought ‘very best place in
the world’. It would have been interesting to know what the answer would have
been if, say, in 1910 – by which time 11 million southern and eastern Europeans
had poured into the country – if the question had been put in this form: many
new Americans thought the United States was a hellish place to live, they
thought the rosy promises had turned into slave labour and a third of them
wanted to go back to Europe or actually made it, what do you think? So I'm
inclined to forget that first question and the massive favourable response as a
collective act of wishful thinking.

However, what's most revealing about this recent survey comes out when you
compare it with the same surveyor's results 30, 40 years ago, and of all the
questions, the most heartening is the one that goes directly to the touchy
question of race, of old and new attitudes to where the blacks are going and
where they ought to go. In 1944 towards the end of the Second War, the survey
asked whether blacks should have as good a chance as white people to get any
kind of job, only 45 per cent said yes. Just over 25 years later in 1972, the
same question was put again, this time 97 per cent said yes. I'd love to
believe this figure if it came out of a survey taken today, and I'm astonished
that this Washington Post writer didn't himself initiate a poll to see what had
happened to national feeling about race and jobs in 23 long years. I'm positive
it would have been a more revealing and depressing answer.

After all in 1972, Nixon was still in power and Watergate was a local caper, a
joke on the horizon. We'd come through the turbulent ghastly '60s, the
assassination of President Kennedy, the assassination of his assassin, the
assassination of the Reverend Martin Luther King and the literal inflaming of a
dozen or more cities by enraged blacks. The dreadful presidential campaign
rallies at which students and other radical anti-Vietnam groups made it
impossible for the politicians to speak. The Republican convention in Miami,
which had about as much happy-go-lucky feeling as an armed camp, and the
disgusting Democratic convention in Chicago where not only the student radicals
and other fringe rebels sponsored violent marching protests, but the police
themselves went as berserk as a gang of frightened SS men in Hitler's Munich.
The assassination of Bobby Kennedy and so on and on. It was a dreadful time, as
an era of social upheaval, threatening a breakdown as bad as any I'd known in
30 years, but we recovered.

Nixon was exposed as a liar to the Congress and the people and abdicated. The
Vietnam War, the first Americans had been called on to admit they lost, wound
down in general disbelief and bitterness, the only healthy Mark Twain sort of
mood with which to face this tragedy, was that of a dry wry senator from
Vermont: "Stop talking about agonised reappraisal," he said. "Say we won and
fetch the boys home." Which is what happened.

But in the healing time, people didn't want to contemplate any more national
headaches, and the condition of the blacks remained one. Besides, Lyndon's
Johnson's Great Society had produced a civil rights bill that passed a law
called, affirmative action, which said out loud what blacks very much wanted to
have said on the very question of equality of jobs. It said that all things
being equal, there were social situations in which preference for a going job,
a piece of handiwork, a big contract whatever, the preference should be given
to a black if there were two applicants with more or less equal qualifications.
And this at the time seemed fair enough and a decent attempt to pay a proper
price, conscience money if you like, for 300 years or more or slavery and
backwardness.

But remember that poll, 97 per cent said yes should blacks have as good a
chance as whites to have any kind of job? I swear that must have been 1972 the
high mark of popular acceptance of the theory, in practice six years later the
Supreme Court had to act on the discovery, which was seen everywhere, that
blacks and black employers were understandably expecting or assuming something
very like a quota system.

Anyway, they began to expect preference when the equality of credentials was
debatable, and the system has been perverted and exploited ever since. So much
so that in the last year or two, the Republicans have come up with a plan to
abolish affirmative action, quoting cases, and of course they're there, though
not as overwhelming as the Republicans say, or hope, where a white firm, white
man or woman of plainly superior talent has been turned down in favour of a
black. It's a tricky, mean, perhaps insoluble issue, for it calls, for in every
case, coolness, fair mindedness and a due regard still to the historic
disabilities of blacks – a combination requiring in every case an exercise of
magnanimity, which perhaps cannot be written into law.

Anyway, my main point is that since 1972, the country has been turning more and
more conservative through the Reagan '80s and with the Supreme Court losing
three or four of its most dependable liberals and there now being a majority of
conservatives. Only a week ago, the court decided that from now on, affirmative
action cases should be given, quote: "The strictest scrutiny before a decision
is made in favour of a black." They didn't spell it out quite as coarsely as
that, but that's what they meant and the blacks knew it and the wave of
disillusion has swept over them. Bring on the pollsters! A black man of great
distinction, not a demagogue but a sociologist, warned a congressional
committee a line has been drawn in the sand and I fear for the peaceable future
of American society. I'm afraid that cheerful piece based on an old poll and
one a little older still, was just a whistling solo in summer's empty
Washington when we're supposed to cheer up anyway and play games and take a
snooze.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP