US intervention in Rwanda - 15 November 1996

Who was the great man who said: "You don't notice what isn't there"? The
liveliest example that comes to mind is of a friend of mine, my oldest American
friend. Over thirty years ago, I took him on a motor trip through the West
Country of England, and we'd hardly got into Dorset before he marvelled at the,
well he said the "cleanness" of the English countryside.

He went on like this for several days until the morning we were due to drive
back from, I think, the Cotswolds to London. "I know," he said. "It looks like
a huge private estate." "And why is that?" I asked him. He didn't know, he was
puzzled. I said: "It's not what's there, it's what isn't. No telegraph poles,
no billboards." "My God," he said. "That's it!" I believed then, and believe
now, that the most civilised act of parliament passed since the Second World
War was the Town and Country Planning Act, at least that part of it that buried
the telegraph poles and banned advertising billboards more than, was it, two
miles from a city centre.

The perfect coda to this story happened this summer when another English friend
drove with me through the end of Long Island. He was a much younger man than my
old crony. I guess he was a tot when they started to enforce the Town and
Country Planning Act. Anyway we were toodling along the vineyards of the north
fork of the island on a sparkling early fall day and he said, what a pity that
the landscape wherever you go in America is defaced by these wires strung
across poles sticking up everywhere. Of course he's right, but nobody, Briton
or American, has ever said it to me before.

Well I'm not changing the subject, but the unnoticed disappearance of a famous
American institution suggests a political variation on it. "When," I casually
asked a friend who is close to Washington politics, "when did Clinton hold his
last press conference?" He was puzzled for a moment. "Can't remember now," He
said. "I suppose just before he launched his final campaign. Maybe just before
Labor Day." The answer is January, last January. He'd gone nine months without
one. We never noticed.

It's true of most presidents, they come roaring in and they can't wait to give
their first press conference, to get up there all dolled up – with the Max
Factor No.9 isn't it? – and be centre stage on national television. After a
while, they make a rather awful discovery, that what applies to television
comedians applies to presidents: overexposure.

It's always true anyway, that the television audience for a presidential press
conference declines in inverse proportion to their frequency. More conferences,
fewer viewers. And then there's always the possibility, increasing with time
into a probability, that you'll make a slip or an actual howler in fact. Ronald
Reagan made so many, it became an essential follow-up to his press conferences
to have an aide announce later that he hadn't really meant what he said. The
last, I think eight presidents, have in time given them up or held them very
rarely.

Now somebody in the class is going to say how about Roosevelt? Right. Franklin
Roosevelt was a law unto himself. His first press conference came a day or two
after he was inaugurated in March 1933 and his last was in the first week in
April 1945, a week before he died. Twelve years, nine hundred and ninety-eight
press conferences. He revelled in them.

But the great difference between his conferences and the ones that came after
was a set of inflexible rules which could never be imposed today. He could and
did say no comment to anything tricky he didn't want to discuss. He talked
openly, frankly, fascinatingly about his relations with Congress, problems of
an upcoming bill, the sort of opposition he was up against. Also much
confidential stuff. None of this ever appeared in newspapers anywhere. He
simply would say at the end of an anecdote or a confessional: "That, by the
way, is for background only" or "off the record." Or he'd announce a policy and
say: "You can attribute that to White House sources only".

About three, four times a year, he'd say: "And you can attribute that to me,
but no quotes." And about once a year, he'd intone a strong sentence and say:
"And you can quote me." Forty pencils rained down on forty notebooks. That was
so rare, it was an oracle come down from Olympus and of course made national
headlines.

The astonishing thing was that even the most squalid tabloid and the most
anti-Roosevelt newspaper chain abided by these rules. Harry Truman picked them
up, modified them, allowed much more direct quotation, and then came television
and Eisenhower and all the rules went by the board.

Eisenhower maintained he'd introduced a more democratic procedure. Why
shouldn't the people see and hear everything on the president's mind? Of course
they didn't, we didn't, he couldn't or daren't or didn't choose to reveal the
real problems he was facing. He just had to waffle and evade and indulge in
double talk. And ever since then, the need to avoid saying anything that might
come back at you, the uncertainty about facts too, these things accumulate in
the mind and the experience of every president, and they're all glad eventually
to forget the institution.

What struck me when I realised Clinton hadn't held a press conference since
January was, "Ah, so that's when he really started his campaign." He wasn't
going to feed the television network libraries with tapes they could replay of
his press conference mistakes and stumbles.

He was right. It was bad enough during the campaign that barely a day went by
when we didn't see a tape of him saying – which he did one time last year –
that he had introduced one tax too many, and another tape, which the Republican
campaign used night and day, of a younger Clinton replying to that question way
back, if he'd ever smoked marijuana. With a chuckle, he'd said: "Yes, but I
didn't inhale," which we all thought was a pretty funny crack at the time. But
in the Dole campaign it was played right up against alarming statistics of drug
addiction in the young and offered us brazen, visible proof of a president who
thought that drug addiction among the young was a joke.

So with a lot of this in mind, I was excited on Tuesday to be told there would
be a press conference on Wednesday. It was not so. It was to be a statement
from the president's press secretary. But, I was told, important. So on
Wednesday we had Mr Michael McCurry appear and make an announcement. He'd
hardly got halfway through the first sentence before I realised how mad the
president would have been to release this statement any time during the last
weeks of the campaign. Here it is:

"The president has given his approval to the deployment of several thousand
United States troops as part of a Canadian led mission to avoid a human
catastrophe and bring food and water to hundreds of thousands of Rwandan
refugees in Zaire where the supplies of aid have been cut by recent fighting."

And then the reservation, which might have puzzled you: "The president has
decided that the United States is willing in principle to participate in a
limited fashion in this mission as long as certain conditions are met".

That sentence must have been sweated over during a night session with the
Canadians. During the campaign President Clinton stayed most of the time far
away from controversial foreign policy themes, indeed from foreign policy
itself. The Republicans were crouching to leap and catch him, offering to
intervene somewhere in the suffering world. They mumbled at best, grumbling
complaints about American troops having gone into Haiti and Somalia, and have
been sharply divided about the mission to Bosnia.

Mr Clinton knows better than anybody that the Republican controlled Congress
leans toward less, not more intervention abroad. Dark rumours were spread by
the Republicans: you can trust Clinton not to keep his word about bringing the
troops home from Bosnia after the promised period, which is to end on the 20th
of December.

The Republicans, Mr Dole as much as anyone, went along with the Bosnia mission
because President Clinton attached a time limit. This has become a habit. Ever
since Vietnam, the Congress, every congress has developed a deep distaste for
what in the long, isolationist period between the wars they called "foreign
wars." This distaste has increased since the collapse of Soviet communism and
the alleged disappearance of public enemy number one.

From Reagan to Bush to Clinton, a president who feels that American military
intervention in a given country is a duty or in the interests of national
security, he's had to soften the fact of intervention by setting a time limit,
which on the face of it is militarily ridiculous. It's one thing to hope and
another to insist that the boys must be home by Christmas. And sure enough
running parallel with the headlines about troops to Zaire was another one that
will no doubt start the first rumpus of the new congress: US likely to keep
troops in Bosnia, says Nato Secretary General. Of course it was always
inevitable.

I think the most lurid reflection of the isolationist mood of the country is
one statistic that came out just before the election. And I should preface this
shocking figure by saying that if there's one policy that most politicians,
Democrat and Republican alike, will sneak round corners to avoid, it's any
proposal to increase the American budget for foreign aid. But here is that
figure. A national study conducted by Harvard University asked what percentage
of the whole government budget goes to foreign aid. Four Americans in ten said
25 per cent. That's almost the whole defence budget. Twenty-five per cent. The
actual figure for foreign aid is two per cent.

I fear that sooner than later, in the New Year there is going to loom a
showdown between – as the Bible says – them that say yes and them that say no
to the immemorial question: Am I my brother's keeper?

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP