Pat Buchanan - 6 March 1992

You may have noticed, some listeners I hope have noticed, that I have not so
far talked about any of the presidential primary elections. This is not an
oversight and I can hear rejoicing in some quarters at the thought that I might
not talk about the presidential campaign at all until the last of the
primaries, California, in June. But before we move on to the general topic that
I think interests most people, I'd like to say as simply as possible what a
primary election is and is not, apart from mentioning that like most America
political and legal institutions, it is extremely, lovingly complicated.

Roughly it's a way of taking the control of political parties away from the
bosses and the local party machines and giving the choice of candidates for a
dog-catcher for president to the ordinary party member, the voter. What people
vote for in these state primaries is not George Bush or Bill Clinton or Jerry
Brown or Paul Tsongas directly but for men and women on the ballot form who
will go to the party's national convention in the summer, pledged for a certain
candidate. So in voting Mr Elmer Schmidt, you know that you're showing your
preference for say, President Bush when the Republican convention meets.

Well that's enough of the system. Looking over the general picture, as Mayor
Koch used to say every time he saw a voter on the street, how am I doing? After
every primary election so far, the president has been asked that very question
and he regularly replies, fine, we're doing just fine, which being translated
means he's doing remarkably badly and is nervous and every day his campaign
advisers and his White House cronies met and try to devise some new technique.

They've just sent out an emergency call for Peggy Noonan, the speech writer who
coined "gentler, kinder nation", the phrase that is, not the fact, whatever it
may mean. In trying to deal with it, I should say that it is the president's
main Republican opponent, Mr Pat Buchanan and it's time to talk about this
remarkable character who has never run for elective office in his life, who
when he first mentioned some months ago that he was thinking of running for
president was mercilessly kidded by his friends and ridiculed by the late-night
stand-up television comics. An Irish American, black Irish as we used to say.
Goodness no, not black – a dark-eyed, black-haired, twinkling, pugnacious
53-year-old and known around the country as a panellist, sometimes chairman on
a television talk – more often shout – show, which pits downright liberals
against downright conservatives, the farther apart on the political spectrum
the better. The purpose of this articulate, often preposterous show, Crossfire,
is to have spokesmen for the left and right wing of any issue, quarrel together
as entertainingly as possible.

First about the life and career of Mr Buchanan. He was born in Washington DC,
middle class Catholic family, third of nine children, idolised his father whom
to this day he calls the "finest man I ever knew". Father Buchanan, who is long
gone, had three heroes in his lifetime: Generalissimo Francisco Franco, the
Spanish dictator, Generalissimo Douglas MacArthur, the Commander in Chief of
all the United Nations forces in Korea until briskly dismissed by President
Truman for wanting to take the war to China, and the late Senator Joseph
McCarthy, the notorious hunter of Communists and liberals who might be
Communists in the infamous witch hunt of the early 1950s. Pat Buchanan's
adoration of his father is such that he picked up with apparently no
reservations or misgiving, his father's admiration of this heroic trio.

Young Pat evidently made both parents proud of him by executing his father's
advice to punch the nose of any boy whose ideas he found obnoxious and
fulfilling his mother's fondest hopes of him as a scholar and a devotee of the
church in all its preferences, from the King James version of the Bible, the
Latin Mass and its detestation of Communism, abortion and pornography. He must
have been plainly a spunky, wide-awake, mischievous little boy and this I think
is important in assessing his appeal – he's endowed with a generous dollop of
off-hand Irish charm.

The education of young Pat Buchanan was absolutely in line with the tradition
of middle and working class Irish-Americans throughout most of our time, The
tradition demonstrated or maybe idealised in the movies, by the old 1930s
Warner Brothers team, I should say Catholic team of Jimmy Cagney, Spencer
Tracy, Pat O'Brien, namely beat up the neighbourhood gang, go hangdog to the
local priest, Spencer Tracy, be scolded with a wink, traipse to confession,
back to the happy, rowdy school and the baseball team and if you're Spencer
Tracy or Pat Buchanan, you can be forgiven for being something of a scholar.
Maybe you'll become a seminarian.

Pat Buchanan then went, of course, to public school in the American sense, lord
knows, and did not, like other humble Irish boys whose parents had gone up in
the world, go off to a private school, like say the Kennedy sons, whose father
was the son of a saloon keeper. Pat went off to a school run by Jesuits, then
on to the local university, where his regulation stay was interrupted by a
year's suspension for fighting it out with two cops, who'd arrested him for
speeding. He went on to a school of journalism, a regular feature of many
American universities, and finally got his first job on a Missouri City
newspaper and at once hit his stride, which was to cook into salty prose, his
father's peppery convictions and prejudices, namely to skin and fry what
another old Irish-American journalist called bleeding heart liberals.

So from the start of his career there was never any question or wobble in the
political stance of Pat Buchanan, he was a conservative Republican and if it
came to a semantic choice, he was a conservative first and a Republican Party
member second. One day, way back in 1965, he was then all of 26, he happened to
be one of hundreds of guests at a reception for none other than Richard M Nixon
who was, at that point, out of office and as far as most political experts were
concerned, at the end of his career. Buchanan had the gall to say: remember me,
as a boy I caddied for you in Washington. Why don't you run for president, I'll
be right there. Awful, outrageous, it worked. Four years later Pat Buchanan was
settled down in the White House and was a speech writer and yes, adviser to
Nixon and after that, to Reagan. He was in his element with both of them.
Watergate? Nonsense, he says, nothing but a bunch of Mickey Mouse
misdemeanours. The farther he gets away from the presidency of Ronald Reagan,
the more he idolises him and his era as one in which, and perhaps he's right in
this, for the last time the white Christian macho male was king in America.

During the four or five years he's been seen jousting and quipping on his
television show, he has without shame expressed many views that, in most
American public debate, have dared not speak their name. They are the views of
people in, pure, or should I say unhesitating reaction against the whole
liberal litany. Against multi-culturalism, special help for the poor and the
blacks, sympathetic concern for the immigrant Hispanics and Asians, a
willingness to accept homosexuals into society and into full legal equality. We
come here on a strength, as a campaigner, as a rising politician, that lies not
in the view themselves but in the pungency, the sharpness of their expression.
That's to say, Pat Buchanan has one thing that none of the other candidates
has, he's a wit.

Now that has never been a notable advantage in American politics. Dry humour,
yes, but on the contrary, wit tends to make large congregations of ordinary
people uncomfortable. President Eisenhower privately called Adlai Stevenson a
smart aleck. However, Buchanan's wit does not set him above the crowd, it's not
Noël Coward mocking the plebs. It's used to confirm their liveliest prejudices.
When I say their prejudices, I mean the actual freely stated prejudices of many
straightforward bigots, but also the secret prejudices of many respectable
people, who are ashamed to proclaim their feelings about gays, blacks, free
trade, the abuse of welfare, American policy towards Israel.

Mind you, Buchanan has spent most of his campaigning tour playing down these
views. But few papers and television shows can resist quoting and re-quoting
the phrases he used down the years on his television show. So while most people
would have a hard time telling you precisely how Governor Clinton and Mr
Tsongas, and come to that, Mr Bush feel about policy or about these deep
grievances, it's not difficult to recall that to Pat Buchanan, the Congress of
the United States is Israeli occupied territory, that the late 1980s in America
displayed vulture capitalism, that American policy towards China consists in
baling out an 85-year-old chain-smoking Communist dwarf. In fewer words, what
sets Pat Buchanan off from all his opponents and many of his supporters, is
that his wit and his temperament make him a sharp, memorable character. If we
left it there you might well get a wholly false notion of his influence and
likely future.

To me, the most significant statistic to come out of all the primaries so far
is an exit poll, taken among people who'd voted for Buchanan in New Hampshire.
Now these, remember, were registered Republicans but only 20% said they'd voted
for Buchanan – either for the new political campaigner or the old blatant
curmudgeon; 80% say they would most likely vote for a Democrat in November and
this has been true almost everywhere where Buchanan has had between 35 and 40%
of the vote. It's been a vote against George Bush. In a state where Bush was
unopposed, 30% refused to commit their votes to him. The only consolation for
Mr Bush in all this is the equally surprising fact that just over half of all
Democratic voters wish somebody else was in their race for the presidency.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP