OJ Simpson media coverage - 8 July 1994

In 60 years of watching and reporting American affairs, I can't remember a time
when a single topic that obsessed the whole of America has gone so little
reported in Europe, in Britain anyway where I spent a hot week at the beginning
of the month. I'm talking about the scandal to which I devoted reluctantly
devoted all of last week's talk, the OJ Simpson affair.

The spontaneous response I can hear from very many listeners – who is OJ
Simpson? – explains at once why among European editors no interest is assumed
or taken, absolutely understandable except for the scruple I mentioned last
week about not reporting a case that has not yet come to trial. That might be
the answer in the English media; I was told so by one good English friend who
assured me that the rule of no comment from the press on cases sub judice,
under determination by the courts, was still strictly observed by the British
press, the media.

I was amazed – not for long. Last Friday morning the three or four most, how
shall I say, respectable of English national newspapers had blazing headlines
about a peer who is being investigated over, quote, "alleged", unquote, insider
trading, to be found guilty of which, the three papers were very quick to
mention could entail a sentence of seven years in jail, reams of reporting on
an alleged crime for which the man is not yet charged and so has certainly not
come to trial. So much for the old British scruple.

I had the passing thought that perhaps it was simply good taste on the part of
the British press that kept any mention of OJ Simpson out of the papers and off
the air, but surely it's a little late in the day for the British press to be
exercising good taste in not reporting a double murder. I don't propose to set
up the plot as I did a week ago, but just to say for now, I find it impossible
at the moment to think up a figure in Briton of comparable fame and
attractiveness. People have mentioned famous soccer players unknown in America,
rock stars – they'd be known but so far have not been charged with a crime
anything like as horrendous as the one which OJ Simpson is alleged by the Los
Angeles district attorney to have committed.

It's not enough to say that OJ – who is nationally known as OJ just as Bing
Crosby was known to everybody in the world as Bing – not enough to say that he
was the most dazzling running back that has ever appeared in American football.
He attracted fans who knew little about football because of his good looks and
his quicksilver grace, endowments that got him lucrative commercial contracts
and motion picture roles the moment he retired from football.

The pre-trial coverage of the case has been so overwhelming and so prejudicial
to OJ that about half the population doubts he can get a fair trial; 70% of all
Americans think the media have gone overboard in excessive reporting, yet 9 in
10 say they read and watch. And what they had to watch this past week was a
preliminary hearing before a judge in a Los Angeles courtroom, a hearing
familiar perhaps to you in fact to the normal thing, but extraordinary in an
American criminal case where you'd expect 99 times in 100 get an indictment
handed down by a grand jury, but as I said a week ago, the judge dismissed a
sitting grand jury because the Los Angeles police had released to television a
radio tape of Mrs Simpson begging the police to come and save her from her
husband who was heard in the background breaking in a door and roaring
obscenities. This gave such vivid, such horrid emphasis to something that had
been hushed up a year or two ago his being found guilty of beating this same
young wife.

Well in California, court proceedings are allowed to be televised. This is a
decision for each state to make and the day-long hearings have received
day-long coverage, so that the three main networks suspended their soap operas
and normal programmes, one even restricted the evening news to nothing but the
Los Angeles hearings. The quarter- and semi-finals of Wimbledon and some World
Cup games were simply skipped in favour of OJ's hearings. The great newspapers
the Los Angeles Times, the New York Times of course fully reported the
startling decision of Yasser Arafat to make his headquarters in the Gaza Strip
and there was the usual large troop of correspondents tagging along behind
President Clinton on his trip to Europe, but the television audience that
doesn't spend much time with newspapers probably couldn't have told you whether
President Clinton was in Europe, Little Rock or leading the troops soon in the
much publicised invasion of Haiti. By the way, this is the first invasion I've
ever heard about, which announces its probable date and reports fully on the
training of 1,000 commandos and lists the ports and airfields that are to be
seized.

So the coverage of the Los Angeles hearings has suffocated most of the news and
will probably only be surpassed when, if the case comes to trial. The chances
of a trial greatly increased on Wednesday when the judge allowed as evidence
some things the defence wanted to have excluded. Remember, the detectives found
the bodies of Mrs Simpson and the man friend just outside her house in pools of
blood, two miles away is the home of OJ. The detectives went to tell him of the
slaughter, they rang and got no answer. It was very early in the morning, they
waited, no response, they saw OJ's car parked on the street and a spot of blood
on the drivers door, they tried the house intercom and the telephone, no answer
from anyone, so they climbed the walls of the estate and there found
bloodstains on the driveway and a glove, they say matched one found at the
scene of the crime.

The defence lawyer affected to be outraged by the fact that the detectives
entered the OJ home without a search warrant and therefore their evidence
should be excluded, but the judge said the detectives did not go in, quote,
"like storm troopers fanning out over the property, examining every leaf, every
car, every closet", they were working for a benevolent purpose in light of a
brutal attack and they feared for a further loss of life.

So the first big blow at the defence position that evidence will be allowed in
deciding whether or not there is a case against Mr Simpson. The lamentations
over the huge media coverage of this horror have been reported so far as I can
see in only one serious British newspaper, but these laments are shared in the
United States itself in a lusty bout of mea culpa, many papers are editorially
deploring the vast space given to the Simpson's hearing not only in somebody
else's paper, but in their own.

I think the, the most sensible voice in this banshee howl is that of a famous
Chicago columnist Mike Royko, who says correctly that of course the media, the
people are riveted by the story since OJ Simpson is the most famous American to
be accused of a killing in this century, if not, in the past two centuries.

It's true and we've all been riffling through the history books and everybody's
come up with a comparable scandal in 1804, the vice president of the United
States Aaron Burr had a political rival whom he detested as much for his
brilliant intellect as for his rather aristocratic political opinions, he was
Alexander Hamilton, subsequently the first secretary of the treasury, one of
the three founding fathers who pamphleteered in many searching papers for the
adoption of the Constitution.

In 1804, the Vice President challenged Hamilton to a dual and on the Jersey
bluffs across the Hudson, Burr shot and mortally wounded Hamilton 190 years ago
this coming Monday. Do you suppose if there had been 72 channels of television,
which most of us have without having to pay for half a dozen extra ones, do you
suppose there would have been no massive television coverage?

The day before the dual, Hamilton wrote a passing thought. This democracy, he
said, is not for me, that word was a new word then, it had been mentioned only
once in the debate leading to the writing of the Constitution. George
Washington announced that among civilised governments, democracy is the form
held in most disrepute. Hear, hear, they all said and it was never even
discussed as a desirable or possible form of government for the new nation to
embrace, but once discussion of the form passed from the eastern landholders
and merchants and bankers and lawyers to the farmers and mountaineers and river
men, democracy was heard from and came to triumph, as you may have heard. It
seems to me inevitable that given democracy and television, people of all kinds
are bound to find themselves in the position of the millions polled who say by
7 to 3 that there's too much coverage, but who are the same people by 9 to 1
watch it.

I remember the enormous hullabaloo here as in Britain and indeed throughout the
world in December 1936, when King Edward VIII, besotted with an earlier Mrs
Simpson, faced the prospect of abdication. Our headlines were as black and
blanketing as yours, there was no television but the radio hammered and
prattled night and day, I contributed about 400,000 words from London myself.
There was a small body or cabal in Congress that hated all this attention being
given to an American woman divorcée in love with the king of England. What, one
of them cried is all the fuss about? The old famous Baltimore newspaperman HL
Mencken said, "the fuss, it's quite simple, it's the biggest story since the
crucifixion."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP