Black Monday 1987, Black Tuesday 1929 - 23 October 1987

On Thursday 15 October an affable, vigorous and remarkably prosperous Yankee –
call him, for convenience, Uncle Sam – noticed something that hadn’t happened
to him before, a flutter in his pulse, an irregular beat.

It was a little worse on the Friday, but the doctor told him it was nothing
serious, a touch of arrhythmia, probably been drinking too much coffee. Take it
easy over the weekend and forget it. Last Monday, the 19th, a date he would not
forget, he had a sudden massive heart attack, was rushed to the hospital, had
an operation, caused a couple of days' panic among his relatives and friends,
but on Thursday, thanks to a medical technique learned in Japan and a quick
transfusion from the Federal Reserve Blood Bank he was already pacing round the
corridor and responding to all well-wishers with the brave, almost automatic
American phrase "fine, just fine".

He expected to be on his feet for good and back to business as usual in a week
or two. Still the doctor said, “It happened, and while modern medicine has
resources that can save you from the same thing that killed your grandfather
we’d better keep a watch on you for the next month or two”.

They called the 19th Black Monday and the immediate use of the word simply
reflected the instinctive American impulse to compare any dramatic plunge in
the stock market with what was called, and ever after has been known as, Black
Tuesday, 29 October 1929.

On the evening of that day a visiting Englishman, a politician out of power,
was the guest of a clutch of bankers at a private dinner on Fifth Avenue. He
rose to respond to their toast and addressed them as “Friends and former
millionaires”. Like most politicians of that day, and of ours, he was not an
economist and assumed – as millions of us ordinary citizens tend to – that a
bad day on Wall Street is bad only for stock holders.

Next morning Mr Churchill heard shouts on the street below his suite in the
Savoy Plaza Hotel. He looked out of the window to find that a gentleman had
cast himself down 15 storeys and was dashed to pieces. This, Churchill
concluded, was a serious matter. He got himself invited to look over the Stock
Exchange and went down there expecting to find pandemonium, but the sell-out
was over.

All he noticed was calm and orderliness and no one could doubt that this
financial disaster, huge as it is, is only a passing episode in the march of a
valiant and serviceable people. It took him a day or two and a painful session
with his friend and broker Bernard Baruch to realise that he too had been
touched and hurt by the fact that in seven weeks American investors had lost
over $30billion, just about what the United States had spent on the First World
War.

It took him a little longer to learn that, for the next decade throughout the
1930s, he would have to write articles for anybody and everybody to keep his
family and his house going. Much later, he would write, “The American
economical blizzard turned all England into one vast soup kitchen”.

This slow response of a layman to what would be involved in the Wall Street
Crash of 1929 was not restricted to lay men. It took the bankers and financiers
and politicians here anywhere between a year and 18 months to acknowledge, with
enormous reluctance, that the Coolidge-Hoover prosperity, the big party, the
so-called Era of Wonderful Nonsense was all over and to appreciate the menace
behind the newly-coined crack, “When Wall Street sneezes Europe catches cold”.

In the days in what seems like an age since last Monday it’s fair to say for
once that everybody in America was talking about the same thing and asking two
related questions: what does it mean, and what does it mean to me?

At our end of Long Island at twilight last Monday a farmer wondered, “Who’s
going to buy my seed?” A young middle-aged couple who’d put their house up for
sale and were about to build another changed their minds and took their home
off the market. A golf pro who reads nothing but the tabloid headlines said,
“Well I guess that’s the end of the $100,000 first prize golf tournaments”.

An old man who’d just had an operation was worried that Medicare – the national
sickness insurance fund that covers 80% of medical expenses for everybody over
65 – that Medicare would cut the percentage. A real estate broker cancelled her
plans for a long Florida vacation and thought she’d stay around for a while to
see what happens. A friend who’s been in and out of the stock market going on
50 years at dinner a couple of nights later, when the market had rebounded
healthily as we all hoped said, “The thing that frets me that I can’t decide is
whether there are more similarities with 1929 than differences and which are
going to count”.

It’s worth looking into that dread comparison because it’s on everybody’s mind,
but mainly because the received popular version of what happened in 1929 is
firmly established but is, in important ways, quite wrong. To begin with, let
me say that six months ago a drop in the stock market of, say, 30 points was
the lead item on the Evening News but in the past six weeks or so the ups and
down – 30 points up, 40 points down, 49 points up – have lined up as matters of
general interest behind the Iran-Iraqi war, the confirmation hearings of Judge
Bork, a big fire, a plane crash.

When I asked knowledgeable people about these fluctuations which so lately were
major and now are minor I was told that they were small corrections. One expert
said, “The market is trying to find a stable plateau from which to rise
gradually”. Now months before October 1929 this happened too and nobody was
worried except a few cunning and very rich investors. President Kennedy’s
father, Joseph Kennedy, was one who, it came out much later, got out of the
market completely.

Now it comes out, and the story was not written up until last Wednesday, that
several of the very richest men in America had done the same thing this summer.
The most flamboyant and successful of New York’s real estate developers, Donald
Trump, whose high-rises have transformed or exaggerated the skyline, said on
Wednesday that he had a premonition, a negative instinct, about the market and
in August sold $500million worth of holdings and made $200million profit.

Mr Ross Perot, the billionaire entrepreneur from Dallas, has now confessed that
last year he unloaded all his stock holdings. Why? “Because” he said “there was
too much money chasing too few stocks, but all the fundamentals on the
instrument panel were in the red, so I pulled out simply because I couldn’t
understand it.”

Well these fluctuations both in 1929 and in 1987 disturbed very few people and
nobody in power, and then came, in 1929 Thursday 24th and the usual version is
that once that happened, everything went down and the Depression was here.

Not at all. Only three hours after the market had opened and tumbled
disastrously on Thursday 24th, six of the biggest bankers met and agreed to put
up $40million each to shore up the market or, as they said, “to restore the
market to orderly trading”.

Very soon the market rallied and the desperate remedy had worked. Things were
better still on the Friday and Saturday. Then they slipped again and slid into
the debacle of Tuesday 29th, Black Tuesday. But the next day several
corporations declared dividends. The president, the secretary of commerce, many
bankers and business leaders declared that the economy and the market were
fundamentally sound.

The panic was over, but the next month, November saw them down and down and
down again to the lowest ebb on the 13th, and more or less stayed there.
President Hoover swore to reduce taxes and start a public works programme. In
the first three months of 1930 the market enjoyed what became known as the
Little Bull market and stocks regained more than 50% of their losses in
October.

Henry Ford made an immortal remark, “The country, the economy, is in splendid
shape, but very few people seem to be aware of it.” Well, he was right and he
was wrong. By the spring the bottom line was indeed the bottom of the pit and
by the end of 1930 or the following spring even the president knew that the
country and most of Europe were in Depression.

It’s been said ever since that it could never happen again because of new rules
and procedures set in the 1930s – federal deposit insurance, securities,
exchange regulation, the insuring of brokerage accounts and of small savings
deposits. In 1929 you could buy a dollar stock with only ten cents on hand;
today it would have to be 65 cents, and so on.

Certainly there are, and have been, substantial safeguards but already, as a
former secretary of the treasury said on Thursday, “They may not be enough.
Black Monday’s mischief could have been caused by vast tradings in options and
futures.” He called, too, for an end to “programmed trading by the computers,
which do not buy and sell but serve as a fire station, alert to a drop and go
off on their own ringing the fire bells – sell sell sell!”

A friend in California phoned me the other night and said, “Watch Tokyo, how
they respond could be the long-term answer.” It may be so. The Japanese system
sets a prescribed floor under all big stocks. They drop, say, from 100 to 90
and that’s it, they’re frozen. They can still be sold as a frozen package, but
not below that price. So if the recovery is as swift and real as we all hope,
it could be that we’d come to say not thank you, Paine Webber, but thank you,
Tokyo.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP