Narcotics, interdiction and Columbian drug lords - 08 September 1989

Among the more bizarre anniversaries that were celebrated this summer is an
event that happened 20 years ago and which I find is no longer mentioned in the
indexes of encyclopedias, almanacs and the like.

Yet it seems to me it marked a turning point in American social history and
powerfully affected the behaviour and the beliefs of the succeeding generation.

The original event was that gathering, as of pilgrims to Mecca, of 100,000 or
more young people of college age in a great stretch of pasture land, a hundred
miles or more north of New York City where the mountains begin by the Hudson
River.

A small, old artists' colony, which was alarmed by the promised invasion and
made the pilgrims move several miles out of town. The town was Woodstock. The
gathering was intended as a vast lament for the war in Vietnam and a protest
against what were called "middle-class" values by a new, sensitive generation
calling itself the "counterculture".

Mostly, they were middle-class couples or partners who assembled to deride the
generation of their parents, many of whom had scraped to send their children to
college so they could become more sensitive. The lament and the protest were
expressed with waving banners for a while but soon settled into a huge rock
festival, the bands pounding through the night while from the stage to the far
horizon, the legions of hippies swayed and thumped in ecstasy, amid the rattle
of beer cans and an atmosphere dense with marijuana.

Now this was a time, remember, at the peak of the insurgent '60s when the
campuses erupted in riots, when Martin Luther King was murdered in Memphis,
Bobby Kennedy in Los Angeles, when the Democratic convention in Chicago turned
into an obscene rumble on the streets between taunting student radicals and the
police gone beserk.

It was a despairing decade but time and history moved on, the student revolts
wore themselves out. The bewildered middle-class, so long called "the silent
majority" found a voice, it's own protest, and elected a conservative president
– twice. The Supreme Court followed the election returns and began to assert a
conservative bias which we thought had gone forever.

But one element of the youth movement, the "counterculture", remained, and was
passed on, in the next generation up into comparatively placid middle-class
youths, down into the ranks of the poor, black and white. That element was
drugs, which the hippies had told us "raised your consciousness, could give you
a sense of mastery and wellbeing, beyond anything procurable by cigarettes and
alcohol".

And indeed, the lonely or insecure young of any class, the rich, the
comfortable, the pinched, soon found it was so. To the poor blacks of the
cities, the drop-outs and the abandoned, the fatherless, the chronically
unemployed, drugs were a magical gift that could, for a short time, and then
for another short time, and then every day, and for keeps, give them the
undreamed-of feeling of being on top of the world.

First it was marijuana and then LSD and other variants. And in the ghettos, in
the streets of dark town, heroin.

As early as the end of the '60s, the mayors of the big cities and the
congressmen who represented them were disturbed enough by the steadily rising
numbers of heroin addicts to wait on the White House. And in October 1968,
President Johnson established the first grants for building and staffing drug
treatment centres.

Two years later, President Nixon signed the Drug Abuse Prevention and Control
Act. And two years after that, he signed the first bill to advance
international narcotics control.

Down the next decade, these and other federal agencies went more briskly about
their job of going after pushers, arresting drug dealers, trying to break,
without much success, the hold on the increasing drug traffic of organised
crime.

In 1983, President Reagan created what he called the National Narcotics Border
Interdiction System. And that, throughout his two terms, was to be his policy.
"Interdiction" was the watchword, which meant to stop the importation, by sea,
by land, by air, of the drugs pouring into this country now from the countries
of Central America. There is, alas, no need to trace the story, the methods of
interdiction. It has been a calamitous failure.

Today, even the Republicans who believed in interdiction as fervently as Mr
Reagan did, concede that despite the controlling of the American borders, the
alertness of the coastguard, the diligence of the tax people, the Internal
Revenue Service, the deploying of helicopter teams to catch stuff coming in by
air, about 1% has been intercepted. Ninety-nine per cent coming in from the
offices of the Colombian drug lords is delivered somewhere in the United
States.

In the meantime, between Nixon's first efforts and Reagan's last, marijuana is
almost forgotten, along with LSD. Cocaine has been, and is now the irresistible
invader. And through the Reagan years, the "me" decade, the age of the yuppy,
cocaine ceased to be the secret vice of movie stars, rock bands, the jetset.

It had spread throughout society and is the narcotic of choice in cities,
towns, villages, the middle-class, the upper middle-class, and in its cheap,
crude and most addictive form, crack, it has begun to ravage the black sections
of all the cities.

There are by now a quarter-million black babies who, at birth, were cocaine
addicts. For the first time in the polling of the American public, drugs have
become the most urgent national issue. More people, one in three, believe it to
be of greater concern than the deficit, poverty, Nicaragua, housing, foreign
affairs, medical costs, the homeless, whatever.

So while President Bush, while he was inaugurated, confidently proclaimed that
drugs were a "scourge we shall wipe out", the admission that interdiction was a
hopeless effort and the verdict of the latest poll moved him to devise and
announce, in his first television talk from the White House, a new strategy
under the command of Mr William Bennett, his appointee as the first national
drug director.

First I ought to try and sketch a rough, very large outline of the problem as
the government has learned to see it. Interdiction – it was doomed by the stark
facts of geography. The American border, from the east coast of Florida to the
coast of California wriggles along something like six to seven thousand miles.
The coastline of the Florida Peninsula alone is 1800 miles long.

The stuff, we believed, used to come in in job lots in regular airplanes or
single-engine planes or by boat into Miami and points north, and some far to
the west, through the Texas/Mexican border towns and from Mexico into Los
Angeles.

But we discovered – a little late in the day – that the Colombian drug lords,
who we thought of as a small, ruthless family, shipping everything into a few
airfields in the east, now fly it in by circuitous routes into small towns,
village airstrips, pastures, lonely highways, deep in the south, the Midwest
and the west.

We discovered that the Colombian drug lords have a government all their own.
They have their own air force, their own army, their own undercover diplomats,
so to speak, in several states. Their own legion of agents, down from
impeccable businessmen who make discreet deliveries in toney drawing-rooms and
hotels, down through many echelons to the street-corner privates who waylay a
simple black boy with a menial job and a struggling mother and suggest he
becomes a salesman at $1,000 a week.

To break this continental network, Mr Bush has put up to Congress $8 billion,
about 30% more money than Congress voted earlier in the year. The Democrats say
it's not nearly enough and compare it derisively with the $166 billions voted
to bail out the bankrupt thrift companies, the savings and loan associations.

The new tactics, in what Mr Bush calls "a grand strategy" are to double,
almost, the number of federal jails, to go after the middle men, to punish drug
users, to compel them into treatment. Not much more money yet – the big
complaint of the Democrats – for addicts who seek treatment.

The first big move of men and money has been to the Colombian government for
helicopters, security services, money and equipment for their police and their
army. And, it should be said, that the first really direct and massive attack
on the drug lords has been done by the Colombians themselves.

They have a good government, a good army, a desperately busy police force and,
in the light, the murky light, of the assassination of 70 judges, a core of men
and women staying on in the justice department, not least the minister herself,
whose bravery ought to make them the admiration of the world.

They appear to be breaking and terrifying the drug-running families but they
will scatter, find other bases. And, anticipating this assault, they, some time
ago, shifted their sights to the greatly growing market of Europe.

But most effective of all the machinations of the drug lords is their highly
sophisticated system of disposing of their profits. Obviously by the transfer
of the monies into overseas bank accounts but less obviously, and more
alarmingly for us, by their setting up in this country, in swift and subtle
ways, of real-estate firms, insurance companies, car rental services, office
buildings, pizza parlours. Once these businesses are established, their
revenues, the money from their clients, is as clean as any other, and
effortlessly loses its identity on the computers of the best banks.

We have focused all along on Colombia. But the plain, visible fact, if you look
at a map, is that Colombia, while it is the processing centre of the raw coca,
produces only 10% of the coca crop. Bolivia produces 60%, Peru 30%.

Somewhere down the line where, at the moment, we don't care to peer, is the
awful root of the problem. The need to subsidise several million peasants in
those infamously poor countries, by way of asking them to destroy the crop they
live by. And grow something else.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP