Ed Koch, Mayor of New York - 12 August 1988

The other morning, caught on Fifth Avenue in a hopeless traffic jam, the driver
and I panting away in the furnace of his taxi which must have been well over
100 degrees, the driver said, “If you’ll excuse me, Mister, but I’m going
home”.

I didn’t blame him. I paid him off and padded down the avenue with all the
alacrity of a Boy Scout tiptoeing through a minefield.

Later in the day I had occasion to be going by Gracie Mansion, the mayor of New
York’s graceful colonial house that sits in a little park on the edge of the
East River. The ordeal of the morning, the traffic jam, and the sight of the
mayor’s white house bristling like a mirage among the trees made me think back
to a time, I think the last time, I was a guest in the house with the then
mayor and one or two of his young aides.

We were going on about the increasing traffic density everywhere in the city
and I was complaining, as I’ve been doing ever since, about the meaningless
signs posted every two blocks on Park and Fifth Avenues which say in bold print
"No commercial traffic".

No truck driver I can remember has ever been stopped and I suggested there was
an enormous amount of revenue available from a campaign to enforce the signs
and hand out hefty fines. The trucks and vans, I said, go 10, 20, 40 blocks,
two miles down Fifth Avenue and nobody does anything. The mayor shook his head.
“It’s not possible” he said “to do anything any more. You’d have unholy
congestion on every avenue that allows commercial traffic.”

Well that must have been 20 years ago and presumably Mayor Koch feels the same
way. As we tilted our drinks that evening long ago and gave up yet another
local issue as a bad job, I suggested “Why don’t you do what they did in Rome –
prohibit all commercial deliveries between sunset and dawn?”.

“Say,” said the youngest of the aides “how about that?” The mayor looked
pityingly at this young, this very young, politician and said, “Great, first
you’d be paying golden time – triple pay – to all the truck drivers. The price
of everything would shoot up. Then you’d have protest marches about the city’s
inflation rate being way above the national average. Pretty soon, I can
imagine, somebody in Albany getting out a bill, the Teamsters Marital
Compensation Act for all the drivers whose marriages went bust through the guy
sleeping by day and being out all night.

"The parent-teachers association would move in on that one and citizens groups
protesting all those delivery vans and trucks barrelling through the streets in
the dead of night and extra help needed at the toll stations and the tunnels
across the rivers at double pay. Shall I go on?”

“Well,” said the young aide “ they did it in Rome.” “When?” asked the mayor. "I
think," I said, "it was around 30, 40 BC."

Another bright idea bit the dust.

The other night I watched the present mayor, the beleaguered but indestructible
Ed Koch, in a packed schoolroom up in Harlem doing what he does once a week,
which is primly described as "The Mayor’s Question and Answer Show" on the
city’s TV station.

You might have thought you were present at an interrogation session on the West
Bank between Israeli soldiers and a pack of young Palestinians. Everybody was
fanning himself, herself in the atrocious heat. The mayor was continually
mopping his face and neck with a handkerchief the size of a tablecloth and the
questioning, so-called, a screaming siren of protests about the drug pushers
taking over this bit of a park, no street lights in that lady’s block on Staten
Island, an old man threatened with eviction and what was the mayor ever going
to do about extra night police at such an intersection, and why was a big
condominium, a high rise for the well-off going up by a tenement that had no
water pressure?

The questions were very rarely put as questions. They were defiant, disgusted
speeches bawled at this sweating figure at a rostrum and the mayor paused or
backed away.

“Listen, lady, if you listen... when this meeting is over get a hold of
Commissioner So and So, he’s right here, and give him the details. You, no the
man in the red shirt – OK, OK, lady, that’s enough, shut up. Next, the young
woman over there, what’s your complaint?”

She was the one screaming about the street lights on Staten Island and she also
joined in on the water pressure problem which the mayor said was absolutely
unavoidable with the enormous draw on the power grid in this heat. “You’ll be
lucky if you don’t wake up one night with all the lights out.” The young woman,
a Hispanic with blazing black eyes, howled, “My father tell me don’t go live
New York, it’s hell on earth”. She was screaming on and on and the mayor cut
in, “OK, listen to your father next time. You, the old lady in the corner
there, yes madam?”

Now there are many mayors of cities, governors of states, who regularly submit
to the questions of citizens from all over, but in the air-conditioned
sanctuary of a television studio with an MC monitoring the incoming calls and
the questioners, the attackers, at the safe long distance of a telephone wire.

I don’t know of another politician who goes through this face-to-face,
nature-red-in-tooth-and-claw performance more than once in a while as an
unpleasant necessity of political office, but to Mayor Koch it’s a necessary
weekly joust which he fervently believes is the essence of his being – being a
politician.

When the meetings are over, within a few days, his office is flooded with
letters from people who saw the show on television and the various officials
who stood warily beside him that night are confronted by the complainers who
were told to take their troubles to the responsible department. Now all of
this, of course, is a mere item in the Mayor’s daily grind which starts at dawn
and is lucky to end at midnight.

Just now, today, for instance he’s trying to recruit 700 new policemen in the
narcotics division of the city force to stem the outrage over open drug dealing
on the streets of many neighbourhoods. He’s just apologised for the excessive
force he believes the police used in putting down a demonstration against a
curfew in a small but dangerous park.

He’s just begged people to stop giving money to street panhandlers and
contribute instead to city charities. He’s ordered the hospitals to report on
their methods for disposing of hospital waste which has been washing up in
noxious quantities along some of the Jersey and Long Island beaches – and now,
by the way, has appeared lapping the shores of Lake Eyrie 700 miles inland in
Cleveland, Ohio. That has spurred the United States Senate to get out a bill
prohibiting, from 1990, on the disposal of hospital wastes in all seas and
lakes.

Meanwhile the mayor faces a constant battle with the people in every borough
who want new prisons but don’t want them in their neighbourhood, rather like
the aroused citizens of several New England states who believe in principle in
nuclear power but have mobilised to resist having an essential nuclear waste
dump in their neck of the woods.

Two or three evenings a week the mayor has in theory time off, which means
attending a dinner to distribute to eminent immigrants the city’s Medal of
Freedom, then ducking into an Italian-American dinner, then a Puerto Rican
dinner and last week an Irish protest meeting about his outrageous remark that
the British in Northern Ireland did not constitute an army of occupation.

That observation alone probably lost him 100,000 Irish votes in next year’s
election, and the unreal, the incredible, thing is he wants to run again, after
11 years of presiding over this seething cosmopolis and after two years of
fighting charges of corruption in his administration. During that time several
of his closest aides and city officials have gone to jail, resigned under fire,
or committed suicide. He has, by his own admission, too often put his trust in
the wrong people.

But why would he want a shot at another four years? Because, I think, after all
the wear and tear of trying to take care of seven million people he remains an
irrepressible romantic who's had the tonic experience of sometimes seeing
romance turn into reality.

He did pluck New York from the brink of bankruptcy and is not going to let you
forget it, but unlike President Reagan, another romantic, he does not cling to
an old and simpler picture of America and yearn to restore it. He gets as
excited over the prospect of housing 100 homeless families in a run-down Harlem
hotel as Mr Reagan does over the vision of Star Wars.

Mayor Koch, in his racy, egotistical and never dull autobiography wrote, “The
city of New York includes near 200 religions, races, national groups. It used
to be said that New York city was a melting pot. It never was and it isn’t
today. Our fathers and mothers and some of us wanted to believe we’d lost our
own racial and ethnic traditions and had become homogenised. That never
happened.

"What happens is you gain respect for the traditions of others but don’t lose
your own. Today black is beautiful. Spanish is the language of the future.
Women want to be astronauts and are. Jews play golf. God made us whatever we
are. Being mayor of the city is a very special experience and I’m lucky.”

By the way the mayor, obviously one of the leading Democrats of the nation, did
not go to the Atlantic convention sobbing rhetoric, and a thousand balloons are
not his style. As for the weekly brawl with those rocking, bawling, aggrieved
citizens, the mayor finds it a stimulus. If nobody had ever invented the now
worn-out phrase, he could truthfully say “that’s what government is all about”.
If he were a demagogue which he isn’t, he might call it “democracy in action”.

As it is, if you put it up to him he would say, with a stoical smile, his
eyebrows up, his shoulders shrugging, “Well it’s nothing else”.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP