The Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of 1982 - 17 December 1982

A friend of mine, a German who has been in this country for over 20 years, said
to me the other day, I think I have seen my first bread line.

EDITED LETTER FROM AMERICA 1982-12-17 (17TH DECEMBER 1982)

A friend of mine, a German who has been in this country for over 20 years, said
to me the other day, I think I have seen my first bread line.

It was a straggle of down-at-heel men lining up outside a church on one of New
York’s more posh avenues. And now, at night time, it is possible, if you roam
around the less posh avenues, in neighbourhoods to see something that I can’t
recall having seen here in maybe 50 years. Huddled forms asleep in doorways, on
park benches, and down on the Lower East Side simply shored up against the
walls of warehouses and dingy tenements.

The normal havens for the hungry and homeless – church aid societies, the
Salvation Army, the city's own shelters – can’t cope with the sudden rise in
the population of the homeless. The lame duck Congress which will come to an
end this weekend, held hearings the other day on a Bill that would provide 4500
shelters. The Bill will hardly have time to pass, which is probably just as
well since it barely nibbles at the problem.

The government calculates that there are two million actually homeless people
in the United States. New York has an alarmingly disproportionate burden of
56,000 in the city alone. There were other portends rising like wraiths out of
the depths of the recession, one of them – or rather two of them – the names of
twin ghosts that haunted the Depression of the 1930s.

I never expected to hear these names again; they are known only to historians,
and to people old enough to have grown up during the great Depression. The
names are Smoot-Hawley. To be precise, they are the names of two long-forgotten
legislators, Senator Reed Smoot of Utah and Congressman Willis Hawley of
Oregon. They were the co-sponsors of a Tariff Bill which became the first order
of business in the Congress that met in the wake of the great crash of October
1929.

Mr Smoot and Mr Hawley were fervent protectionists. In the disastrous slump in
world trade their aim was, as they boldly put it, to make the United States
self-contained and self-sustaining. This may sound more than a little mad
today, but in those days the United States was practically a wholly exporting
nation. It really could, in a pinch, live off its own vast and various
resources.

The Smoot-Hawley Bill was passed in June 1930 and it raised duties on incoming
foreign goods to the highest point that had ever been known or suggested. Why
should this have happened when the United States needed few imports? Well,
whether it needed them or not, the nations – especially the nations of Europe
that owed the United States many millions in war debts – they had a very
pressing need; they had the choice of paying back in gold or exporting their
goods. Unfortunately they had little gold, the United States had collared more
than half of the world’s supply.

The European alternative to exporting to the United States was, therefore
bankruptcy, and the alarm of the former European allies was compounded into
outrage when it became clear that the Smoot-Hawley Tariff was aimed mainly at
the European debtors; it allowed free entry to a roster of goods from other
countries. Well, Smoot-Hawley prompted the helter-skelter building of a wall of
European tariffs by way of retaliation.

The effect of the Smoot-Hawley offensive and the European counter-offensive was
to bring the trade of the world almost to a halt. The great Depression had
arrived. Well, those haunting names came up the other day in Congress when the
House of Representatives met to debate a bill known, for short, as the Domestic
Content Bill. Although its proponents kept saying they were not protectionists,
they simply wanted to send a signal to Japan, it was a fairly straightforward
protectionist bill.

It requires foreign motor car manufactures who sell their cars here to use
prescribed percentages of American parts and American labour in their cars.
It's intended, of course, to persuade the foreigners – which means the Japanese
– to start plants here, or build the cars that would otherwise be exported
here, in idle American plants.

The bill was sponsored by a New York Democrat whose constituency takes in a
suffering General Motors-Chevrolet plant. Understandably, he had strong support
from Michigan Congressmen, for Detroit is in Michigan, is the automobile centre
of the country, and is in dire distress to the extent of between 15 and 20%
unemployment. So, obviously, the big lobbyist for the bill was the UAW, the
United Automobile Workers union.

The UAW took ads in the newspapers before the Bll came up in the house, and
they said, "Why not a Datsun made in Detroit?", an appealing notion since, as
the UAW claimed, if the Bill passed both houses it would mean 800,000 more jobs
for Americans in their own factories.

This figure was waved like a magic wand over the floor of the house on
Wednesday but the opponents quoted the most objective student of the Bill, the
very useful, non-partisan, Congressional budget office. It calculates that the
Bill would create no more than 38,000 jobs, not 800,000, and that they would be
gained at the expense of at least as many – perhaps twice as many – lost jobs
in export industries: truckers, packers, freight handlers, longshore men and so
on.

This equation was figured on the assumption that Japan would retaliate with
tariffs against American wheat (it takes 60% of all American grain) and soya
bean and rice, and other products which account for many more billions of
dollars of revenue from American exports.

But where did Smoot-Hawley come in? Except in my memory, my recall, it came
right on to the floor of the house, where the opponents of the Bill put in an
amendment to have the Domestic Content Bill renamed the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act
of 1982.

Now, you might have thought this was a passing note of factiousness. Not at
all. I watched and listened to this debate for four hours, and two of those
hours were spent on debating this change of title. It was almost the most
serious part of the general debate, for it was contrived by the opponents, to
launch into a warning, wrestling with much persuasive detail, about the dangers
of passing a first tariff bill.

The opposition had other heavy guns on its side apart from the Congressional
budget office, the Department of Commerce itself estimated that the cost of
employing another 38,000 auto workers – they get over fifteen dollars an hour,
almost three times the national average – would raise the cost of these
domestic Datsuns by $1,000 each. No special interest was quicker to see this
than the motor car salesmen, who in several states saw themselves going out of
business and lobbied to defeat the Bill.

Well in the end, on Wednesday evening, the bill finally came to a vote. Need I
say that the administration is dead against it, as a fatal first flirtation
with protection. It fears most for a drastic impoverishment of American farmers
through foreign retaliation. On the other hand, the Democrats are in the main
for it. The Speaker of the House, Mr Tip O'Neill, waved aside all arguments to
the contrary, and maintaining that he, too, is a fervent free trader, but in
this case he simply wanted to fire a salvo across the Japanese bows, the house
agreed. It passed the Bill by 215 to 188.

In the 48 hours remaining to this lame duck Congress, or as the Reagan men
prefer to say, this post-election Congress, it’s given very faint chance of
getting voted on in the Senate. In fact, the most eloquent of the Bill
supporters in the house almost begged for a favourable vote, not in hope of
getting the Bill, but to put the new Congress, which meets in January, to put
it on notice that there is a movement in the United States to begin to move
what the west European nations have already done, to set firm quotas for
Japanese imports; something the United States has not done.

The battle cry of the supporters was, "Enough is enough," and the echo of their
cry in the halls and corridors of Congress was a warning rumble to France,
Britain, West Germany, Italy, that Americans alone cannot go on forever
passionately espousing free trade in the world where the protectionist walls
are rising every day.

Well, if there is such a movement, and I believe there is, there is another
larger anxiety which is beginning to overtake the world of finance, the banks,
the credit corporations, and many people who see a dislocation in the economic
relations between nations. Which is new... new in scale, anyway, and over
which, some knowledgeable people say, there is no international control.

As one old financial advisor to several governments said to me the other day,
there is something eerie and very dangerous in one fact that we have come to
take for granted: that a foreign debtor, a nation even, is no longer considered
bankrupt if it has no possible means of repaying a loan of billions of dollars,
but only if it finds it cannot possibly pay the interest on the loan.

Certainly, the financial community here has been shaken by the plight of Mexico
and the approaching plight of Brazil. The man who was called on two or three
years ago to bail New York City out of bankruptcy put it more crisply. We are
in a world recession, the first since World War Two.

The international banking system is badly over-extended, western Europe and
Japan are in difficulty, Canada is in a crisis, much of western Europe is
bankrupt, Mexico, Argentina and Brazil are staggering under huge debt, the
Third World economy is largely a disaster. We have to put an end to floating
exchange rates, speculative raids on individual currencies, the uncontrolled
growth of the euro-dollar market. It is now vital for America, Japan and
western Europe to mount synchronised economic policies.

Well, of all unlikely saviours or, world thinkers, one appeared this week in
the Reagan administration, in the person of the Secretary of the Treasury, Mr
Donald Regan – not Reagan. He repeats and believes the laminations I have
recited and proposes, a lender of last resort that will be a kind of world
federal reserve.

At the moment, this a vague and beautiful shining trial balloon. But if it's
allowed to float and is examined and thought about, here and abroad, it might
be the harbinger of a new Marshall Plan.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP