USA, Cuba, and Guantanamo Bay - 26 August 1994

Who is Guantanamo? asked a shrewd old Englishman, who confesses to knowing
nothing about American history but has such a gift for asking the simple root
questions that he's given name or as he would say of anybody an Eskimo an Arab,
his Christian name, ought to be not Jason but Socrates. No, a young American
student broke in, you mean don't you who is Geronimo? That threw the old man
for a moment and is mouth fell open, it didn't have time to close before the
student moved in brashly and said "Geronimo was the last of the great Indian
warriors, an Apache, I think you mean what is Guantanamo?" "That's what I
meant," said the un-flapped Englishman.

In the weeks since the second exodus of Cuban boat people confronted President
Clinton and the people of Florida with an invasion of illegals that the United
States can neither repel not contain, I've not heard a single American ask
about nor a newspaper or television programme explain the most peculiar status
of Guantanamo, which is the place the United States coastguard is shipping the
refugees who've been intercepted on their way across the 100-odd mile stretch
from the north coast of Cuba to the top of Florida, but Guantanamo is in Cuba
isn't it? Yes indeed, it is a city of by now about 200,000 on the south-east
coast of Cuba, it has a large well sheltered bay, one of the largest in the
world, close to the Windward Passage and it links the Atlantic to the Caribbean
and Panama, a strategic base, therefore, of the first rank, which has been
occupied by the United States navy since 1903.

At the turn of the century, the United States finally entered Cuba's war of
independence from Spain and defeated the Spanish fleet and shortly thereafter
established by treaty with the new nation of Cuba a naval base that ever since
has been strengthened and expanded - fortifications, airfields, submarine base
the lot. The moment the war was over, the problem came up of the future
relations between the United States and Cuba, nothing new in that.

All the central and South American countries that during the 19th century came
to wrest their independence from Spain or Portugal, they had to define a
relationship with the giant of the north. All these freed countries might in
indignant moments call Uncle Sam the bully of the North but they shared a vital
need with him â€“ they wanted no more European assaults on this hemisphere â€“
and the United States had worked out a doctrine and treaties and, where there
were no treaties, there was a firm understanding that if any European power
came sailing in with the idea of conquering any part of south Central America -
except places like the Falklands, British Guiana, harmless little exceptions -
the United States would intervene.

Right into my time, whenever there was uprising, a coup south of the
Texas-Arizona border, the cry went up from the newspapers "send in the marines"
and they went in and stayed in some countries for years - Cuba, Haiti,
Nicaragua - so that most Americans forgot they were there. The protection of
these Central American countries for their own good and, let's face it, for
their sugar and coffee workers was standard American policy, sometimes the
marines grumbled at not knowing where they might spend the next few years once
the president made a speech before despatching them to Nicaragua reminding them
that the protection of our little brown brothers to the south was a mission and
a duty in a speech that inspired a popular song, "he may be a brother to big
Bill Taft but he ain't no friend of mine".

For a time the Cubans flushed with the idea of independence from one great
power hated the imposed protection of another, but as I say there was always
the fact that if any nation had any idea of American conquest, the United
States was pledged to intervene.

In 1934, however, the Cubans managed to have the United States repeal the
actual treaty that laid down the conditions of Cuba's dependence on America, so
like the other small independent nations once owned by Spain, Cuba managed its
own ups and downs and found a government, usually a dictator, that the United
States could, as we say, live with. Until 1959, when there appeared and
conquered the rebel Fidel Castro. He became a special case because he was a
declared Marxist and more than any other ruler below the Rio Grande, he was
thought of in Washington in those days as a special threat not with his own
resources, but the first guess of the Eisenhower administration that Cuba would
become a ward of the Soviet Union turned out to be correct. Within one year
Castro signed a $100 million credit with the Soviet Union and received the
first shipment of Soviet arms.

It took almost 30 years for some Americans to concede that Cuba was heavily if
not totally dependent on the Soviet Union for a going economy. Once the Soviet
Union collapsed, we learned the massive scope of the Soviet subsidy, which was
withdrawn and has put Castro's - what he calls perfect - society into a state
of desperate imperfection. The thousands of people taking the great risk of
escaping in their inner-tube and packing-case rafts may and do have various
reasons for fleeing, though not so various. From the coastguards' examination
of the thousands already detained either in camps in Florida or at the
Guantanamo base, the obvious reason for leaving bangs like a drumbeat, food,
clothing, soap, toilet paper the barest necessities are giving out for too
many.

Now Castro says it's all the fault of the United States for maintaining a trade
embargo for the 30 years since he Castro came in. From the beginning, the
United States said it would lift the embargo the day Castro held a national
free election and he promised one for the spring of 1961. We're still waiting
for it.

The Cuban ambassador to the United Nations was on a television panel last
Sunday and he declared to the shock of the sitting American pundits that Cuba
had had an election in I think he said March of 1993 a national election; it's
a startling bit of news that never wafted north. And it came out a day or two
later though that technically the ambassador was correct there was a motion put
up to the regional managers - gauleiters, proconsuls or whatever they're called
- asking for a vote of confidence in the following candidate for prime
minister, Fidel Castro. The vote was overwhelming.

As I speak, the United States coastguard fortified with cutters brought from
the North Atlantic and the Great Lakes is dashing back and forth across the
intervening sea stopping and turning back and rescuing and for the time being
interning these escapees at the Guantanamo base. It is large, as I said ,but
not boundless and its calculated that by the end of next week Guantanamo will
have taken all the thousands it can feed and maintain.

Remember, the refugees come in all shapes and sizes and ages very many of them,
not only babies, are in dire need of medical attention. The examining
inspectors dread a reputation of what happened with the last infamous boatloads
that Castro threw out many criminals, many people somewhere between
listlessness and madness.

Well, President Clinton is being both praised and blamed for reversing the
28-year-old policy of admitting first documented relatives of family already in
the United States, Florida mainly, of admitting escapees who could be fairly
defined as political refugees and rejecting what are called on paper economic
refugees, which means in life the most pathetic and perhaps most needy, the
very poor and sick with no papers, no legal rights. Everybody now is being
turned back or picked up and the reason is surely plain, though the
administration is fudging it with much florid rhetoric about hoping to bring
democracy to Cuba as well as Haiti. The reason is dreadfully simple; there are
too many boat people. Mr Clinton is the first president who watching the
southern borders of the country from California to Key West engulfed in a flood
tide of illegal immigrants 9 to 10 million is the latest guess for the past
five years.

The first president who has to defy the proud policy of a century give me your
poor, your tired, your huddled masses and say hold, enough is enough. What to
do. The administration is begging with not much response, other Central
American nations to take in the surplus human load. If Guantanamo fills up with
its sea-borne refugees, Castro could recall his troops who patrol his inland
fences and let swarms of people climb, run or storm the base by land. The
secretary of defence, anticipating this move has warned that it would be
regarded as wait for it, an unfriendly act.

The first obvious act of relief that occurs to most people is to let the Cubans
in to states, less populous and less populated with Cubans than Florida.
However, Mr Clinton is probably the first ex-governor to shun that idea. As
Governor Clinton of Arkansas, he generously took in several thousand Cubans and
precipitated a nasty riot. I'm afraid the sad unspoken truth today in America -
certainly in any state that touches an ocean or a foreign border - is give me
your poor, your tired, your huddled masses but not in my backyard or front
yard, either.

  • 
    USA, Cuba, and Guantanamo Bay