The Wall Street crash - 31 October 1997

Until last Monday, there was no question in my mind what had to be talked about
this week: the very delicate topic of China and America.

But Monday was the day when the skies went dark at noon and scared, you might
say, the living daylights out of everybody. And at 3.30 in the afternoon, the
president of the New York Stock Exchange did something that had been done only
twice before: immediately after the assassination of President Kennedy, and
then again after the wounding of President Reagan.

It was feared that if trading was allowed to go on, the market might reel into
chaos. The market always closes at 4pm, but on Monday the gavel fell and the
bell rang at 3.30, and by that time stocks had plunged 554 points, the largest
absolute number ever – 46 points more than the well-remembered drop almost
exactly ten years ago.

But the experts were quick to point out that in 1987, the volume of the market
was much smaller and the percentage drop was over 22%; whereas on Monday the
drop was just over 7%.

It used to be, as late as a dozen years ago, that a drop as small as 30 points
in the market would be the lead item on the television evening news. But the
bull market has been going on so long and the recovery from bigger drops so
swift that, till now, even a 90-point drop comes late in the news. Until last
Monday.

Five hundred and fifty-four scared everybody for a night and a day, though
Tuesday’s rousing rally offered a temporary gasp of relief.

Throughout all of Monday and on into the American night, during which the Hong
Kong market starts up again, all that time we saw on our screens, like the
endless credit crawl of a long film, a running procession of figures, the
battle casualties, on the exchanges of the countries that matter most these
days to Americans: Sydney, Singapore, Hong Kong, Bangkok, Jakarta, Tokyo,
Berlin.

How the life of man (and woman) has changed since the days when we woke up in
the morning and seized the newspaper to see what happened to the franc and the
pound.

Well to a hardnosed observer resigned to the fact that what happened to him was
happening to everybody else, the most cold-bloodedly interesting thing about
the whole event was the trotting out by the experts of all the judgements, the
usual phrases that have been used after every stock market crash since 1929.
Maybe since 1873, when the most famous historian wrote, "Overproduction of
goods, overcapitalisation of property and railroads and feverish speculation in
all sorts of corporate enterprise" – does it sound familiar? – "brought the
financial panic of 1873."

It took the country four or five years to get to its knees again.

Towards the end of last Tuesday when the 554 drop was a fact to accept and
explain, the experts were first telling us in a breathless tone not to panic,
and then the sages came in. What had happened had been a long overdue
correction, a balancing act, an attempt to seek a healthy haven, and – I love
this – a shaking out of weak money and those investors with no spine. Asked to
define a spineless investor, the man said, “Investors who cannot stand the
strain on a daily basis.” The ones, I guess, who at the first plunge were
desperate to sell.

Tuesday, when the market bounded back over 300 points, we heard about a smart
recovery, a wild rally, and (another favourite) an opportunity.

By Wednesday, when the rally was more modest but apparently on its way up, we
heard such technical gobbledegook as “the shorts getting squeezed” and “money
taking a flight to quality.” And with two or three more wobbly days to ponder
the deeper meaning of all this, the experts dared to use our own sort of
English. “Is,” asked one sage, “is the ball rolling over?” The second wizard
replied slowly, “Well I think the bear is coming out of hibernation.”

By the end of the week, it was the consensus of the Wall Street wizards that
the market had taken, might still be taking if not a rout, at the very least,
one man said, “a haircut.”

I imagine that everywhere around the globe today people are wanting to believe
that the whole scare is over and that the early discovery of a healthy market
level will save us from the hobgoblin, the nightmare that haunts us all
whenever there’s a halfway dramatic fall in the stock market: the ghost of
1929.

In listening this week to bankers, brokers and other financial magicians about
1929, I find a surprising general belief that on the so-called Black Thursday,
24 October, the market crashed with a bang and that was the beginning of the
Great Depression. It didn’t happen that way, and since so few people are alive
even among the wizards of Wall Street, who were there at the time, it might be
useful for one who remembers it well to sketch the unfamiliar sequence of
events that eventually made Thursday 24 October, but only in retrospect the
beginning of the end.

Historians date the beginning of the end at the previous 3 September, but
nobody at the time did. It happened to be, we can now see, the peak of the
stock market’s rise, the peak of the so-called Coolidge-Hoover prosperity. But
the stock market figure was not surprising at the time, made no headlines, no
comment. It was just higher than yesterday.

The headlines were about a speech in Geneva by the Prime Minister of Great
Britain, announcing that the United States and Britain were on the way to an
agreement to limit naval armaments. The German dirigible, the Graf Zeppelin,
had just triumphantly circled the world.

Bigger headlines in this country were in the form of a question, which men and
women who knew absolutely nothing about sport were eager to have answered:
would the wonderful Bobby Jones win his fifth National Amateur Golf
Championship?

After the 3 September though, the market dropped, surged a little, dropped
again, and at the end of the month went into a slow slide. Nobody was really
scared. There had been lurches and recoveries in the big bull market of the
preceding two years. Brokers’ loans rose to their peak, yet into October the
market drifted and went on sagging. European investors began to pull out and
some (maybe too many) Americans were equally prudent.

After another three weeks, famous stocks began to lose 10 points, 25 points, 40
points.

Tuesday, 22 October, a rally, and several big men, chairmen of the big banks
put out warming assurances about the soundness of the economy and the
healthiness of what they called “the shakeout.”

Nothing prepared anyone for Thursday the 24th. The rush of selling was now a
deluge.

Five of the biggest bankers formed an emergency pool to move in and buy and
steady prices, which they did for three or four days. But the bankers’ stopgap
heroics were no more than a thumb in the dyke. Tuesday, another deluge.

One appalling but by no means unique example: a famous sewing company’s stock,
which had been at 48, closed on the Monday, the 28th, at 11. Next day, a
messenger boy had the gall to offer a dollar a share and bought a packet. Two
days later, John D Rockefeller announced he was buying common stocks. The
exchange declared a holiday to help the sleepless floor clerks rest and then
climb through the mountains of unfilled orders.

But the market fell, and fell again, and in the middle of November the deluge
hit rock bottom. In two weeks, $30billion no longer existed on paper or in
life, which was just about the money the United States had spent to fight the
First World War.

President Hoover called to Washington every sort of business and industrial
expert – labour, farm leaders – and announced a programme of public building,
capital expenditures, no cuts in wages, expansion of public works that cheered
the country. The president and the bankers assured the nation that a crisis had
been met and overcome; that the economy was fundamentally sound and that
“Prosperity is just around the corner.”

Well throughout the winter and into the spring of 1930, the stock market rose
to its feet again, and again there were mergers, combinations and many what
were then called amalgamations. Pool operators got busy again pushing up
prices.

All through the spring of 1930, most of the American people had read about the
panic, but the thought of 1929 was that of a very nasty jar, a sickness they
were recovering from. It took more dips and surges before, for one thing, the
extent of unemployment dawned on the employed. It took almost two years after
the infamous Black Thursday for the whole country to know positively it was now
in a deep depression.

Three years after the first crash, I arrived in New York along with half a
dozen other Britons, coming to take up fellowships at American universities.

The chairman of the fund that had brought us over told us that evening that
there was by then – the end of September 1932 – the real possibility of a
revolution. We could stay with our fellowships or sail back home. We were young
and callow, not to say callous, and thought a revolution might be fun to be in
on.

If there’s anything to learn from 1929/30, I think it is that a true depression
is unlikely to develop from one or two sensational plunges and alternating
surges in the market. The time to get seriously concerned is when the market
slides gradually, slowly and steadily and tries from time to time to lift its
head above water and doesn’t make it. Till then, all the stock responses of the
Wall Street wizards I’ve quoted are of little use.

In the light of the 14 stock market crashes since 1873 none is quite the same.
There is no dependable pattern of positive decline or positive recovery.
Everything is very different or slightly different. All we can do is watch and
wait, keep our fingers crossed, distrust the experts and hope for the best.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP