US financial regulation - 17 April 1998

We all know about the official prophets of the Roman world who went off to
consult the oracles and then came back from the mountain or the secret place,
unrolled a scroll and gravely reported the news to the Emperor.

It so happens that I have this exact scene above my head, behind me, on the
wall of my study, a priceless – well not priceless, I bought the original from
the artist, one Dana Fradon whom old readers of the New Yorker will recall for
his drawings of droll and harmless men with sausage noses – this cartoon, a
comic masterpiece, enshrines for me, an attitude typical of the 1980s, when
young investment bankers were kings of the universe, until the afternoon of
Monday 19 October 1987, when the stock market fell 508 points and Wall Street
came reeling back to reality, like a drunk who'd hit a tree.

Mr Fradon's cartoon appeared shortly after Black Monday, when most of us kept
our fingers tied together, hoping and praying that we were not plunging into a
repeat version of 1929. The cartoon shows a small hall in a Roman palace.

A droopy, rather grim-looking Emperor with a wreath around his head is sitting
on his throne and two steps below him stand four senators in their togas. The
one in the foreground has the scroll in his hand and he's just consulted it.
He's saying, "It's true, Caesar, Rome is declining, but I expect it to pick up
in the next quarter".

A quarter is the three-month period that requires a regular report from the
treasury, from the stock market, from companies, from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, from everybody who has something to do with the national economy.

I don't believe it's unique to America but this week, at a conference in
Washington on the Asian economic crisis, the Americans – represented chiefly by
the secretary of the treasury and the chairman of the Federal Reserve – were
wishing out loud that the Asian nations, Japan in particular, had similarly
strict and open rules of regulating and reporting the figures about their
finances. Especially losses and other embarrassments that are, on the contrary
in Asia, routinely withheld.

It has come only now into the general knowledge of Americans, perhaps of
Europeans too, that for instance, Thailand and South Korea regularly refused to
show how much their foreign currency reserves had dwindled, so an investor
would not know a conservative broker from a currency-speculating cowboy.

Secretary Rubin got off a memorable phrase which had the advantage, as Dr Henry
Kissinger used to say, of being true. The most powerful source of discipline we
have around the world, he said, is the power of the markets.

If, in any nation, they are falsely reported or not reported at all, no wonder
we're astonished to hear that banks are tumbling all over Asia and big firms in
their wake, for the root reason that Wall Street finally crashed in October
1929 – the Everest of the stock market was a mountain of credit or debt on a
molehill of actual money.

This Washington summit on the Asian economy is inevitably too complex, too
detailed, on a subject, international finance and economics, that is itself an
alien form of mysticism to most of us. What every man and woman wants to know,
I gather from acting as a listening post, is what's going to happen to you and
me. If Japan crashes – and it's giving a reasonably good imitation already –
will the quake spread to America and Europe?

Will the doomsday men be right, who predicted that if the Dow Jones industrial
average ever went above 9000 and Japan fell, there would be a global
depression? Well even competing experts in the same field of international
finance agree on one thing. Nobody can be sure of anything.

But when ordinary people say, looking over the simpler facts of the American
stock market, when we hear that more than 60% of Americans own stock – more,
proportionately, than in 1929 – when average, intelligent investors blandly
announce that they expect in the next year their investments to produce
anything from 15 to 25% interest, which would have been thought a dream-like,
preposterous figure in the sound 6% promise of 1929, what makes the present
huge bubble of investment less perishable than that of 1929?

And then, we who were there and white-haired historians who weren't there trot
out the usual reassurances. Before 1929, you could buy a dollar stock with the
dime in your hand, afterwards you had to meet a high margin, only one of many
rules imposed by the government – the setting up of a Securities and Exchange
Commission to police investments, for the first time the federal government
insured not only brokerage accounts but the smallest bank deposit.

There were many other acts of regulation that have made Wall Street more
disciplined than any other stock market on earth. These rules may indeed brace
us against the tidal wave that is expected to wash these shores if the Japanese
economy collapses.

The only trouble with the theory of history repeating itself and the steps we
take to see that it doesn't happen, is that history may trace exactly the same
pattern so far, but then deviate by one detail that makes all the difference
and makes us decide, yet again, that history is no guide. Hence the stubborn
truth which surely goes back to the first wars fought with battering rams, that
at the beginning of any new war, the generals are prepared to fight the last
one.

Well, all I care to add to this baffling and anxious business of when will the
bubble burst, is a new note struck, surprisingly, by an English newspaper. If
the worst happens and the response of America and Europe is to do what they did
in the 1920s, to set up trade barriers, to go in for protection, if, it says
here, if America and Europe do stumble, politicians will be quick to blame the
Japanese, but on present evidence, the real blame is more likely to lie either
with trade-bashing politicians or with, wait for it, the Federal Reserve, which
failed to raise interest rates last year to deflate the stock market bubble.

That final phrase amounts, in this country, almost to an act of blasphemy. Mr
Alan Greenspan, the sainted chairman of the Federal Reserve, has been praised
routinely, every quarter, for not raising the interest rates and so reining in
his chief enemy, inflation. I don't think anyone, I can't think of anyone on
Wall Street, who so far has blamed him for not pricking the beautiful, swelling
bubble of the stock market.

In the years immediately following the Second Word War, those fountains of
wisdom, cab drivers, would say after any disaster – an earthquake, the Yankees
losing a baseball game, their sister going down with the flu – they'd say, it's
the bomb, you bet your life, it's the bomb.

The dropping of those two atomic bombs, the first on Hiroshima, the second on
Nagasaki, was the biggest and the scariest news of the century and, taxi
drivers apart, lots of other people had alarming ideas about what the bomb
would do to human beings.

I remember a distinguished psychiatrist saying that his patients' dreams were
more and more haunted by the bomb and he thought that, for a generation or two
or three, we can expect a pandemic of rebellious behaviour among the young, as
a desperate escape from the deep fear that was implanted by the bomb.

This is an uncomfortable thought, with more than a grain of truth I think, so
we'd better retreat into the current explanation for natural disasters,
especially in the weather anywhere, as announced once again by the taxi
drivers. El Niño.

El Niño has become a buzzword, like virus or Alzheimers, used far and wide by
people who haven't a notion what it means. Well, the fact, which meteorologists
keep on explaining over the evening news, is that El Niño, the Christ Child, is
so-called because it first appeared on Christmas Eve.

It is a stretch of warm water, a stretch 6,000 miles wide, which rests normally
in the Central Pacific, but once every five to seven years, it moves east, off
the coast of South America. This huge expanse of warm water develops clusters
of thunderstorms and whenever the El Niño centre moves, it violently alters the
track of the jetstream winds, which steer storms.

Nobody knows for sure why this happens, but this winter and on into our summer,
they – the climatologsts, not the taxi drivers – say the known results will
continue. Great droughts and fires in South America and Australia and Africa,
drenching rains, mudslides and millions of dollars'-worth of houses sliding
into the sea in California.

We've already had more than the promised scores of whirling, murderous
tornadoes through the south, turning small towns into matchsticks in two
minutes and here in our north-east, the mildest winter on record. From 1
October to the first day of spring, 28 inches of snow is normal. This year we
had one half-inch in all.

Which reminds me. I had a call from a London friend this week. He said London
was snowing like mad. This was alarming news. I knew he was going off to a
Mediterranean island and I imagined him ploughing up to his hips on the way to
Heathrow and being told all flights had been cancelled for a week.

About an hour later, my daughter called from Vermont. She'd just had what she
called a dribble of six inches of snow, but enough, on a base of 12 feet to
keep the skiing going a little longer. Still, I checked with the London
meteorological boys and discovered that day of a mad snowfall had deposited a
quarter of an inch.

I was much relieved for my friend, and indeed, for all Londoners whom I'd
imagined suffering the catastrophe of a lifetime.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP