Pearl Harbour and Church attendance - 23 March 1990

Mr Alec McCowen the actor, came back to New York on Wednesday evening to
report, once again, on the life of Jesus Christ.

I think that’s a fair way of describing his performance of the Gospel according
to St Mark because he doesn’t recite it, or declaim it, or intone it, as holy
scripture. He tells it as a gifted reporter might tell it to a group of friends
on his return from having covered a marvellous story. Mr McCowen has been doing
this for, what, 20 years or more, but he still tells it with the concentration
and awe of an old reporter recalling the most fascinating foreign assignment he
ever had.

It is, to young theatregoers especially, a revelation for it’s safe to say that
in this country no children in the public schools have bible reading as a
regular, or irregular course, since the prohibition and the bill of rights
against an establishment of religion applies to religious teaching of any kind
in the schools.

You’ll get it at home or you don’t get it at all and you get it at home very
little these days, except in the families of devout blacks and among
fundamentalist believers who are mostly congregated in the south.

Anyway the experience was so invigorating, so fresh, for one theatregoer, Mr
McCowen told us that she asked him where she could find the script of his
wonderful play. He replied in almost any hotel room.

I’m not sure about the almost, I have inhabited, I suppose, in my travels
thousands of hotel rooms in the United States and I can’t remember one which
did not have in the drawer of the bedside table, a Bible, universally known as
a Gideon’s Bible.

It’s exactly 100 years ago since three commercial travellers named Hill,
Nicholson and Knights did something together to supply a want that they sorely
missed when they were on the road. They were, as we say, devout Christians and
what’s more they were practicing Christians. And if they forgot to take their
Bibles along with them they were bereft of decent reading matter, not to
mention spiritual comfort.

So they organised themselves into something called the Gideon Society, they
took out little advertisements from their own pay in the newspapers of the
towns they travelled through. They invited subscriptions to the society from
the congregations of their own churches.

Within a year or two they had enough money to buy thousands of Bibles and
distribute them free to inns and hotels. I’m sorry to say I can find no record
of their early experiences in doing this. They didn’t offer just one Bible per
hotel to sanctify the house, they asked how many bedrooms and dished out the
scriptures accordingly.

But there must have been innkeepers who were lackadaisical Christians, if not
downright atheists, and certainly there have come down stories about hotel men
who didn’t much care having on hand for every guest a book, so full of
injunctions to avoid strong drink, especially the favourite tipple of the east
coast long after colonial times, the demon rum.

But I imagine in 1899 when, according to the record, at the very least three
American families in four were regular churchgoers (it’s now down to 50%, just
over), a hotel keeper wouldn’t want to risk a local reputation of being a
heathen, or a man positively against religion.

Anyway, after 20 years of the Gideon Society which later was incorporated as
the Christian Commercial Travellers Association of America, over a million and
a half Bibles had gone into hotel bedrooms. Today it must be 40, 50, 60
millions, I’ve never heard of a hotel that turned them down.

Last time I consulted a Gideon’s Bible to find some text appropriate for the
next talk, I looked down to read the chosen passage and looked up to see the
blazing lights of the night clubs along the strip in Las Vegas Nevada.

Why Gideon? I was hoping nobody would ask. I really don’t know. Perhaps you can
work it out for yourself, if I remind you that Gideon was a judge of Israel,
that he laid his fleece, his woolly, down in the open for two nights, on the
first morning the fleece was wet and the ground was dry, on the second morning
the woolly was dry and the ground was wet.

For some reason no cleric has ever explained to me, Gideon looked on this
oddity as a favourable omen, time to wage war. He went off into battle and won
and set Israel free from it’s Midianite oppressors. How he seemed just right as
the patron of three travelling salesmen I leave you to figure out.

You might gather from this that commercial travellers in America were a
remarkably pious lot. Not at all. When I first came here there were rafts of
jokes about commercial travellers, all of them racy, all of them involving the
farmer's daughter or some other local lass.

In these sophisticated times the jokes seem to have languished, though not so
long ago I did hear a lamentable story about a travelling parson who used apt
quotations from the Gideon Bible to have his wicked way with the girl changing
the sheets. Enough.

That was by way of celebrating the 100th anniversary of the brave initiative of
the Messrs Hill, Nicholson and Knights. An anniversary that makes me realise
how drastically the Bible has gone from the public speeches, the debating
speeches of politicians.

When I first sat in the press gallery of the Senate there was hardly a speech
that didn’t resound with phrases and echoes of, especially, the Old Testament.
I say the Senate in particular because its leaders, its committee chairmen,
hence its regular spokesmen, were all southerners.

This came about because 50 years ago the south was known as the Solid South, it
was in every election solidly Democratic, sending back every six years the same
senators. And since the rule in those days was that committee chairmanships
went always to men who had the longest service in the Senate, the chairmen were
almost all of them southerners.

There were days when you would have thought that the Confederates had won the
civil war and all the powerful speakers were southern. By the same token, the
south was the most earnestly doggedly religious part of the country.

Perhaps I should say the most invincibly Protestant, colonised as it was in the
early days by Methodists and in the later days by Protestant Ulstermen, what
Americans call Scotch Irish. And all the old southerners, whatever other bits
of literature they knew, were steeped in the language, in the parables of the
Bible.

I remember the Sunday the word came in that the Japanese had bombed Pearl
Harbor and we reporters rushed off to the White House and while we were waiting
to be called into the Oval Office to hear the worst from the president's press
secretary, we could her distinctly through the door of an adjoining room the
high tremulous southern voice, verbally pulverising the two Japanese envoys
Admiral Nomura, I think, and a Mr Kurusu, who had been sent as a blind to
Washington.

Obviously, the Japanese calculated, correctly, that the Americans would not
expect anything belligerent to happen while they had two peace-seeking
negotiators as guests of the president.

What keeps this memory very green is the stream of colourful abuse that the
southerner, the secretary of state Mr Cordell Hull, was pouring out on the meek
Japanese.

I wish it had ever been recorded, all I can remember is that his denunciation
of their treachery was a combination of running quotations from the Old
Testament interspersed with unflattering comparisons and examples of animal
biology.

That was – and still is – a style of southerners telling stories and there are
no storytellers like southerners. Half their similes and metaphors are taken
from the habits of muskrats, raccoons, hound dogs, skunks and opossums.

That still remains, but the younger southerners nowadays talk much like the
northerners. I mean the prose they use, not the accent, just as the members of
parliament seem to have shed all the fire and colour of the Lloyd Georges and
Churchills and Nye Bevans and talked like company prospectuses.

The last of the old breed in this country was not a southerner but a
Midwesterner, son of a Welsh immigrant mining family. His name was John L
Lewis, and he himself left school early and went into the mines. He became the
leader of the first national industrial union and in the late '30s and early
'40s he was the most powerful labour leader in the United States.

His appearances to testify before Senate committees, usually as a defiant or
uncooperative witness, were star performances of a vanishing kind, for he
talked as well as speechified in biblical quotations.

The last time I remember him appearing before a committee this great bull of a
man, with eyebrows like a thatched roof, he recited to the committee how far
the miners and the automobile workers and the steel workers had come thanks to
40 years of his efforts.

A senator intervened to remark that Mr Lewis certainly knew how to blow his own
horn. Lewis turned on the man and said, “It is written in the word, he that
tooteth not his own horn the same shall not be tooted.”

In the past week, one congressman has sounded a line from the Bible on the
theme of taxes which can no longer be ignored even by President Bush who was
elected on the promise “No new taxes”. With the national deficit now estimated
higher than the White House predicted, President Bush has called for a national
increase in the tax on petrol and on airline passengers. He doesn’t call them
taxes, he calls them "user fees".

A howl has gone up from the farmers and the parents in the Midwest, the south
and the western states, who have to drive many miles to work or school. At the
same time the president wants to reduce the taxes on income derived from the
sale of stocks and other investments, a reduced capital gains tax.

Hence the cry of a Democratic congressman, “There went out a decree from Caesar
Augustus that all the world should be taxed, save only the rich.”

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC.

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP