US defence spending - 31 January 1992

It seems ages ago but it was, I suppose, in the early 1950s that I was invited
to go aboard one of the first atomic submarines and, when a trifle of a storm
came up, to descend as a submarine does in a hurricane and go way down into
what they call the clear element.

It's a belt of absolutely still water where you hover like a single tropical
fish in a placid tank. Not the most surprising of many things about submarines,
one of which I remember the commander explaining with great patience and skill,
is that the aim of a submarine designer is to come up with a boat which is, in
its mobile capacity, more of a fish than a boat. A dolphin, he said, was the
prototype they'd aimed at.

There was, I recall, a submarine christening ceremony that, at the time and in
that place, could only be called gay. Brilliant day, a smart wind, the waters
of Long Island Sound flashing mirrors of light on the medals of the officers
and the rows of white uniforms and the pretty girls holding on to whisking
skirts. Then I spend two or three days covering the story, as we say, learning
about the wonders of these stealthy ships and the crew that mans them, known as
submariners, watching a tough commander instruct rookies throwing switches on a
simulated bridge and when the sun went down, drinks with the captain and the
officers. There was one young man whom the instructor said, rated just about
100% as a nuclear submariner – 99%, he said, will not do. I looked out for him
but he never came for drinks, I understand his wife had just had a baby, but
anyway he was a Southern Baptist and he wouldn't have been at home with the
bent elbows and the poteen. I met him 20-some years later, very briefly. On a
perishing winter day he was standing on the corner of 96th Street and Madison
Avenue in New York, like a… like a beggar, like a Salvation Army recruit,
holding out a frozen hand and saying something like, I'd appreciate your vote,
I'm running for president, my name's Jimmy Carter.

Well that, that exciting summer naval episode was going on at Groton, a small
coastal town on the Connecticut shore, facing Long Island Sound. I don't
remember the name given to that christened submarine, it could well have been
the Nautilus, a series which started in the '50s. Ever since, Groton,
Connecticut has been home to the main nuclear submarine builder, a company with
the simple – un-American, wouldn't you say? – name of the Electric Boat
Company. Down 40 years, the shipyard workers, the contractors and the
businesses big and small that depend on the Boat Company's employees, they've
made up over 80% of the New London County's $2 billion payroll. Throughout all
that time, two generations of submarine builders have come and gone and
throughout all those years, at least until about 18 months ago, it never
crossed anyone's mind that one day the whole company might shut up shop. But
today it has crossed and befuddled their minds.

Last Wednesday, Mr Dick Cheney, the Secretary of Defense, following on the
President's Tuesday speech, went before the press and the cameras at the
Pentagon and spelled out what is going to be cut out of the next defence
budget. The latest submarine they're working on at the Groton shipyard is
something called the Seawolf. It costs $2 billion per – 29 of them are on order
or were two years ago. As of last Wednesday, there are none – 28 cancelled. I
suppose they'll be allowed to finish work on the first one which is now under
construction. Needless to say, the congressman who represents that county and
the one who represents the 4,000 workers from neighbouring Rhode Island, are
sad and mad. So they are Democrats and Republicans alike, all across the
country, wherever a defence plant has been told that its budget has been
trimmed, its speciality has been modified or abandoned. Two great plants in
California took as big a blow. There are to be finally, no more B-2 Stealth
bombers and there was bad news for Boeing in the Pacific Northwest, a sharp
cutback in the production of Comanche helicopters. The same with an advanced
cruise missile and the plans to improve the M1 tank.

These cuts and cancellations make up a saving of $10 billion in a current total
defence budget of 291 billions, which doesn't sound like much except to the
thousands of people who are going to lose their jobs. There are several sombre
ironies in this picture of sudden economies and angry responses, before the
details of the president's budget were known, a former head of the CIA, Mr
William Colby, said if he were in charge, he'd cut the defence budget in half.
His reasoning was that the republics of the former Soviet Union – no matter how
dramatic are the cuts in the economies they proclaim in their defence budget –
they will have to strip themselves to the bone, militarily speaking if they are
to avoid famine and maintain a fragile economy.

But 50% cut in our defence budget? The Democrats had a fit. For 10 years, ever
since Reagan went into the White House, they've been saying, as a party, that
the solution to America's economic woes, even when America didn't seem to have
any, was to slash the defence budget dramatically and invest all those saved
billions of dollars in people, in schools, in day-care, in hospitals. Swords
into ploughshares has been the Democratic slogan practically since the Cold War
began. Not quite as loud or self-righteously as the socialists in the
parliamentary countries, but consistently. Then the Soviet Union collapsed.
Now, they said, is the time, no more enemy. Huge defence cuts could mean an end
to poverty, homelessness, illiteracy. Then something happened that the
Democrats had never expected. President Bush and Secretary Cheney agreed with
them and said we'll begin with irrelevant military bases and naval shipyards
and Mr Cheney announced with rude despatch a list of, I don't know, 20, 30
camps and bases around the country, some of them famed in song and story. Quite
right, Democrats, they said, close 'em down. And, of course, senators and
congressmen of both parties who found a base closing in their constituency, it
was their turn to howl.

Some liberal Democrats, especially ones who don't have a base or the Marine
Corps or a factory in their back yard have gone on urging drastic cuts in
defence but again they've done it as a political ploy on the unspoken
understanding that the Republicans, the administration anyway, would never go
so far as a liberal Democrat. Well now it's happened and they're left to
quarrel with the way President Bush has divided up the money saved. Of course,
you realise that when we talk about the budget or the president's budget or the
total cancellation of the Seawolf submarine, we're not reported something that
has happened or will positively be done. I always forget to mention this
reminder until I get to Europe and see headlines saying things like, Reagan
will slash social security, What that meant was he's made his State of the
Union speech and that's what he proposes, it's up to Congress to dispose and
across Long Island Sound there, at Groton, Connecticut, an official of the
Electric Boat says the proposal to kill the Seawolf is unacceptable and we're
not going to lie down and die, we're going to fight. And so will say his
congressman, especially if he's up for re-election this year.

So what do the most influential members of Congress say? The men of the
opposition. Well the chairman of the important committees, Military Affairs
Committee, Space, Ways and Means, they've already started holding hearings. One
of them, Senator Nunn, the Democrat who's the chairman of the powerful Senate
Armed Services Committee was asked if the details Mr Cheney announced amounted
to an end of the Cold War budget. That's what it is, he said, that's what
they're doing. He didn't mention the blessed fact that among the projects that
will not be trimmed is the air force's new F-22 jet fighter. Lockheed
Corporation has go the go-ahead, full-steam. The F-22 will be assembled at a
plant in Georgia which, by coincidence is where Senator Nunn comes from.

I'm well aware that these cuts, these closings of military bases, reduction of
army strength are going on in more countries than the United States, Nowhere
more than in the CIS – the Commonwealth, if it is one, of Independent States.
Someone, a Kremlinologist in Washington, said the other day, that Mr Yeltsin's
announcement of those deep cuts in nuclear weapons was of course good news as
matching, or even going beyond Mr Bush's similar cuts. But, he said, something
else. It's the best news yet from Yeltsin. The money, he says, may go a long
way to provide pay and housing for all those hundreds of thousands of Soviet
troops who have been brought home and wander around like a vast army of the
suddenly homeless, except they have weapons and the habit of discipline and –
with no housing and no pay and facing a rough winter and a possibly famished
population – they could be immense trouble.

Well, remember we all cheered when the system collapsed but as the hallelujahs
die down, we hear they've acquired some other of the blessings of democracy:
drugs, increased crime, pornography, a roaring and very damaging black market
in the distribution of food. I wonder how many millions of them and how many
thousands of unemployed Americans who live near a closing camp or bomber
factory, I wonder how many awake in the morning and guiltily sigh for the
lovely old predictable evil empire.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP