Shared concerns in Britain and America - 27 December 1991

In the old days, when I was filing one or two dispatches a day from the United
States to what was then the most influential liberal paper in Europe, my
editor, a sharp eyed shrewd little Lancashire man insisted that once every two
years I should go over to England, and spend a month learning what's on the
mind of the people you're writing for. It was always a good idea, in the main
the trip corrected my long-distance view of what things in America Britons were
interested in and what not.

Well, I've just come to the end of a brief safari into southern England and
this time it produced a startling surprise, due to what reason I don't know,
maybe the immediacy of television and so the speed with which ideas, fashions,
political theories, social anxieties and disaster are transmitted round the
world. What I discovered was that, often for months I'd been talking from
America about social topics, movements, new customs and the like on the
assumption that they would be news to the listening audience, whether in New
Delhi, Newcastle or New Guinea.

The shock of this disillusion hit me no later than the second morning when I
collected a bunch, well, four English newspapers and riffled through them at
first to see what news from America they were covering, no surprises there,
early profiles of the six dwarves, or Democrats running for the presidency.
Front page pieces on the governor of New York, the ineffable Mario Cuomo when
he begged after aerobic exercises of conscience to have this cup taken from
him. An astonishing amount of space given to the trial of William Kennedy
Smith, and of course a parade of defaulting tycoons, firms, banks, and their
temporary retreat into the haven of chapter eleven, or protected bankruptcy.

When I turned to the home, or British, news the first thing I noticed which was
also no surprise was that all the signs and symptoms of recession we notice in
America were happening there. Nothing I've talked about in the past, what,
seven months or so was new to Britons, from one-time Tom Wolfe yuppies turning
from investment banking at a $120,000 a year to short-order cooks in fast food
restaurant at a $150 a week. Down to a nationwide slump in house building and a
rash affecting very many young householders of foreclosed mortgages. A
Christmas fair announced for some English village had to be cancelled just as a
similar Christmas joust in I think Connecticut had to be cancelled.

The recession tales are almost eerily similar and the only question we asked of
each other was, when will it be over? I don't think anybody, anybody knows.

One reflection, response common to both countries could have been expected:
however learnedly and long we go on about election issues in either country,
the fact is deducible from years and years of experience that in the end, for
most voters the pocketbook is decisive. If your economy and ours are worse at
election time the immemorial consequence has been that the incumbent takes a
beating. In Britain, Mr Major's persuasive powers are going to be tested sooner
than Mr Bush's. I don't know what the trend has been in British elections but
in America if the economy is half-way healthy, even when it's just ticking over
easily, it is extremely difficult to unseat a sitting president, to deny him a
second term.

So although we have 10 months to go and prophecy about any presidential
election more than a day or two before the event is madness, at the moment and
looking over the calibre of the six opposing dwarves, Mr Bush looks very hard
to beat.

Pretty soon I don't doubt the polls will discover that his big recent slump was
an overreaction to the panic cry that he spent all his time improving the world
and forgot about the old folks at home. I should say the young folks, for one
of the scarier discoveries of government studies in the past few years is that
the old folks, since the introduction of Medicaid for the poor and Medicare for
everybody over 65, have never been better off. It's the great majority of the
poor that are children.

Well now, what was the surprise, what I called the shock of my disillusion when
I'd followed the news in Britain for a day or two? It was that social trends of
fashion I'd talked about as being peculiarly American turned out to be boringly
or alarmingly common in Britain.

Three evenings in a row I kept tabs on the local news which follows in London
the nation and international news. I swear with a simple change of names and
addresses I could have been in New York. A robbery somewhere, a fire possibly
due to arsonists, a policeman stabbed, followed by a grave recital of the
numbers of policemen wounded in 1991. A gay protest against some company, some
army base, a child found abandoned or bruised in a cellar. Some headmaster,
mistress acquitted after a charge of sexually abusing young children. A royal
or other distinguished public figure presides over a charity concert for Aids,
accompanying short editorials about the rising incidence of Aids among young
people hitherto thought quote, "innocent", that is heterosexual and non
drug-users. I could go on and on but I will not at this supposedly merry time
of the year, bombard you with the uncanny coincidence of our afflictions,
problems, and fetishes.

Last summer, after three weeks in Britain, I came back here to boast that for
so long I'd never heard the word cholesterol or the word Alzheimer's. No
longer. Cholesterol has come bounding in as a transatlantic menace, and the
knowledge and fear of Alzheimer's disease is now about where it was in America
15, 20 years ago. On that fearsome topic I will simply repeat my never-answered
question: why have we heard about it and started talking about it only in the
past say, 15 years at most, when it was discovered and named over a hundred
years ago?

Here, as sharp as I can make it, is my point: Alois Alzheimer was born I
believe in about 1857 – I'm away from the books but believe I'm approximately
correct. He named the disease in about 1887 when he was 30, he died in 1915.
What was so special about it? It was the discovery that senility could set in,
in middle age, as early as the late 40s and early 50s, it was therefore a
premature form of senility. And I believe all the early cases he studied died
within six, eight years of what he took to be the onset.

Well in the United States in the past decade or more you never hear of an old
person, however aged, who dies of senile dementia, it's always Alzheimer's. My
suspicion boosted by several doctors I know is that the great majority of cases
of people going round the bend in their 70s or 80s are simply senile, but as
one tart British neurologist wickedly suggested, Americans have to die of the
latest disease.

Anyway, I have personally known one absolutely genuine case of Alzheimer's. I
knew the late Rita Hayworth in her late 40s, when she was already showing
distressing symptoms, of irrational fear, loss of memory, wayward talk. Well,
now the word and the affliction are coming in, in Britain, though I notice most
of the victims are very old. "What's it matter," another doctor friend of mind
said, "the symptoms are precisely the same as those of senile dementia and you
can raise more money for an Alzheimer's drive than you could for a senility
relief foundation." So be it.

I should add an observation something I've noticed which is peculiar to London.
A comparative study put out I think by the United Nations, showing that
pedestrian deaths in London are three times that of any other big city, due any
foreigner will rightly guess to motorcars ploughing down the natives. I have to
tell you that no matter how long I'm in London I look twice both ways before
taking the plunge into the whirlpool of the roadway. The way cars and vans and
taxis come whizzing through side streets and around squares and circles is
something that a foreigner has to see to believe. This whizzing James Bond pace
is a characteristic that Londoners are apt to deny, but that's only because
they don't live anywhere else; by the same token, I always forget how very hard
London water is until I come to take a bath and feel that I'm soaping my arms
and legs with resin. This is not a New York prejudice – a discovery I made 65
years ago when I first came south from the north country, where we took our
water from the then crystal springs of the Lake District.

Well it's getting late, the old year ticks away and I have only a minute or
more left I'm proud to notice that I have not added a word to the interminable
sermons on the life and achievements of the sainted Mikhail Gorbachev. I leave
you with one piece of good news, it's a study just finished in Finland, of
1,200 Helsinki businessmen under special watch for 15 years, all 1,200 had in
the beginning either high blood pressure or high cholesterol levels, half of
them were put on a low fat, low sugar, low alcohol, no smoking, much exercise,
chicken and fish and vegetable life, the other half were allowed to continue on
their sinful, lethal way of life.

What do you know, at the end of 15 years, the controlled pure non-sinners had
67 deaths, half of them from heart disease, the uncontrolled reckless eat,
drink and be merry lunatics had only 32 deaths, only 14 from heart disease.
Thoughtful grave and reverent seigniors of medicine will no doubt spend the
next year finding treacherous holes in this well-rounded study. But for now,
and for the rest of us there is the happy new year's word of a splendid Irish
doctor who says, "Constantly measuring cholesterol levels can do more harm than
good, anyway sooner or later this cholesterol theory is going to collapse
completely". Mama, would you kindly pass the plum pud and the brandy sauce.
Happy New Year.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP