Conventions and opinion polls - 14 August 1992

Ten days after the United Nations ultimatum that expired, that's to say 10 days
after the Desert War had begun, the first day of February last year, I came off
a plane in southern California – this was the last leg of a little talking trip
– and that the four airports I'd been in you'd have thought the bomb, the bomb
had dropped. At high noon, the huge echoing stadium of the Dallas airport
echoed nothing but a quick patter of a few tiny feet of the few travellers
about as audible as mice in a cathedral nave. For some reason never
satisfactorily made clear to me, everybody across the 3,000 miles of this
country of this continent was terrified of flying.

When I came out into the mechanical sunshine of southern California, if I
hadn't known the place before, a place named Irvine, I could have thought I was
in some unreported part of heaven, which as the book says, has many mansions.
Well this outdoor mansion would be one dedicated to the perpetual glory of
American patriots, conservative patriots towering at the entrance to the
airport was a gigantic heroic figure after whom the airport was named, it must
have been 20ft high, none too towering for the man it commemorated, John Wayne.
As our car drove off and once I'd finished goggling at this immense work by I
believe Michelangelo, I noticed we were gliding in an American car, don't doubt
it, along a smooth divided highway, its name of course MacArthur Boulevard
named after the man whose biographer called him American Caesar, the hero of
Batan in the Philippines, commander of the United Nations Forces in Korea until
he was unceremoniously bumped by President Harry Truman for exceeding his
orders. And somewhere along that boulevard, I seem to recall another heroic
statute in the imperial likeness of General MacArthur, who was in life a very
handsome and commanding figure. Hollywood could not have achieved a better
piece of casting for the soldier to overlook the Japanese signing of the
surrender on the deck of the Battleship Missouri and pronouncing the four epic
words that brought the Second World War to its end. "These proceedings are
closed."

I remember remarking to my host as we swept on to the broad and leafy expanses
of the campus of the University of California at Irvine. Irvine didn't exist 50
years ago, I remarked that if there were two statues not likely to be found in
this county they would be those of Franklin Roosevelt and Adlai Stevenson. I
might have uttered a blasphemy, two blasphemies he shuddered and nodded his
head. We were in Orange County, south of Los Angeles.

Now there are in California, 58 counties and they have quite a measure of
self-government. Incidentally, the vote in national and state elections is
always reported county by county. The town of Orange was born 125 years ago in
a stretch of country that grew in abundance oranges, olives, lemons and
almonds, it was called Richland then, but the man who bought the land in 1868
wanted to change the name. He let a poker game decide it; he sat down with
three friends and the four of them impersonating orange, olive, lemon and
almond. Orange won. It was then about 30 miles south of the almost wholely
Mexican town of Los Angeles.

Only 50 years ago, Orange had a population of a mere 8,000, the whole county no
more than twice as many and while I can find no record of how people voted, I'd
bet that by Roosevelt's second term 1936 very few Orange men were going for
him. From its beginning's, Orange County has been a nursery and haven for
thriving white middle-class lifelong Republicans, they were suspicious of the
glib Roosevelt even in the year of his ascendancy out of the Depression to the
throne. Every since you are never sure of the California vote until Orange
County had come swinging in to balance or outweigh the votes of the detested
liberal counties around San Francisco Bay.

In 1984, the county went 600,000 to 200,000 votes for Reagan, three to one the
largest Reagan majority in the country. In 1988, 550,000 to 250,000 – over two
to one for Bush. Now I tell you this story and its impressive statistics
because the latest word not to be believed from Orange County as I speak is in
a county-wide poll – Bush 32%, Clinton 58%. This is as if the stockbroker belt
around Windsor, Wentworth, Swinley Forest mounted a rebellion, marched on
Westminster and demanded that John Major resign in favour of John Smith.

Well, this is a poll taken very soon – remember after the Democratic
convention, most if not all of the polls around the country, as you know,
showed Clinton in a commanding and to the Republicans a staggering lead.
However, let's begin by reminding ourselves that shortly after the Democratic
convention four years ago, Governor Dukakis – remember him? – was 17 points
ahead of the struggling Mr Bush. A party convention, however blousy and
theatrical and self-congratulating, always acts as a tonic to public taste,
very like alcohol – short-term stimulant but really and after a while a true
depressant.

Whatever doubts exist as the Republicans come together at Huston on Monday, and
doubts are rampant, I don't think there's much question that once the balloons
have burst and the ticker tape has fluttered down and the candidates have stood
there, there are two arms mimicking a double eagle, the following poll will
show a rise perhaps a swift rise in shall we say the potential or intended vote
for Mr Bush. It's always translated into the shorthand of popularity, but many
more emotions are involved in looking over the candidates than liking and
disliking. Everybody agrees including the Republicans themselves that they are
in trouble and our daily and weekly journals are endlessly saying so, I'm
talking about the good, the sensible press not the miserable howling tabloids
who are more than ever in the hunt for what the president and Governor Clinton
rightly condemn as sleaze.

Incidentally, the noun is new, the adjective sleazy is old and was originally
used here to describe a fabric, rayon, that was cheap and shabby such as early
German immigrants attributed I'm sorry to say, to my favourite part of pre-war
Germany, sleaze from Silesia.

In the past month, we've been subjected to a continuous downpour of pieces
survey polls and panicky deductions from them all showing as many American
conservatives believe that Governor Clinton and Senator Gore will win in a
landslide. Mr Bush's own former secretary of education Mr Bennett – chivvied
and badgered on a panel programme to talk about what has become known as the
damn Quayle problem – said bluntly, "Dan Quayle is not the problem, George Bush
is the problem". Mention of Dan Quayle the battling Vice President was of
course inevitable. For many months, grave and reverent seniors, pundits and
Republicans even some close to Mr Bush have been privately urging the President
to take Mr Quayle off the ticket or in the usual way of such humiliations
invite the man himself to write a letter asking to be executed for the good of
the party.

The people who do this begging always have an alternative choice and excitedly
insist that their choice would revitalise the party and galvanise the public.
The two people most often mentioned were Mrs Elizabeth Dole, the very able and
beautiful former secretary of transportation now head of the American Red
Cross, and Mr Jack Kemp, the cabinet officer who has fumed in the outer offices
of the White House for two years directing the president's attention to the
rotting condition of the inner cities and offering a program called and for
long ignored "enterprise zones run by the inhabitants themselves". We all
suddenly heard about this plan and Mr Kemp's its author after the shattering
Los Angeles riot.

Now Mr Bush you may remember sent a wince-like a whistling wind through his
party by arriving then in Los Angeles in the shambles of the aftermath and
saying, "Well I'd planned to come out here later anyway, so this worked in
nicely". There's nothing like a spontaneous remark as an index of a man's
feeling and likeness to Perot's slip into promising blacks help for "your
people". Mr Bush's casual aside reflected what so many people find
disheartening in him. Of course, he's concerned about poverty, bad education
and drugs, crime, but he can't see why the programmes he's initiated aren't
good enough. In other words, he doesn't see these things as the core of
America's present sickness; he looks on them as nuisances distracting him from
his favourite energetic concern – foreign policy.

We'd all expected the coming Republican convention to be as automatic as a
hurdy-gurdy, a mechanical coronation, but since the polls have gone on showing
the president in a steady decline, there's a feeling in the air, which may on
the journalist's part be more wishful than anything else that something
dramatic and rebellious is going to take place at Huston.

As I speak, it seems certain that Mr Bush is determined to stay with Vice
President Quayle, but I think it likely that Mr Bush and the party have taken
heart from the sudden emergence of very serious foreign matters, which will
require a sensible and experienced hand. The trade agreements with Mexico, the
relief of the starving Somalians, the tension in South Africa, more than
anything the spreading disaster of Serbia on the loose. In the two months or
more after this convention, the comfort if not the security of America may
appear to be threatened seriously enough to make very many of the voters who
now reject or have abandoned Mr Bush come back to him laggedly, reluctantly as
their tried and true protector.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP