The Irish in New York City - 19 March 1993

A headline last Wednesday morning, "One more time with turmoil" and the
subheading "True to Tradition St Patrick's marchers face controversy". No truer
words were ever written; perhaps tradition is a little strong. The habit of
controversy is very recent, but what the tradition lacks in longevity it is
certainly made up in veracity.

A year or two ago, the brouhaha about the St Patrick's Day parade began, as
many other social conflicts have done, with the coming out, their word, of
homosexuals. I suppose that means it's been about 20 years since men and women
in large numbers asserted that homosexuality was a lifestyle of choice not as
for many centuries the sin that dares not speak its name. To the Catholic
Church, however, whether or not it speaks it name, it is still a sin and that
belief is at the root of the never-ending wrangle in this city between the
Church and the homosexuals who claim to be good Catholics.

The City of New York, its government, its laws and ordnances theoretically
stands in between, though according to who's mayor, it goes along with one side
or the other. Last year, our first black mayor, Mr David Dinkins, marched in
the parade under the banner of the so proclaimed gays and lesbians. He was
often booed along the way and he had several kinds of refuse thrown at him; he
has survived. This year, he stayed home respecting a decision of the courts,
which came only on the eve of the parade that denied the homosexual group a
permit to mount its own separate parade.

I better stop talking about homosexuals in general, because they're not as such
a party to the dispute anymore than our all of New York's Irish. The
adversaries in this contest are the ILGOs, the Irish Lesbian and Gay
Organisation, and the most venerable of Irish Catholic societies in this city,
the Ancient Order of Hibernians. The gays and lesbians, whom from now on we
shall call the ILGOs, were organised only a few years ago and now said to have
120 paid-up members. The ancient Hibernians and their order go back to 1836 to
a time when the prevailing Anglo Americans began to be alarmed at the thousands
of Irish immigrants pouring into New York from Liverpool and Cork; only 12
years later, the flood would arrive, the starving refugees from the Irish
potato famine.

The Anglo Americans were greatly bothered then by the noisy and effective Irish
entry into local politics. In 1835, Irishmen had organised to drive the local
Whigs from the polls and when the mayor and the sheriff's posse tumbled along
to restore law and order, they were put to flight with blinding showers of
green confetti and the threat of a brawl. The city fathers consequently
retaliated with ordnances just short of laws that sharply discriminated against
the Irish in housing and employment.

The year after that Keystone Cops chase between the Irish and the mayor and his
henchmen, 1836, the Ancient Order of Hibernians was founded. They've always
been the sponsors of the St Patrick's Day Parade here and after the disruption
of last years parade by angry onlookers resenting the marching homosexuals, the
Hibernians were first in line to claim an exclusive right to sponsor and
organise this parade, but they also announced that they would not tolerate a
homosexual group.

The city granted the Hibernians a permit, but ignored their threat to ban the
ILGOs, where upon the ILGOs appealed to the city to declare that the Hibernians
had no constitutional right to ban them. Everything, you'll notice, from
playing a radio in public to selling films of close-up sexual intercourse comes
down sooner or later to the First Amendment, the free press right of the
Constitution.

Well, the city couldn't at that point take on the Constitution. In the end, the
whole row went to the courts, but the ILGOs had thought up what they took to be
an even-handed fair solution, they asked for a permit to hold a separate parade
an hour or two before the big one. The judge said, "no, too big a risk of a
literal meeting of minds and bodies" – what we call a confrontation, especially
if as the ILGOs wanted, they should march south and at the end meet the
oncoming Hibernians. So now denied any legal right to march in the big parade
or to stage one of their own, what were they to do?

On the eve of the great day, they announced that they would defy the court and
the mayor and the city, most of all Cardinal O'Conner the head of this diocese
who always – except last year – always stands under a canopy outside St
Patrick's Cathedral nodding and blessing all the groups, the marching bands,
the societies, the local units, the drum majorettes, all the emerald tinged
bodies that go by: 198 units, 120,000 paraders. So not surprisingly, when the
nasty grey drenching day dawned, there were over 4,000 police at the ready and
800 more than last year.

As the Hibernians were assembling, down at 42nd Street and 5th Avenue, the
Irish Lesbians and Gays set up in marching order and waving banners "Cardinal
O'Conner is a bigot in a dress", "ILGOs against bigotry and intolerance",
"Freedom for ILGOs" and so on and they marched in triumph uptown exactly one
block. At 43rd Street they approached a wall of policemen who, like trainers
routinely leading their horses into their stalls, quietly arrested over 200,
which was just about the total muster of the ILGO brigade. There wasn't a
truncheon, a flailing of a stick or a visible bully. The ILGOs whatever their
word said kept to the promised deed, they practised civil not to say
differential disobedience, so in about 15 minutes the homosexual rebellion was
all over.

The big parade began and for four or five hours, the endless troops of the
faithful plodded through rain coming down as they say like stair rods. On the
sidewalk outside St Patrick's where onlookers under umbrellas still roused by
the cardinal's stinging peroration at the early mass, neither respectability
nor political correctness is worth one comma of the apostle's creed. There were
some present at the mass who, however, had other sinners in mind, a pity
rambled a Republican and a Hibernian, the day doesn't focus on the key issue
the British presence in Ireland.

This tremendous argument about the Hibernians and the ILGOs has been going on
for months and debated with eloquence, with absurdity, with on both sides
bigoted charges of bigotry. In the city council, in the pubs and clubs, on
television endlessly, it strikes me that two points were never made not anyway
in my hearing or reading. One is ironic and not likely to be made much of by
the faithful; it is who was St Patrick? He was a Scot kidnapped at the age of
17 by the brutal Romans in one of their press-gang raids, whipped off to
Ireland to be made a pig keeper, which he hated, but being an apprentice saint
endured for six years till he yearned to get back to his native land and he did
so. But at some point he had a dream in which he was urged by the Almighty to
fulfil his true mission to return to Ireland and preach the gospel. He did, he
made himself a Bishop, he baptised converts, he ordained priests and allowed
them to marry. How about that, Cardinal O'Conner? So his mission in life was
not to glorify the Irish but to save them from perdition.

The other point is the legal decision of the judge, which was no more and no
less than to approve the Ancient Order of Hibernians' constitutional right to
bar the homosexuals. The propriety of this ruling was never gone into by the
homosexuals who stayed with heated protests against bigotry, homophobia,
fascism and the like. One angry man brought up the analogy of McSorley's
Tavern, an old Irish pub downtown that's in the discrimination battles of the
'60s had at last to let in women, two women as it happened who were determined
to invade any public place where men liked to be with men. But note the word
"public" – McSorley's Tavern is public, so is any land or property owned by the
city or the state. In such places you may not under the law bar anyone on
account of race or religion, but the judge pointed out the Ancient Order of
Hibernians is a private society and like any other private club or society
owning its own premises it can legally keep its membership to men, to women, to
whites, to blacks; it can bar anybody it likes, bachelors, Italians,
Englishmen, left-handed people. This is the simple truth in law that the ILGOs
couldn't bear to face.

In spite of the Hibernians announcement that they welcomed open homosexuals in
the parade, but not marching under a banner that proclaimed them as something
special and different, the ILGOs didn't want that, they wanted to use the
parade maybe as a celebration of St Patrick but also as an advertisement for
open homosexuality.

Why do the Irish, Irish Americans perhaps most immigrants get so much more
inflamed about issues than their relatives in the homeland?

Well,for the Irish there's the long history of discrimination against them,
into just into my own time, employment agencies posted signs saying "no Irish
need apply", mainly though I think that when any immigrant or ethnic group
comes into the welter of this seething polyglot city, they make an extra effort
to show they're different and to water or exaggerate their roots.

An old Irish friend of mine who I've known for over 60 years wrote to me the
other day, his letter arrived coincidentally the morning of our parade. He
wrote, "as soon as an Irishman leaves home and enters America, he ceases to be
whatever he was, but behaves rather more so".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP