Clinton's high aproval rating and Monica Lewinsky - 24 July 1998

Well, from the northernmost tip of the far western state of Washington, zooming
south-east across 4,000 miles to the Florida Keys and from southern California
blazing north and east, the same distance to the rock-bound coast of Maine, the
whole country was burning and frying in days over 90 and in more than half the
nation, over 100º.

The weather bureau says it, they can't dredge up the record of a time when the
whole continent looked as if it suffered from a single climate. All except one
city, which is unique in this hemisphere, in having a micro-climate all its
own, within the small compass of the city of San Francisco. Across the bay from
the city, only three miles inland, it was 100º. Across the Golden Gate Bridge
and the first valley town to the north is in the mid-90s. But start from that
town and drive south two miles towards the bridge and coming into San
Francisco, you see round a bend, a vast, bulging, drifting cloud of wonderful
white, lazy fog. The mid-afternoon temperature in San Francisco – 63º.

Except for a tiny sliver of the Oregon coast, way up north on the Pacific,
which has a chronic climate, much like England's and undulating slate-grey
skies, more often than not, gentle rain, lots of umbrellas and very green
fields, it's the same story across the entire country. One network, the other
night, put together a collage of brush fires tearing across Arizona, of the
ruined horizons of beaches in Georgia, of corn and cotton in Texas, the citrus
fruits giving up the ghost in the tinder box of Florida and you'd think Dante
had been resurrected and re-staged the Inferno on an apocalyptic scale.

And you'd have one plausible reason, the farmers' reason, to why the stock
market dropped not far short of 200 points in two days. The "futures" of much
of the nation's fruits and vegetables don't look very rosy and I'm told by my
greengrocer, good heavens, a word I've never used in 60 years, it shows either
that the heat is getting to me in the worst way or later than sooner, we resort
to our origins. Just to be sure I looked it up in Webster. It says crisply,
greengrocer, a retailer in fruits and vegetables, in brackets, "Brit.". Well
then, Mr Shim, the Korean round the corner is my greengrocer, though he'd be
much surprised to hear it. He says that already the supplies of fresh stuff,
coming in from just about everywhere, near and far, are shrinking by the day
and the prices going up in inverse proportion.

It's a factor that Mr Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board
didn't, as they say, factor in in his warning the other day that just now what
the United States has to fear is less the continuing deterioration of the Asian
economy than the prospect of early inflation here at home. He has not, so far,
mentioned the heat or the farmers.

Why should he? He leaves an air-conditioned home to drive in an air-conditioned
car to an air-conditioned hearing room of, this week, the Senate Banking
Committee. One of these days I suspect he's going to be called to dispense his
learning before the Senate Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry Committee, which
is the main farming one, not to mention its various allied sub-committees,
Agriculture Credit, Agricultural Research, Foreign Agricultural Policy, Soil
and Water Conservation, Rural Development.

But rotting crops, bankruptcy and the prospect of inflation is all the farmers
talk about. Sooner than later, I suspect, their view will begin to strike the
distance vision of the city folks. As I think I mentioned last time, in the
good bad old days, the infernal summer weather was mostly what Americans
thought and talked about, that and baseball and what to stack up for a picnic
at the beach or wherever, because, as I said, Washington was a dead city.

Before the Second World War, that is before air-conditioning, both houses of
Congress and all their cronies and lobbyists and petitioners managed to get
through their labouring and haggling by the end of June and take to the hills
or lakes or seashore or mountain cabins and the fat trout rivers. Nowadays
Congress goes on and on, demonstrating a perfect example of Parkinson's Law.
You remember Parkinson? The wily Englishman, who, 40 years ago just put his
finger on the moment in the life of a bureaucracy when it can grow fat. His
immortal maxim – work expands so as to fill the time available for its
completion. Tell the Congress it has to be through before all hell descends
with the July heat and it slams its desks shut on the last day of June. But
tell them (you don't have to tell them, Senators and Congressmen with
snow-white hair have grown up under the impression that air-conditioning is a
law of nature), so you say, your work in Washington will take as long as you
need and they've got into the habit of saying, well we'll have to see how long
we have, to which the fatal answer is, all the time you care to take.

These morbid reflections are due to the impression that, if Congress still had
a deadline, we should by now know what the special prosecutor has been able to
find out about the president's relations with the immortal, it seems, Miss
Lewinsky. He would have already delivered his report to the chairman of the
House Judiciary Committee and after conferring with colleagues on the
committee, he would have decided to file charges of impeachment or to do
nothing at all.

After all these weary months, the whole Lewinsky thing came up late last fall.
We hear this week that what Mr Kenneth Starr, the special prosecutor, is trying
to find out from the Grand Jury that must be mighty weary by now, is what did
four Secret Servicemen on duty with the President on 28 December last hear
about Miss Lewinsky's visit to see the president? It was the last time she was
to be in the White House and the informed rumour, shall we say, has it that
Miss Lewinsky returned presents the president had given, that she talked with
the president's secretary before going into see him, that the president is
alleged to have maintained that she did no more than pop her head in and say
hello, goodbye but that Mr Starr has witnesses who allegedly believe that that
could have been the occasion when the president might have persuaded Mss
Lewinsky to testify falsely before a Grand Jury looking into, wait for it, Miss
Paula Jones's case against the President of the United States. Must I go on?
It'll all come out in the wash, one day, that's what Mr Starr says, while the
president and his lawyers seem quietly determined to say no more than he's
already said, which so far as we know, is to deny any wrongdoing.

But Miss Lewinsky is alleged to have said one thing to her lawyers and another
to a friend who secretly taped a long conversation with her, way back. Is that
legal? It surely ought not to be. It happened in Maryland and its legality is
yet another of the pack of legalities that are being gone into. There's no way
that this tangled web can be simply unravelled.

All I can say now is, first, the peril to the president is not that he may have
had sexual relations with this young woman. Weirdly, over 60% of the people
think he did. But Mr Clinton's popularity rating, is he doing a good political
job running the country, is also in the 60s, as high as ever. The question Mr
Starr, the special prosecutor, is dying to have positively answered in the
affirmative is, did Mr Clinton or a close friend of his or his devoted
secretary, advise or persuade Miss Lewinsky to lie by declaring innocence,
either to the sitting Grand Jury or in a deposition she's supposed to have
made. Was she persuaded by the president to lie?

That's the nub of the whole huge ball of twine, if twines have nubs, and yet
not another strand of meaningless string. You'll have heard from the few times
I've gone into this, to spare you the writhing coils of justice, you'll have
heard another paradoxical statistic, that a majority of Americans are sick and
tired of the whole thing and the majority takes a shriekingly bored view of the
persistence of Mr Starr.

Worse still for him is a recent poll which runs dramatically against the
popular verdict of six months ago. Suppose the President did have sex and
suppose he did persuade Miss Lewinsky to hush it up in public before the Grand
Jury and, granting that that is the crime that according to the Constitution
would make him eligible for impeachment, knowing all that, would you want to
see him thrown out of office? And whereas it used to be, "Oh in that case...",
over 60% again say, well if he did lie, then he did obstruct justice and suborn
perjury, just like Mr Nixon and he ought to go. Today about 50% say, "So what,
he's doing a great job, though as a man his character is not to be trusted".

It all comes down to a question that's rarely asked these days. Since the youth
of Dr Gallup, as long as polls have been taken, the popular answer has always
been firm to this question, "Yes the presidency must represent the moral
authority of the nation". Apparently today most people don't think so or don't
care and that too, is something Mr Henry Hyde, the very balanced, perceptive,
experienced and fair-minded chairman of the House Judiciary Committee will bear
in mind when and if he gets a report from Mr Starr suggesting grounds for
impeachment.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP