Failing to predict the future - 9 January 1998

Of all the prophets and false prophets who assail us in the New Year, there's
one who's come through absolutely on the button – the climatologists, who 15
years ago spotted a huge stretch of unusually warm water floating across the
central Pacific Ocean. It's the reason why today we New Yorkers are feeling our
way through a dense, warm fog, with a cold or a cough or, you may have noticed,
a throat.

The phenomenon of a thousand miles of warm surface water first appeared on
Christmas Eve off Peru, hence it was dubbed after the Christ Child, El Niño.
They predicted then that, at indeterminate intervals – nine, ten, 15 years –
this stretch of surface warm water would block the cold, and as far as the fish
are concerned, the nutritious water that rises from the ocean bottom, with a
result that the Peruvian catch took off hundreds of miles south, to Chile.

But the larger, unknown effect was to be worldwide. Immense droughts in
Australasia and Indonesia, steady, heavy rains along the California coast and a
remarkably mild winter in the north-eastern United States. And so it was and so
again, it is, with Australia suffering huge fires, California's coast drenching
and we here in New York City, whose normal average temperature at this time of
year is about 20º F, 12 below freezing, have been staggering around in 60º,
with warm winds from the south meeting the cold ground, producing dense,
city-wide fogs, zero visibility at the airports.

Of all the times of the year, this is the one when professional commentators
are expected to come up with a prophecy or two about the immediate future of
the world, outside their own bailiwick. I don't know when this custom, when
indeed the custom of the professional commentator, columnist, came in. I gather
he didn't really emerge until after the First World War and only one journalist
I ever knew or heard of paused to wonder, as he put it, how we came to be.

This columnist has been dead nearly 30 years, but he's not likely to be
forgotten by anybody who could enjoy watching a man kick the language around as
deftly and hilariously as anyone since Mark Twain. Westbrook Pegler was the
name. A tall, beetle-browed, straight-backed as a grenadier, Chicago-bred
newspaperman, who like many another fine American writer, started out as a
sports writer and was one of the best until he did a murderously thorough job
of exposing the crooked life of the labour boss of the motion picture unions.
He went into the life and professional methods of this boss with so much
careful digging that he was able to begin a whole series of reports on the man
with the simple firecracker of a sentence, Willie Bioff is a convicted pimp.
Period.

Mr Bioff never sued. On his way to gaol he simply complained, I've been
Peglerised. But one day Pegler graduated from baseball and the horses and
football, to writing funny, downright pieces on anything that crossed his mind
and what was crossing his mind during his best days was the folly and
wastefulness of politicians, the brutal absurdities of Mussolini, the lunacy of
Hitler and the mounting crimes of Joseph Stalin – and that at a time when all
the best liberal opinion in the West looked on Hitler as a monster but on
Stalin as a stern, but interesting agricultural reformer.

And then, one New Year's Day, the time when the readers most expect you to tell
them what's in the wind, Pegler sat down and wrote of all the fantastic fog
shapes that have risen off the swamp of confusion since the Great War, the most
futile is the deep-thinking, hair-trigger columnist or commentator who knows
all the answers just off-hand and can settle great affairs three days or even
six days a week. Being one of these myself, I've been trying to figure out how
we, myriad-minded us, ever came about.

Well, he looked over, without naming anyone, the current crop of famous
commentators and having the privilege of knowing most of them in private life,
he decided that we include experts on the budget who can't balance an expense
account, economic experts who can't find the 5.15 on a suburban timetable, much
less read a balance sheet, labour experts who never did a lick of work in their
lives, pundits on the technological age who can't put a fresh ribbon in their
own typewriters and resounding authorities on the problems of the farmer who
never grew a geranium in a pot. Maybe, he concluded, I shouldn't be writing
like this, revealing secrets of the trade and all, but I just got to thinking
it over and, honest to God, we are getting plumb ridiculous.

I never knew another journalist, man or woman, who had the simple honesty to
confess our frailties, most especially the political columnists who take
themselves with a seriousness verging on papal pomp. But there's enough truth
in Pegler's confessional to persuade me this time to do no prophesying.

But surely, apart from journalists of many specialties and apart from the
proved expertise of the climatologists, this time there must be experts in
finance, history, economics, the rise and fall of great nations, internal
medicine and so on and so on, of course, and we certainly ought to defer to the
best of them in meditating on the immediate future, on what it is likely to
happen.

Well sir, two things, one daily habit and one experiment a few years ago, make
me sceptical of the experts as much as of anybody. The habit is a thoroughly
disreputable habit I got into lately. It sets in sometime in the late
afternoon, between the end of the typewriter's clacking and the start of the
more charming sound of the tinkle of ice. I turn on a channel that for 24 hours
a day covers the markets and after they've closed down spends the rest of the
evening interviewing a raft of experts, 30, 40, 50 of them in turn, on what
happened today to the market, why and what's likely to happen tomorrow.

I used to be mightily impressed by this stream of expertise, until one day a
few weeks ago, I decided to keep tabs on the stuff they were saying, past,
present and future and I discovered that 50% of the time, their predictions for
tomorrow, never mind next week, next year, were way off. Since you didn't know
which 50% to believe, they might have just as well have held their breath. The
experiment I mentioned, which only added to my doubts about prophets,
professional or amateur, happened in that never-to-be-forgotten high summer of
1991.

I was wakened, hours before my normal time, to rise and shine by a telephone
call from my daughter in Vermont and through the fog of some dense dream I
heard her say the ludicrous sentence, "Gorbachev's been arrested". I said,
don't be silly, Gorbachev is the one who does the arresting. Well as most of
you will remember, that was only the first of a series of totally unanticipated
shocks.

Unanticipated by whom? That's my point. Not only by you and me but by the most
famous experts, the internationally distinguished Kremlinologists. In the
following weeks I consulted half a dozen of them, either in person or through
their latest writings and I'm talking about true experts, so far as modern
scholarship can judge, men who had devoted their lives to the history of the
Soviet Union. All I wanted to know was, what happened? Why had Communism, 70
years of a terrible, swift revolutionary system, why had it collapsed in just
ten days?

Well none of them, in their writings, in their thoughts before that morning of
19 August 1991, had ever been visited by a suspicion, let alone a theory, that
the Soviet system was about to be over. None of them had a clue. There was, so
far as I know, only one statesman who was on record as saying that the
Communist empire, the actual Soviet Union was about to collapse and we could
help the collapse along by going beyond them in their bluster about abolishing
nuclear weapons. But to scholars everywhere, that statesman was a dummy. His
name was Ronald Reagan.

Mind you, I'm not mocking these Soviet experts. None of us, I dare say, with
their history, their scholarship, their devotion to their subject, would have
done any better, but tapping them after the event for an explanation and
finding them as ignorant and bewildered as you and me, only went to show that
about great events, nobody is a prophet until it's happened.

Which brings me to today and to another favourite journalist, I quoted him the
other week, Paul Samuelson, on the possibly menacing effect on all of us of the
Asian financial slump. I quoted him then because his record of prophecy in
economic matters has been remarkable. So you can see how, having declined for
once to make any New Year predictions on my own account, I should turn to him
in the hope he might bring us appropriate cheer.

And what has he to offer? The rather bleak conclusion that the inability of
humans to spot the really important trends and events to come is, as he puts
it, routine. What is certainly true, he wrote this week, is that the most
important trends and events of 1998 won't have been predicted at all. This was
so last year when Asia's economic turmoil surprised everyone. Hardly anyone
foresaw the collapse of Communism, the advent of AIDS, the explosion of the
internet and the dramatic drops in this country in crime and inflation. Our
best seers are regularly humbled.

And so they are. The best thing is to make no guesses, hope for the best,
expect the worst and maintain a cheerful expression.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP