Freezing weather and earthquakes in 1994 - 21 January 1994

There have been many momentous things happening both here and abroad this past
week, this month and I hope we'll take up one or two of them. But if ever there
was a fortnight when you have more pressing things on your mind and body than
momentous events, this has been that time.

Simply the weather, mostly quite beautiful to look upon, but just about as
beautiful and deadly as those pictures of Scott or Amundson on sparkling
cloudless days at the pole. About two-thirds of north America from the
north-west and Pacific coast down through the Midwest and the east, but then
amazingly south almost to the Gulf of Mexico paralysing, Arctic cold.

Because I live in New York City, I can report that New Yorkers like other
metropolitans – like Parisians, like Londoners – think they are at the centre
of the earth, so they grow hysterical when the temperature drops below, below
zero. And let me say it once for people and journalists in temperate countries,
that below does not mean below freezing, it means below zero, 32 degrees below
freezing. So for many nights in the city, we had about 37/38 degrees of frost,
frightful. But then you look around at the rest of the country, the big cities
of the Midwest and beyond, Chicago 28 blow zero, Minneapolis to whom 28 below
is normal winter life but this time 48 below zero, 80 degrees of frost – not
imaginable to, say, west Europeans. My wife and my daughter up in Vermont
usually talk to each other, every second or third day and when we complain that
the thermometer is at zero, she usually says "well we're hoping it'll climb up
there". This week they had 30 below every day. If you cover your ears and nose
and the rest of you, it can be a tonic experience just to be alive and moving.

We've had most days during this dreadful month January have been brilliant,
diamond bright, ice-pick cold, but it's not just the extreme cold around most
of the country that's caused all the miseries, but a perverse sequence of
weather. First snow, light or massive, then a following thaw, but then a
deceitful day of rain and then suddenly the thermometer toboggans and hundreds
of thousands of roads, main, sub-main, county, back- country roads are immense
ice slides.

I imagine this past week or two, more millions of Americans were unable to get
to work than at any time in memory and the consequent griefs – burst pipes
collapsing ceilings, no power, no light. This and not Iran-gate and not Mr
Yeltsin, not the resignation of Admiral Inman, not even the bizarre Lorena
Bobbitt trial, this is what most people were either talking about or having to
cope with across the area of western Europe.

Now most of the country, the northern half of it has this sort of weather every
winter, but lately there's been a drastic shift in the route, the passage of
the prevailing westerlies. Normally they come in from the Pacific turn up north
into Canada dip down through the upper Midwest and then go on straight east
through upstate New York and New England bringing much cold and masses of snow
and brilliant days and icicle nights to what is the top third of the continent.

The climate of mainland America is controlled by the currents of the central
Pacific Ocean and for the past six, seven, maybe 10 years some shift of that
controlling current in the central Pacific has produced a dramatic switch in
the direction of the westerlies' flow across this continent, they still blow in
from the Pacific, turn north-east go up into Canada along into the Midwest but
then, for reasons the best meteorologist cannot wholly explain, they swoop
directly south sometimes sparing the east coast completely and roar on down
through the south, the Deep South all the way to the Gulf of Mexico. A
temperature of 12 below freezing in northern Florida is bizarre, 20 inches of
snow in South Carolina is ridiculous and nobody I'm sure ever sings anymore
that old song about Dallas, that "Texas town that never seen ice or snow".

The trouble is throughout this great sweep of the Deep South, about a third of
the area of Europe, they're not equipped, they've never been prepared as the
north is for this unusual, to them, weather. I doubt very much whether in this
disastrous arctic visitation any of the Southern or mid-south towns have for
instance stores of sand and salt. So its the combination of the big shift in
the route of the westerlies with the constant ice storms that have caused most
of the massive interruptions across the continent of work, play, transport, the
practice of building, of deliveries, of medicine and all the other services,
all compounded by temperatures everywhere of 15 to 20 below the normal in any
given place. It's a miracle and a sign of how splendidly well organised from
long experience most cities are that so far there are no more I believe than
about 150 dead. For us sissies in New York, there is tremendous news that word
has been flashed like the flares that signalled the approach of the Spanish
Armada by next Monday we may see 40º Fahrenheit. Glory be and God save the
homeless.

I'm sure some of you are astonished by my not having even mentioned southern
California and the earthquake. Everybody I imagined has seen the pictures, they
sufficed to plant a true impression of damage and destruction and hint at the
far-ranging lack of light, power, food, water and a roof over their head. Poor
old California, first the recession, when everywhere else seems to be climbing
out of it, the government comes along and fires a quarter of a million people
who work in and around the military and naval bases shutdown by Congress, which
affects the economy of many more than 250,000. And then the ghastly riots and
the trials and then the usual hazard of a long drought, the arrival of the
dreaded Santa Ana,the hot crackling wind coming in from the desert and making
tinder of 1,000 homes on the coast – and now an earthquake. And worst, an
earthquake erupting not from one of the three infamous faults but from an
unknown fault 80 miles long, which is only now for the first time being traced.

For me, perhaps as a chronic onlooker or a heartless reporter, the memory that
will stay green is a roving television camera shot through a dense section of
Tokyo and groups of thoughtful quiet Japanese hearing about the new fault and
thinking that below them a mile, half a mile, lies their own all too well
identified fault – when would that crack and explode? The Japanese weatherman
said, "we really must do what the Angelinos do, educate our children better in
earthquake lessons what to do, where to lie, to collect food, candles, so on."
Why should this image be so much more poignant than that of people without a
home, I don't know.

Well, once cosily indoors looking out on the great beauty of Central Park, the
great reservoir and ice pond, the rolling fields of snow, the trees sharp and
black and the children sledging down the hills. The whole thing like a
marvellous canvas by Breugel called Little Ones at Play, then it's possible to
think of one momentous topic.

After seven years of an investigation costing about $40 million, the special
prosecutor appointed to get to the bottom of the dreadful Iran-Contra mess, the
secret trading of arms to Iran in the dim hope of getting those American
hostages back and then the illegal use of the funds, the cost of those arms to
finance the rebels fighting the leftist government of Nicaragua or such aid
either in money or the weapons the money bought had been banned by act of
Congress.

Well, after seven years, the prosecutor came through with a final report, it
reminds us that though 11 men went to jail for criminal behaviour, the two
ringleaders of the underground diversion of Iranian funds were indicted, tried,
convicted and by the force of a couple of fine technicalities on appeal were
acquitted. Mr Walsh, the prosecutor has produced devastating judgements on
President's Reagan and Bush, he believes Mr Reagan knew what was going on, not
the diversion of funds, but connived at the illegality because he truly
believed he was acting in the national interest. Mr Walsh on the contrary
believes Mr Bush has no altruistic excuse acted shabbily and knowingly.

So in the end, what that $40 million worth of taxpayers money has proved I
think beyond all reasonable doubt is that the Iran-Contra plot was conceived in
the White House, involved both the president and vice president of the United
States and was not just a reckless secret foreign policy conducted by a rogue
hunter in the White House basement. It's a disheartening miserable judgement
and you might expect outcries for reform, bills to give Congress sharper powers
as a watchdog of the presidential initiative in foreign affairs, all sorts of
political even constitutional cures might have been expected to see that
nothing so brazenly illegal could happen again inside the White House. But I'm
afraid it's taken so long, seven years to arrive at this judgement that it's
had quite the worst possible effect, the public is weary and doesn't care
anymore.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP