Chernobyl and the Star Wars defence program - 14 September 1990

It occurs to me that for a month now I have talked about one thing, Kuwait, and
what followed on Saddam Hussein’s invasion of it.

Kuwait, a country that most of us two months ago could probably have said very
little about. When it lurched into the headlines and became a fixture on the
box I thought of Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain in the long ago, talking
about a faraway country that similarly seized our attention in 1938.

A remote country he called it, implying in the most delicate way that it was
not the sort of nation over which Britons would go to war, Czechoslovakia. He
was right about its remoteness, it was a small, not a powerful country and
though we were to hear a lot about it from then on, we had only the dimmest
picture of it. What we knew we heard over the radio.

Today practically nowhere on the globe is remote, we see the pictures before we
can pronounce the name. I’ve just seen a doomsday programme on Chernobyl. One
of the chilling assets of glasnost is that the Russians finally allowed an
American reporter to go through there with the American doctor who went in
immediately after the catastrophe and who ever since has been advising Moscow
and ministering to the afflicted and the alarming numbers of children who might
have been afflicted.

It’s struck me now, as it vaguely occurred to me at the time, that perhaps the
most significant event since the Second World War was Chernobyl. The effect of
its radiation damaged crops and herds in Wales, fruit and vegetables in
Northern Italy, and forced the Scandinavians to destroy most of the reindeer
that provided their livelihood.

I wondered then, and I’m even more curious now, how Chernobyl affected Mr
Gorbachev and President Reagan. How much that demonstration of the immense
lethal spread of radiation gave second thoughts to the two leaders and led them
to decide that there really was no future for the human race in the prospect
not of an all-out, nuclear war, but of one big accident.

I have not checked with anybody at the Pentagon, or even with anybody in either
the Reagan or Bush administrations but I do know that several influential
congressmen who had voted for continuing Star Wars research were jolted into
the thought that even a successful Star Wars defence would trigger a huge
disaster.

Success even among Star Wars most enthusiastic advocates meant that the
stratosphere shield would stop 98% of the enemies missiles getting through. But
then you had scientists, old Arthur C Clarke off there in Sri Lanka for one,
pointing out that if only 2% of the warheads came through, there would be
enough radiation to paralyse many countries, if not a continent.

Some day I’d like to know if the men at the top in the United States and the
Soviet Union came to that dread conclusion. If they did, it would explain more
than an unexplained surge of goodwill or Mr Gorbachev’s need to feed his
peoples why we emerged suddenly into the new era of goodwill and partnership.

It would also explain why in the past year or so the leaders and the military
men in both nations have seen as the real threat to all of us the acquisition
of nuclear weapons by some nameless madman or dictator who today many people
think has a name.

Well, my original point in remarking on our preoccupation with Saddam Hussein,
the American military presence, the heartening unanimity of the United Nations
and the rest of it, was to suggest that, to put it simply, life goes on in the
United States as elsewhere and now I dare to say is the time to go back to
interrupted business.

The first item will surprise, maybe shock, some people, but I’ve had letters
from listeners who feel they have been tantalised beyond bearing. What was that
you were going to tell us about? Wait for it – the cockroach.

I hinted in a previous talk that the cockroach may be the answer to industrial
productivity. Could – if the professor I had in mind successfully completes his
research – could dramatically affect the mass production industries and the
economies of the United States, Japan, western Europe.

Well the professor’s name is Dr Robert Full a biologist, and his speciality is
the mechanics of locomotion in animals and humans. He came to see early on in
his research that the same principles of energy govern humans as animals,
whether they have two legs or as many as the centipede.

He clocked his animals on a treadmill and measured the force of their muscles
as they walked, ran, or crawled and he discovered that most muscle energy in
all of us, and all of them, is spent not on moving but on resisting, battling
the pull of gravity – so it’s to stay on the ground.

Of all the creatures he studied he found that the most successful in staying on
the ground at speed was the cockroach. It covers a distance of 50 body lengths
in one second which is the equivalent of a six-foot man keeping up a speed of
200 miles an hour.

They – the cockroaches – can lope along at say, only 50 miles an hour on all
six legs but when they’re going for the Olympic record they tear along on only
two legs.

Now, where does the lesson for industry come in? Dr Full recently lectured to
the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and having confirmed that most of
today’s robots – mobile robots used for assembling industrial parts – have only
two legs since they were created to mimic humans, why not, he suggested, go to
the cockroach thou sluggard and build robots with six legs which would use far
less energy and bounce along at speed instead of clunking along like a human
with advanced arthritis. It is true, his audience now realised that when we
came to build mechanical stand-ins for humans, we automatically used humans as
the model.

Well I’m told that the mechanical engineers were mightily impressed by Dr Full
and who knows, one day when six-legged robots whiz around and assemble a motor
car, a tank, a refrigerator, in five minutes instead of a week or whatever it
takes, the name of Dr Robert Full may take its place alongside Marconi, Henry
Ford, Thomas Edison.

Talking about scientific research, I came on a very disturbing piece about a
trend in American medical research that until now has gone generally unnoticed
during the ten years or so it’s been developing. It is nothing less than the
flight of American clinical research – the trying-out of new drugs and
procedures on groups of patients – the flight from America to Europe, Japan,
and surprise, South America.

Time was – and we’ve always assumed the time was any time since the Second
World War – that Americans loved what are called patient trials and were best
at it. Just look, Americans would routinely say, at the great stack of Nobel
Prizes that Americans have collected since the '50s.

Well now, many American doctors busy researching new drugs have grown impatient
with the drastic cuts ordered in government research during the Reagan years,
impatient with the over-zealous regulation of research by the government and
universities, which requires rounds of committee meetings and forms filled out
in triplicate. Also, private medicine is too strapped by the purchase of high
technology machines to put much money into research.

So the proof is now abundant in many fields, in cardiology, blood chemistry,
psychiatry, alcoholism, child medicine, and on and on – a doctor in Michigan
interested in a device to clean out clogged coronary arteries went off to test
it in Germany. A Nobel Prize winner in New Orleans took his research on
endocrine drugs to France. A psychiatrist here up in the Bronx who’s studying
alcohol metabolism in women found it practically impossible to round up enough
women patients here and he went off, with an Italian collaborator, to Italy.

These were thought to be random examples of impatient doctors who happened to
find conditions for patient trials easier, less hampered by bureaucracy abroad.
But a doctor who is, so to speak, a researcher on research has recently tracked
through ten years of distinguished foreign medical journals which once carried
a conspicuous load of American papers and he found that over the past decade,
the foreign papers have doubled and trebled as the papers from American sources
have gone down and down.

This drastic change, this flight of basic research has not yet hit the public
via the networks, when it does and Americans discover that people abroad are
being successfully treated with drugs they can’t get here there’ll be, no doubt
about it, a popular outcry.

And now from Japan – where else – comes a bit of ingenious technology that will
surely be a blessing to mankind and womankind. Mitsubishi has put out a wizard
of a video cassette recorder which automatically cuts out, without a breath of
a pause, the commercials, the ads on any programme or movie that you care to
tape.

It started in the spring and throughout the summer Japanese movie buffs, gadget
freaks and plain citizens bought them and applauded them as a giant step in the
march of civilisation. Alas, the outraged sleeping giants of the big Japanese
television network and the advertising agencies who sell time arose and turned
into hackers – they mixed broadcast signals with electronic gremlins that
scramble the image.

At the moment, the New York Times reports gravely, Mitsubishi is weighing
whether it is more important to make viewers happy or maintain harmony in the
world of Japanese business. Guess who will win.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP