Deaths of tourists in Florida - 17 September 1993

Of course the stunning news of the American week, perhaps of the worlds week,
was a picture, a truly moving picture we all saw on television the eerie, not
to believed sight of a president of the United States gently touching the
shoulder blade of a prime minister of Israel as he advanced and shook the hand
of Yasser Arafat. Looking at that incredible image on the box, a friend said,
"have you ever seen anything like it".

It seemed tasteless at the time to say what went through my mind, but I thought
of a scene equally preposterous, equally improbable but because we'd not been
warned about it, it was even more literally shocking. It was a day when on our
evening news, I saw at the door of 10 Downing Street about to receive a warm
handshake from Prime Minister Callaghan the in Britain anyway, the loathed
former head of the Irgun terrorist gang that blew up the King David Hotel, none
other than Menachem Begin.

I mention my stunned feelings the next day to an American friend, an amiable
cynic, and he said, "Wait a while, 10 years from now Yasser Arafat will be a
guest at the White House". Well no commentary of mine is likely to improve on
other commentators or on the sombre warning note of Mr Rabin who before the
night was out said "the best thing you could feel was hope".

Let's turn to a topic that touches more people abroad than anything else I can
think of that's happened here, it will be no news to you that tourism is the
nub the backbone of the economy of Florida. A fact, which I must say in passing
I never, can comprehend considering the immense variety of superior touring
delights throughout many of the other 49 states and I can only attribute
Florida's conspicuous success as a tourist Mecca to the triumph of a cliché,
namely the unchanging lush stereotype of the Florida advertising posters
folders and television commercials. A famous old economist long gone included
in his masterwork, which was on the economic geography of north America, a
photograph of four palm trees throwing deep shadows on a sandy beach and a half
dozen lazing tourists and far off in the blue green sea a scatter of happy
swimmers. The caption under the photograph read "'Florida's chief crop and
chief source of income, the healthy condition of these few small palm trees is
prove that repeated photographing does not injure a tree".

The fact is and it's a puzzle to the states that have the luck to contain great
scarlet canyons or majestic alps or even like upstate New York forests and
mountain valleys and gorges and great lakes. The fact is that the Florida
Chamber of Commerce, it's called a "department" has been probably the most
successful of all the states in touting itself as a tourist paradise 31,000
million or $31 billion a year is the normal revenue from tourists, or was.

No wonder the secretary of the Florida Department of Commerce called the twin
killings of a German and then of a British tourist in one week "catastrophic
for tourism", the first calls abroad indicated that there might be as high as
30% cancellations, so he with the permission of the governor and other state
officials announced a step that I doubt any other country attractive to
tourists has ever taken. Florida has indefinitely suspended all its tourist
advertising both here and abroad and around the country. The knife has been
turned in that wound by newspapers reproducing the New York Times's big story
with an inset map of the state and a memorial list of the nine victims of
random shooting since last September, four Germans, two Englishmen, two
Canadians and a Venezuelan diplomat on a stopover to his post in Switzerland.

Many of us, however, outraged by the killings themselves must have felt sorry
for the governor of Florida standing before a microphone trying to sound
authoritative taking charge, what could he say other than make a general
promise to bring criminals to justice to stamp out crime, how do you do that?

For the time being, he has ordered all rest areas lay-bys on the interstate
highways to be guarded and closed at night and that should take quite a bite
out of the tourist's revenue in a state which is twice the size of Scotland.
What else could he do? The stable resident population of Florida is 13
millions; every year 42 million outsiders visit the state. Since most of them
go there, as the saying goes, to have fun, the outlook for general peace and
domestic tranquillity is pretty dim. To be brutally thoughtful, it seems
surprising to me that given the dense congestion of the races, 80% white, 20%
black or Hispanic, the vast numbers of people employed in serving up all sorts
of pleasure, the gamey air of Miami, the existence of many young gangs with
whom as in Los Angeles the police can barely cope, it is surprising that there
is so little casual murder.

Now this thought is I realise no help to the family and friends of the nine
shot in one year or to the family and friends of the others who will likely be
shot in the coming year, less publicised but hardly less hurtful to their
families are the many more victims of hotel assaults, sniping attacks on
motorists in the north of the state, which provoked another precident that made
the travel agents wince. The American Automobile Association put out a general
alert to all travellers on the Florida highways. Something occurs to me, I
think of my early sorties into the, well, it would misleadingly melodramatic to
say the underworld of various American cities, I'm thinking of times in my
early days when I visited certain cities Memphis, New Orleans, East St Louis,
Chicago with the single purpose of checking out their jazz dives.

And in the 1930s certainly, if dance orchestras in the big hotels weren't your
bag, you naturally went into dark town the black quarters and came on the great
men you knew or had heard about and unless they were Duke Ellington they played
on upright pianos in smoky bars or in dubious roadhouses. It never crossed
anyone's mind at the time not to go there. Whereas today, I cannot think of any
white friends in their right minds who would dream of going up to Harlem for an
evening's fun and the same goes for the dark towns of a score of cities, but in
two successive years when I roamed the country and again twice during the
Second War, I never had the slightest misgiving in wandering through these
places and often sitting in a corner the only white man.

Now in saying that you never dreamed of violence or danger I am not saying
there was less than now though attacks by blacks on whites for instance I'm
sure were very rare or maybe I should say rarely reported that's the run. I
wonder how many random murders there were in southern Florida in the sunshine
gambling belt in the 1930s and '40s. My hunch is that there must have been as
many hushed up as ever reported and hunted down, but today there is television.
In Los Angeles, remember there was a home-movie camera and I should guess that
there could hardly be a kind of murder more difficult to hush up than the
murder of a tourist. Every one of those nine in Florida last year, the scene,
the suspects, the police follow-up has been televised by night and day and seen
around the world.

In the 1870s there was a massacre in Wyoming by cowboys of an entire town of
homesteaders, the news of it didn't reach the outside world till 10 years
later. Today, it would be as notorious and as universally pictured as the
massacre of that cult in Waco Texas. All I'm saying is that television makes us
aware that evening of any public murder of a kidnapping of a big fire anywhere
in Europe or the Americas and it leaves us from time to time with a picture of
a world going down in flames or the smoke of gunfire.

Another example, in the past year, there have been a dozen or so murders, rapes
at various spots along the 100-odd miles of Long Island. The other Sunday there
was a cover story in the New York Times's Sunday magazine, the whole piece on
Long Island as an island of crime much to the annoyance disgust even of those
of us who lived there. Pick out four or five rapes, three or four murders in a
population of three quarters of a million and they've all had exhaustive and
exhausting coverage on television and in the local press, put them together
make a piece about them and you I'm sure leave an indelible impression with
strangers of Long Island, not as a splendid ocean playground for the residents
of Brooklyn and Queens, not as a beautiful fishing ground 100 miles or more of
the sound, 30 miles of a landlocked bay, 100 miles of ocean and the big boys,
the stripe bass, and further out the plunging swordfish, or a place of many
music centres much theatre, four universities. At Flushing Meadows 30,000
people hoarse over the tennis championships, no no in this version Long Island
is a haven for the assassin and the pervert. I'm quite sure that has done our
tourist business no good.

For the first time, I met a visiting Englishman who raised an eyebrow at the
mention of a home on Long Island he had read the New York Times, so though I
know it will not be a consoling thought to the family of those nine slain
tourists, I think somebody ought to point out to intending visitors that
Florida is a great many other things than random highway shootings and that
nine in 42 million is a very low incidence of crime in hectic pleasure seeking
land.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP