Kennedy's rocking chair - 3 May 1996

Early on a fine June morning under a blue, blue sky, we took off from Point
Mugu, a coastguard base in Southern California and we clattered off in a small
fleet of helicopters out onto the huge sail-less pacific.

We were the travelling White House press corps, which in those days consisted
of no more than say 15-20 correspondents plus yours truly, the only foreign
correspondent present. Not more than say 10 miles offshore there loomed up a
monster of a ship with a flat top comprising, it seemed, several football
fields. It was the aircraft carrier, the USS Kitty Hawk. We were to see a
performance of missile firing both by day and by night from the Kitty Hawk's
yawning deck, an event that had been postponed for one official reason and
another.

But now the navy was ready and the president, who had flown on ahead of us, was
ready and the day was perfection. What we were to see was how missiles from the
carrier's deck shooshed at impossible speeds off to the horizon to pinpoint
drag targets - large flying red banners, which looked to us no bigger than
handkerchiefs - they were red to signify that they were Soviet targets. The
daytime performance was brilliant indeed, enormous sleek missiles whooshed up
from below, they were phantoms so-called and they skimmed across the bow and
were lost to sight in a matter of seconds.

And then coming up on elevators, like a sudden plague of wasps was a fleet of
little manned jets, a hundred or more of them, they unfolded their wings and
whizzed off over the blue water till they were recalled and came hurtling back
at 150 miles an hour to be retrieved with a jolt by the arresting cables. But,
for beauty and theatrical impressiveness, nothing could compare with the night
show. The great ship immovable in this most motionless of oceans, the last long
red streaks of the sun dissolving into the horizon, and the coming on of an
eerie sort of darkness - an encompassing, purple twilight, and a long silence
suddenly punctured by horns and buzzing sounds punched up by coordinators on an
immense console winking in several colours in the darkness of the upper bridge.

What I was doing there will appear in good time.

In response to these winking orders, small armies of figures in phosphorescent
uniforms came running and advancing and retreating across the deck, way down
below, like bright clockwork toys. At intervals, there was a deep rumble, as of
underground steam pressure and a huge missile exploded out of the ship's belly,
rose like a flying submarine and could just be seen in pursuit of an
illuminated flying target faraway. There was a faint tiny explosion, the target
fell like a shot bird. The missile vanished, an expiring cinder. And we all
clapped heartily, we had hit the Soviet target.

We hit all the Soviet targets that night, of course, and the president was well
pleased. Before the show started, we'd been the guests of the officers at
dinner in an underground dining room about the twice the size of the Queen
Mary's. Then we were led along many decks and corridors towards a lower bridge
where we were told we should have a privileged view of things. The most
privileged view of all, of course, would be given to the president, sitting
with the admiral on the top most bridge.

As the reporters were pattering on our way, I felt smart slap on my shoulder an
affectionate oath spoken from behind, and lo, a friend from the very beginning
of America's war in the Pacific, a young officer I'd known and had merry
evenings with back in February in 1942 and I was assigned as the correspondent
to San Francisco, the 7th Naval District, and most secret, never to be written
about, the net, the underwater net across San Francisco Bay. Well the young
officer had broadened and grizzled slightly – hadn't we all – and was now vice
admiral over the Pacific Fleet. With a quick pull on my arm he said: "You don't
want to go up there, follow me."

We sneaked up a narrow winding stairway, came to a small door, knocked three
times and there appeared a junior officer with what Briton's call a torch and
American's less frighteningly a flashlight. He cupped it with one hand so it
would not disturb the surrounding blackness of the enclosed bridge. As we
ducked in and crept into the only two seats in this tiny room, half of which
was a semi-circle of the console, there was one silhouetted figure that was as
still and sharp as a cut-out - the back of a man's head resting against the
high back of a most extraordinary chair to be in this tiny cockpit, it was a
rocking chair, and the head was of course the head of President John Kennedy.

Later, I asked my old friend about it. I thought I knew everything about the
physical condition of President Kennedy and how much of it was, by an unspoken
agreement in those days, kept secret. I recalled the brief uproar during the
primary campaign when Senator Lyndon Johnson was running against Kennedy and
the Johnson team put out the scurrilous news that Senator Kennedy had Addison's
disease. So he had, which explained the yellowish pigment of his skin
sometimes. He also occasionally appeared to have a hump, known I discovered
later, as a cortisone hump. We noticed these things at the time, as simply on
and off days of a very busy public man.

Anyway, there was then a code, unwritten, never brought up, which would have
made it tasteless to mention such things. As for Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson's
foul accusation, the Kennedy camp promptly denied it and no more was said. So
as I say, after the brilliant missile show that June 1963 in the Pacific, I
asked my old sailor friend how about the rocking chair, where did you get it?
"Oh," he said. "It's his, nobody else's. They fly it everywhere, seems he has
to have it, he can't walk for too long without either taking a bath or going to
work in the rocking chair".

More than a year later, when I was making a memorial album about President
Kennedy, compiling many recorded interviews with every sort of person who'd
known him, I mentioned to Mrs Kennedy that when he didn't have that slightly
waxy complexion, he always looked as if he'd just emerged from a bath. She
said: "So he had, he took them all the time. It was the only place, the only
time he didn't feel the pain in his back." That was from his naval war wound.
You can see now why the most vivid memory of that memorable night on the Kitty
Hawk was not the magic of the soaring missiles leaping like dolphins and
playing the apocalypse, but that rocking chair.

First, it made me realise how drastically the conventions, you might want to
say courtesies, of reporting have changed in 30 years, some might say it
deteriorated. The first hint I had of a new, not a new convention, but you
might say a completely new emotion among a new generation of reporters, it was
in 1958 just five years before that night with Kennedy in the Pacific. There'd
been, I recall, a long debate in the United Nations Security Council and Mr
John Foster Dulles who was Eisenhower's secretary of state, finished long after
midnight, a speech and went off home. He didn't go home, he went straight to a
hospital. Within two days, there appeared a banner headline on the front page
of the New York Daily News, which was a tabloid, but then a good and
responsible one: "Dulles has inoperable cancer." I wrote from my paper the next
day: "No mention has been made in this country about the unique break with
tradition implicit in the publication last Sunday of his doctor's bulletin".

The case of President Grover Cleveland came to mind, more than a century ago,
who woke up one morning with a sore throat, which persisted. One of his
doctors, smarter than the rest, correctly diagnosed cancer of the throat. So
one day, a navy cruiser was commissioned for a weekend cruise, they went out to
sea. The cancer was operated on, the president returned convalesced for some
days, a week or more in the White House – there were no press conferences in
those days – he never had to see anyone he didn't choose to see, nothing was
put out, nothing was in fact known. About 30 years after he died, it came out.

And then in our time, there is what I am now told is the even more unbelievable
press silence about Franklin Roosevelt. It is true that, I should guess,
throughout the 13 years of his long reign, 95 per cent of the American people
never thought of their president as a man paralysed from the waist down. Now,
maybe 60 or 70 per cent would have said they knew, if they'd been reminded that
way back there in his 40th year, when he was governor of New York, he'd had
poliomyelitis. But what the people of every nation saw throughout his
unprecedented long time in the White House - saw it on the newsreels, remember,
no television then - was the strong upper body, the bull like stance, the hands
gripping a lectern and the confident inimitable tenor voice rousing and
consoling the people. Nothing ever said or written and a ban, strictly observed
by everybody, on all photographing of the president in movement, of his being
lifted into a chair, the wheelchair he lived his life, in the daily ordeal of
simply getting out of bed.

I think it was an admirable convention that the press observed. Today, it would
be thought an outrageous suppression of free speech. And last week, we saw that
Kennedy rocking chair on the stage of an auction house in New York not in a
museum, an artefact of a president and a time and an affliction. Its historical
value I suppose is beyond price but its value at auction was $453,000 dollars.

Responding to this, and other monstrous bids, an auctioneer's representative
said: "Well they are buying pieces of history". Not so. This audience was
buying a faded vision. The myth of the first presidency to be cast in
Hollywood, the handsome war hero president and the beautiful delicate elegant
wife. Somebody called it Camelot, which is not history but myth and people paid
dearly to recover some symbols of the myth and pretend it was historical fact.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP