American public schools - 03 January 1992

Not long before the bells began to peel and the hooters to hoot and the
fireworks to blast off, I was quite ready after many hours of listening to
sermons on the meaning of 1991, I was quite ready to switch off the box and
greet a couple of very old friends and bend an elbow and cross our fingers and
hope we'd be here to tell the tale a year from now.

But just as I was leaning forward to the telly, feeling I'd done enough
homework, two or three final precious thoughts came from two or three experts
far apart. One was a negotiator in the dreadful Serbian-Croatian war, he I
thought would have something promising or wise to say. What he said was, until
we have a ceasefire in the war, we can't go forward with peace. Ah so.

Next came a police chief from Los Angeles, announcing with no pride or pleasure
that in 1991 there had been 2,439 bank robberies in California, certainly a
record for the nation and he guessed probably in the world. This touched a
chord and I thought perversely of Willie Sutton, long gone now but for a whole
lifetime the most notorious and the most continuous bank robber in the United
States. When he came up for sentencing for the umpteenth time the judge asked,
"Willie, why always banks?" I was rehearsing this famous little scene when the
picture switched to a big FBI man in Los Angeles, who in dead solemnity
supplied Willie's immortal reply. "They do it," said the FBI man, "because
that's where the money is."

My third pearl of wisdom came when we switched yet again, this time to a fairly
eminent stock market economist in New York and he brought a timely message to
us all. He said, "We are planning on the basis that one year is ending and
another is starting." Well, all we needed to have a perfect little collection
of sayings to live by was something from the great "Yogi" Berra, a legendary
baseball player renowned in his day as the Yankee's catcher and renowned ever
since his retirement for many great sayings. He was the one who first declared
"it's not over till it's over". And sure enough, he sent us off into the New
Year with a thought we should keep in mind whenever we decide to go out to
dinner at a restaurant we haven't visited for some time.

There is in upper Manhattan a restaurant where once all the baseball players
and the sportswriters used to hang out. Somebody asked Yogi how the place was
doing these days, he said, "Ah, the place is packed, nobody goes there
anymore". Well we've been having, as I'm sure you have, exhaustive and
exhausting round-ups of opinions by everybody from presidents to bar tenders
who sometimes make a lot of sense, about the state of Russia, the scare of
scattered 2,700 nuclear war heads, trade with Japan, what will happen to the
English pork pie if Brussels doesn't like it and other momentous issues facing
1992.

One subject which you might think had been argued into the ground is that of
the shocking state of public education in the United States. There is, however,
good and I think you'll find funny and bracing news for other countries too,
from the Deep South, from the state of Alabama. Now you know that most of the
education controversy in this country is over what should be taught and how,
and for how long of the students day, term or year. Suddenly, through all the
thrashing cross currents of argument and theory, one clear confident voice has
lately come sailing through like a salmon through a rip tide. It is the voice
of a cheerful, young, middle-aged man with a trim beard and a simple positive
theory of what's wrong with most American schools.

His name is Welch, Kevin Welch, born in Pennsylvania son of a postal worker,
earned a PhD at the University of Pittsburgh, ran a rural public school for a
year or two, and since the late 1970s has lived way down yonder in Alabama
where he's now a professor of education at the state university there. Mr Welch
is just as concerned as any other good teacher about the decline of public
education and I think, I hope he would agree with me that for too long, for 20
years or more the public schools have been guilty of setting what I call easy
and dithering standards, at least that accusation would explain the childish
competition over how your school stands on tests as against other schools in
the state. And the practice more widespread than most parents would care to
admit of either keeping the tests easy or faking the results so as to have your
school come out on top or close to the top of the heap.

Mr Welch is sceptical of the general lament that Johnny can't read, write and
do his simple arithmetic, what in this country is always called math. Mr Welch
believes that Johnny is quite capable of reading well, writing well, doing
creditably at his math, what holds him back Mr Welch is convinced is not the
quality of his mind, but of his character. How's that again? Put it another
way, Johnny comes out badly on paper in social intercourse and out in the
school yard because nobody has set for him in the first place a required
minimum standard of behaviour. Such as? Well, at work he skimps punctuation and
maybe soon loses the trick of it. He looks for quick fixes in maths, and quick
answers in other subjects. He shouts out an answer whether he's been recognised
or not, he doesn't ask permission to leave the room, after an art class he
leaves dirty brushes around, he likes animals as pets, but doesn't clean up
after them.

I can imagine how a past generation in our culture, my father, his father, and
the present generation of parents in especially Asia all responding with the
same shocked question: but what were the parents doing, did he not learn these
things at home? Mr Welch says that's just it, we've gone on assuming that the
present generation of parents still sets such habits of duty, manners, whatever
you want to call it, before their children ever go to school, but says, Mr
Welch, most households in the United States have either only one parent or have
both parents out at work. So nobody is taking on the job of bringing up their
children as responsible young humans and not as brats.

I remember – oh, it must be 10, a dozen years ago – when a young tennis star
who shall be nameless began throwing tantrums and tossing obscenities at
blank-faced umpires, who for many too many years did absolutely nothing about
it. A friend of mine, a golfer who by any standard was a world champion, shook
his head and said, don't blame him, blame the father. He, the golfer, told of
how when he was barely in his teens and was sweating away at the game every
free hour after school, how coming to the last hole of a game he was very much
on top of, he blew it with a fumbling double bogie. The lad hoisted his putter
and hurled it off the green. On the way home his father said to him, "Jack, I
want to tell you something. You throw just one more club and you won't play
golf for another six months." Jack told the story with as much pride as fear,
flashed his ice blue eyes and said, "And, by golly, I knew he meant it. I never
threw another." Well, I can almost hear the smirk through the nostrils and see
the shaking heads of the various psychologists, professors of child development
and one professor of developmental psychology who have been quick to speak up
and condemn Professor Welch's ideas as, naive, superficial and misplaced.

The trouble here the inevitability of the conflict between Mr Welch and the
psychologists is I'm sure due to the fact that Mr Welch uses words like
character, self discipline, rules, for heaven's sake and if every school
teacher assumed a responsibility for training character, instilling
self-discipline, prescribing rules, then the psychologists would be out of
business. They cannot take Mr Welch seriously when he says for instance that
when you set rules of behaviour, quote, "Children actually experience joy in
finding and fulfilling responsibility." To which the professor of child
development a thousand miles away in New York by the way, retorts "Decorum in
the classroom can stifle creativity and Professor Welch is not taking the
cognitive development of children into account." I must agree. I'm pretty sure
that cognitive development is the last thing on his mind, he's too busy going
after a student who sprayed graffiti on the walls of the school building and
instead of congratulating the poor kid on his creativity. Mr Welch imposed a
fine and said, clean it up.

I hesitate to use so crude and superficial a phrase as, the proof of the
pudding is in the eating – I don't know the developmental language for that,
but Professor Welch pursuing his own misplaced ideas has 12 times in 12 years
been named teacher of the year by the university of Alabama. Educators in other
states want to hear from him, his courses are packed and over-subscribed, the
schools in Alabama that have applied his ideas say, that so many of these
simple souls, the children, have been fired by a desire to do the best they can
that the schools have had to improve their academic standards and enlarge their
courses in the sciences and in languages. One high school principal head
mistress told the New York Times, "It's hard for me to imagine anymore teaching
children reading and writing without also attempting to build their character".
That groan you hear comes from a host of modern development psychologists who
refuse to use the phrase character education. What Mr Welch means, they say, is
values clarification.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP