CNN post-war malaise - 5 April 1991

Here's an interesting medical puzzle, mystery. The telephone rang in a house in
which a young man lives with his widowed mother. The young man answered it and
all he said was: "Good of you to call. Yes, thank you. Thank you. Yes, she's
fine now." Had his mother been ill? Well, yes, in a way. In a way that's quite
new to the experience of most of us. A new disease, an old disease with a new
name which in a country where fashion is king, happens more often than you'd
guess.

Quite simply, the mother, late middle-age, had finally achieved after a six
week attack what one doctor calls "CNN withdrawal". CNN stands for Cable News
Network. And is the station in Atlanta, Georgia which has been conspicuous in
newsrooms and broadcasting offices for 9 or 10 years. It slid into the general
consciousness quite modestly in 1980. But stormed into our daily viewing during
the invasion of Panama. It was everybody's pipeline, day and night, during the
first upheavals in Eastern Europe.

What it was, is, is the world's first 24 hour television news programme. By the
time President Bush reinforced the first wave of troops to go into Saudi
Arabia, by November at the latest, a survey, not flattering to the commercial
networks, or indeed the networks of any nation, a survey showed that for most
viewers with access to cable television, most viewers around the world – which
means by now something like 110/120 countries – which have CNN on tap, most of
them tuned into CNN for the news and stayed with it. And this we discovered was
true, not only for the peoples but for the national leaders involved in the
crisis and the war.

Once the United States Secretary of Defence confessed to news reporters one day
that, "all I know is what I saw on CNN," it was no shame for the president and
Mrs Thatcher and Monsieur Mitterrand, and the Iraqi ambassador here, not to
mention Saddam Hussein himself, to admit the same. CNN had string
correspondence with cameras everywhere. And nobody else, certainly not the
politicians, did.

The result, which I'm sure many listeners in many countries can guess at was
that for the first time in history, a war was converted for the on-looking
world into a theatrical performance to which we had a permanent front seat.
When I said "converted", I don't wish to imply anything crafty or dishonest on
the part of the television crews, or the bosses who ordered their assignments.
It was inevitable once you had television crews out with the bombing missions
and also out in the streets and the houses of the people about to be bombed,
and also in all the capitals with a direct interest in the war, it was
inevitable that the war would become what the resources of television showed it
to be.

I've always been suspicious of that clever, striking maxim of the late Marshall
McLuhan, "The medium is the message." But for the first time, to me, it summed
up a vivid, new truth. The war was, for everybody but the troops ceaselessly
engaged, what television showed it to be. And it was exciting. Exhilarating. I
feel a little shaky saying that now when we've had time to see the ruins and
the victims wandering in them, and to sense what the United Nations' report
called "the apocalyptic destruction of Iraq." Caused by the allies' aerial
overture, what was called in polite military circles at the time "the
softening-up" process.

Well, the widow. The widow whose son declared her now to be fine had finally
broken her zombie's habit of chaining herself to the easy chair in front of the
tube. I don't know the son and if I did, I wouldn't, I hope, be boorish enough
to warn him that his mother now stands in danger of a following complaint,
which is sufficiently widespread to have earned itself a name in the
psychiatrists' manual. If it hasn't, it will soon be there. I heard a
psychiatrist talking quite chirpily about it the other evening as he would of
an illness that is very familiar, not life-threatening, bothersome. One we can
handle. It's called PWM. Post War Malaise. And what do you suppose that is?

It's what happens, has happened, to some people who probably didn't realise how
riveted they were to the box, until General Schwarzkopf's final triumphant news
conference, the epilogue that brought the curtain down. Then you had to get up,
forget the performance and get back to the realities of your own life. Well
this psychiatrist said quite a lot of people couldn't do it. Couldn't slough
off their enchantment with the war. One woman patient said it bluntly: "I can
hardly bear to go out and shop or settle down to work. Life is so dull after
Desert Storm!" The doctor pronounced those words with a smack of the lips,
Desert Storm. The best movie in town for years.

I appreciate it's callous to talk like this after we've seen the vast
shattering of the land of Iraq, which if we'd seen it in sequence with the
bomber take-offs and the amusement arcade entertainment of patriots zinging
into a black sky to pinpoint the scuds, we would have been ashamed and
desolated. So, there will be those who condemn the victims of PWM, Post War
Malaise, as lazy, unfeeling, couch potatoes. But there are more of them than
you might think. And since I spent most of my days certainly riveted to the
screen, I felt enough of the exhilaration before the guilt that has led now, in
some people, to a neurotic let-down.

The doctor did say that one cure lay in a more varied routine than your normal
life. Breaking up your leisure by catching up with an old friend, and why not
take up a new game? The passing thought that some benighted patient might have
to be paying for this prescription reminded me forcibly of Mrs. Crupp's advice
to David Copperfield, when he was down, advice, by the way, given free:

"You are a young gentleman, Mr Copperfull, and my adwice to you is to cheer
up... and know your own walue... If you was to take up skittles, now, which is
healthy...you might find it divert your mind."

However, the psychiatrist did reveal a glimmer of humour. He thought that for
many patients April 15th could serve as "shock treatment". 15th April is the
last day for filing your income tax.

For the general population, the post war month has brought mostly good news, at
any rate, when it's the news that can be attributed to the victory. And the
stimulus is pride. And however embarrassing it may be to see it in its more
jingoistic expressions, the forests of waving flags, the grins and crocodile
tears of bawling politicians who weren't there, there's no getting away from
the hard fact that the lift in the nation's morale seems to have weakened the
recession. Of course, in parts of the country that depended for their
livelihood on the army, navy, air force, the prospect of men coming home has
been a violent tonic.

There's a small town in Georgia that has for two generations at least,
subsisted on the nearby army camp. All but a skeleton maintenance staff were
shipped off to the Gulf in August and the result was devastating. Again, seen
on television, the town appeared to have been abandoned. Stores, bars, petrol
stations closed. To let, to rent, for sale signs posted on a jewellery shop
window, a liquor store, furniture store. The town was going into bankruptcy. It
is now as jubilant as a gold rush city after the first strike. Of course,
that's an extreme example, though I'm pretty sure Saddam Hussein video taped
these first scenes of a bankrupt town. They would have made, to the Iraqis,
appetising pictures.

The most noticeable fillip to the economy has come from the modern barometer of
economic health. Forty years ago it was railroad freight loadings reported and
anxiously scanned every month by bankers and shop keepers. After the Second
War, it was the news from Detroit, the state of the automobile industry, which
at the present, incidentally, is in shock and despair. These days, since the
early 80s I'm told, the barometer is what's called "housing starts". It used to
be known as "home building".

Housing construction has zoomed up from the bottomless pit of a year ago. To
anyone who travels much or lives close by an airport, the most visible, almost
ostentatious improvement is in the airline business. I had to fly quite a bit
between the autumn and Christmas, and then, in January, and the big airports,
Dallas, one of the two or three largest in the world, Dallas after January 15th
was a huge catacomb.

Now without claiming any sort of valour, as I am a physical coward of
mouse-like proportions, I must say I could never understand the panic which
overtook more than, well, about half of the normal flying public. I had
friends, intelligent, educated, not hypochondriacs, who wouldn't fly anywhere
after 15th January, when the aerial war began. Why?

Terror of terrorism. I quoted a mathematical friend. The chances of getting in
a plane, a restaurant, a town, that would be terrorised, if you flew madly,
every day and night for six months in all directions, were about one in 10
million. The chances of being killed walking across Piccadilly or Madison
Avenue are disturbingly high at the best of times.

No matter. I must say it was wonderful to be an airline passenger while the
terror lasted. The care and tending of the few passengers going through or
flying on was remarkable. It recalled to me the universal courtesy, the
solicitude, the bowing and thanking of shop assistants throughout the Great
Depression here. And the accompanying commercial slogan, "The customer is
always right".

One idiom, I'm afraid, that's vanished without trace.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP