The history of US-Russia summits - 9 April 1993

Perhaps we should think of abolishing the word "summit" and maybe the
institution it has come to describe. We've come very far from the intention of
the first summits and today, the mere announcement of summit balloons our hopes
way beyond the possibility of their being fulfilled.

I think it might be worth a long look back to the beginning, to the idea of a
summit meeting and to its originator who was nobody but Winston Churchill. I
was present at the birth, if Bermuda was the birthplace, in December of 1953.
Churchill was then in his second administration and he was meeting with
President Eisenhower who had been in the White House only since the previous
January. Eisenhower had turned down a previous invitation to a meeting with
Churchill because he suspected correctly that whatever agenda, the Foreign
Office cooked up for a conference, Churchill would release a new bee from his
bonnet to urge on Ike a three-party meeting with the Russians … because
Churchill declared, in the first meeting in Bermuda, the British people not yet
able to resume a pre-war standard of living, would not forever go on burdening
themselves with the cost of armed forces strong enough to deter a Russian
advance across Europe.

Two points here for the young and innocent and indeed for some friends of my
own generation who'd forgotten the long austerity of the post-war years and
also forgotten the rampant fear of the Soviet Union once it had added the atom
bomb to its huge arsenal and its enormous armies. The other point is that
Churchill in relation to the Russians has been remembered most for his warning
in the famous Fulton, Missouri, speech about the menace that lay behind the
Iron Curtain. The popular deduction has been that Churchill went on for the
rest of his life to nurture the worst suspicions of Soviet motives and to shun
its leaders, quite the contrary as we shall see in recalling that forgotten
conference at Bermuda.

So as I say, Churchill opened it in the presence of the French prime minister
and Eisenhower by saying that our peoples would simply not go on making
sacrifices in order to maintain a cripplingly costly defence if we neglect all
chances of an easement in relations with the Russians. We always talked about
the Russians then when we meant the whole Soviet Union because the boss man who
spoke for Russia spoke for the Union. To this eloquent speech, some president
thought it statesman like others, Foreign Office men thought it a disastrous
beginning. Nevertheless, President Eisenhower responded at once in, one
diplomat put it, "very violent and coarse terms". I doubt if such language has
ever before been heard at an international conference.

It's true that bearing in mind the certainty that the Russians would learn
overnight what was said there, even a diplomatic novice would have polished up
his language and softened his objections as the American diplomat Averell
Harriman once said, "conferences at the top level are always courteous, name
calling is left to the foreign ministers", but not this time!

What Eisenhower said was literally this, he didn't believe there was any new
look to Soviet policy, Russia he said is a woman of the streets and whether her
dress is new or just the old one patched, she is certainly the same whore
underneath. And the United States intends to drive her off her present beat
into the backstreets.

The British Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden thought this opening riposte had
just about wrecked the conference, he asked Eisenhower when he thought the next
meeting might be? Ike got up and said, "I don't know, mine is with a whisky and
soda," and he stomped off.

Well the conference lasted over a long weekend, but most of what was said and
done there has faded into the dust of the archives, but Churchill came away
with his desire for a meeting with the Russians strengthened by an alarming
hint from Eisenhower that if the truce talks then going on to settle the Korean
War broke down, the Americans might use tactical atomic weapons. Churchill was
dismayed, his whole stress and focus for the rest of the 18 months he would be
prime minister was on the, to him, quite new situation that faced the world
since the skies over a remote Pacific island had thundered with the first
hydrogen bomb. That had happened just one year before the '53 Bermuda
Conference.

Later on at the conference, Eisenhower confided to Churchill's secretary John
Colville what was at the root of their disagreement. Whereas Winston looked on
the atomic weapons as something entirely new and terrible, he, Ike, looked upon
it as just the latest improvement in military weapons, all weapons he said in
due course become conventional weapons.

When it was all over, Churchill now in his 80th year became more and more
obsessed with his view of a radically changed world and he decided that the
last act of his 50-year parliamentary career should be to urge and achieve a
meeting with the Russians with their leader – a parley, he said, at the summit,
and not one meeting but the first he hoped of a continuing series. His view of
the bomb and how it had changed the world was very different from Eisenhower's.
After that first explosion of the hydrogen bomb at Enewatek in the Pacific, he
told his secretary, "we are now as far from the age of the atomic bomb as the
atomic bomb itself is from the bow and arrow". I don't think there were many
leaders on either side, who would have agreed with him but that's what he
believed.

Now to wind up this melancholy tale, Churchill had been promising and
threatening to resign for at least two years, he was declining visibly but like
a, like a dying fire the flames spurted up at surprising times. He could be
frail and forgetful all day and then bristle with sap and mischief at night,
but he never lost this new zeal for a series of meetings with the Russians, at
the summit. But the news from America, the best intelligence about Eisenhower's
policies had convictions gloomily convinced Churchill at last that there was
little chance now of that first summit. So one day, on 5 April 1955, 38 years
ago last Monday he dusted off the rather faded long frock coat he'd always worn
for audiences with the Queen, put on his top hat went off to Buckingham Palace
and resigned.

But as the Cold War grew more frigid, Eisenhower did yield to the advocates of
a summit. In the summer of 1955, he went off to meet Mr Khrushchev in Geneva
under the impression, he said, that there was evidence of new friendliness in
the world. The evidence wasn't helped later that year by Soviet manoeuvres in
the Middle East, but four years later Mr Khrushchev came here to the presidents
mountain retreat in Maryland, Camp David, and they had what I called a very
convivial get together, which generated what was hopefully known as the "spirit
of Camp David". The spirit burned bright enough to light the way to a summer
summit in Paris, but it was brutally doused when on the very eve of the
meeting, the Russians spotted and brought down an American reconnaissance spy
plane. At first, Eisenhower denied there was any such flying animal, but very
soon he said, "Well, you do it, too", and went home,

Two years later, the young President Kennedy met Mr Khrushchev in Vienna; I'm
not quite sure this late in the day why. Two months before, the United States
had suffered enormous laughable humiliation with its disastrous failure at
invading Castro's Cuba. Mr Khrushchev must have felt the young Kennedy was very
green indeed, he was to learn later it was not so. But the Vienna summit became
distinguished only for Kennedy's parting words to the Russian, "it's going to
be a long cold winter". Now the motives on the other, the Soviet side for
holding summits are perilous to guess at, but plainly Mr Khrushchev, Mr
Andropov, Mr Gorbachev were not just sitting there waiting to be friendly at
America's bidding. Mr Khrushchev in particular later confessed he was eager to
have Kennedy beat Nixon for the presidency and then later still he wanted to
help restore Nixon's shattered prestige after the Watergate revelations.

It's ironical to realise now that both Reagan and Bush rallied to back Mr
Gorbachev when the first threat to his power came from, guess who, Boris
Yeltsin.

Looking back over all the summits to see if any have had a permanent or
profound effect on Russian/American relations I should say, "yes, Reagan in
Iceland, Reykjavík 1986". Now I know the official verdict is that the meeting
was a catastrophe because Mr Reagan wasn't well briefed, he went beyond the
briefing anyway and uttered the naive, outrageous but quite sincere remark "why
not abolish all nuclear weapons?" That blab of the tongue was possibly the best
thing Reagan ever spoke. The impossible vision began to hover on the horizon
and led to more summits at which for the first time both sides agreed to
dismantle all medium- and short-range nuclear missiles and then all
intermediates.

By this time, every arranged meeting between Russia and the United States is
called a summit, but the game is not the same, they're no longer equal supermen
and though Mr Yeltsin and the Russian people evidently don't like it, Mr
Yeltsin came begging.

In fact, this summit was about summitry old or new, it was the American stop in
Mr Yeltsin's presidential election campaign. He hoped, and the Clinton
administration hoped fervently, that their meeting, their photo exposure, the
general warmth and ceremony of the occasion will boast the Yeltsin vote on 25
April. Vancouver was an effort to bide time against the old Communists in power
throughout the old Union and against their cunning bureaucracy, which so far
has collared and kept most of the billions sent to the aid of the Russian
people.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP