Earth Day, 1990 - 20 April 1990

What is the word, the word, brother? That used to be the morning greeting of
the members of a Christian sect in the back country of the Deep South.

I was going to say in the "long ago" but I have to watch myself these days. I'm
thinking only of the late 1930s when I was down in Georgia and Louisiana on a
recording expedition, recording I regret to say not the words of the good
people in the countryside but the words of the 12-bar blues as crooned by the
bad girls of New Orleans, behind the swinging doors of their cribs, in the
shady alleyways behind Basin Street and Rampart Street.

What is the word, brother? was not just an offhand greeting. It required,
before you settled down to the small change of gossip, the weather, who's ill
et cetera, it required an answer. Preferably a quotation from the Bible worthy
to be used as the text of a sermon or at least as the watchword for the day's
course of conduct.

It sounds quaint today, but it's hardly less civilised than the morning habit
of the Ancient Greek teachers in rounding up their pupils at the break of day
and setting the topic for discussion. What is the essence of the good life? Or,
what is the first condition for the success of a democracy? Aristotle posed
that one and his answer – which should give us pause – was, "only when most
people are virtuous".

Well, here it is, Earth Day, again. And although a survey reports that only
about 27% of Americans mean to take part in any public observances, over 80%
say they're doing something in their daily lives to help protect the
environment.

Above and beyond these little civic acts, like sending money to environmental
groups, or, much more courageously, if you're a young mother, swearing off the
convenience of disposable diapers, nappies, and going back to cloth ones, there
is a huge clamour of voices across the country giving us the word for the day.
Earth Day. Many words. And just now, most of them warning words, prophesying in
grim phrases our probable fate if we, if governments and the peoples, don't do
more about it.

Global warming is the loudest word. Ozone depletion. Save the rain forests.
Nuclear night. Acid rain. Dead lakes and rivers. The coming death of the
oceans.

The trouble with all these tocsins, no pun intended, I mean these alarm bells,
is that they're too grand, too melodramatic, too unreal and ear-splitting to be
believed. They sum up in a phrase a kind of doom beyond what we've read in the
most lurid science fiction. And they are denied everywhere we turn by our eyes
and our ears.

You look out, as I'm doing now, down beyond the midtown skyscrapers of
Manhattan which, on a brilliant spring day, are as sharp as needles, and see
the flowing Hudson River, bluer, and incidentally, cleaner, than it's been for
some time.

And down to the left, to the south, the great bay and beyond, the Atlantic
Ocean. Tiny puffs of cumulus cloud, very white, in a surely very clean blue
sky. It happens to be a weekday and you'd expect to see a thick veil of
industrial smog over the Jersey flats. Who says that New York atmosphere is
getting to be as bad as that of Los Angeles?

Well, the national government for one. And the governor of New York State, for
another. And now the American Lung Association. That's who says so.

The fact which is not visible is unlikely to occur to most of us that on this
day the wind is from the north-west, that is to say, has blown 3,000 miles
across dry land and every time we have it – it's practically prevailing in the
fall – it sweeps every grain and whiff of smog way out to sea.

On such days, the environmental warnings sound like the cries of hysterics.
Unfortunately they're all right. Except on such enormous, vague conceptions as
global warming about which the world's experts are in hot dispute. And suppose
they agree, that there will be a rise in the globe's temperature of 2, 5, 9
degrees a century from now, tell me the name of a politician anywhere who has
the knowledge, the imagination and the willingness to commit political suicide
by saying we must do something drastic now on behalf of 2090.

The nuclear night threat. What President Bush calls "the nuclear night thing".
We're hearing very little of that just now, partly because all the best nuclear
doctors violently disagree about it. Mainly, I suspect, because the European
revolutions and the parlous state of the Kremlin's authority has made the
nuclear threat suddenly appear less menacing than the threat, thanks to Iraq,
of poison gas and bacterial warfare.

Of all the doomsday warnings, I suppose the one that has been heeded most is
the one about acid rain, because in most industrial countries, the effects of
it can be shockingly seen over huge areas of forest and water on fine days and
foul.

Congress passed a Clean Air Act in 1970 and while for many years many
industries resisted obeying it – their livelihood depended after all, through
all the decades of their existence, their prosperity had depended, on pouring
their wastes into lakes and rivers.

What eventually forced through a new law with stiffer penalties for violations
was the strong and, in time, the thunderous protests of the Canadians who came
to demonstrate without any effective argument to the contrary that the toxic
emissions from the industrial Midwest of the United States, when the prevailing
wind was from the south or south-east, ruined forests, polluted crops,
threatened all kinds of horrors, were the prime cause of fishless lakes and
rivers, and threatened even in our own Vermont, and New Hampshire also, the
maple syrup business.

Canada's pollution crisis, caused by the puffing chimneys to the south, were
the spur to the second Clean Air Act. That, and a response, reluctant at first,
and then alarmed, to the plain evidence all around the country, in the Arizona
Desert, a mile high in the sky in Denver, in industries as far apart as the
bayous of Louisiana and the airplane industries of Seattle, 4,000 miles to the
north.

The evidence of decay, pollution, industrial waste, strangling crops, poisoning
rivers and, what really had the politicians on the hop, seriously affecting the
health of human beings, as was testified and is daily being testified in
thousands of lawsuits against companies, industries, city and state
governments, and the federal government.

Well, what a mighty ruined oak grew from such a tiny acorn. I'm not thinking of
the admirable Mr Denis Hayes who had the idea of Earth Day and founded it 20
years ago. I'm thinking of a small, sad, elegant book which came out in 1962
and both in its tone and its subject matter could hardly have been expected to
start a revolution. Yet in its small way, it turned out to be as powerful as a
goad to action as Uncle Tom's Cabin.

An American woman scientist, Rachel Carson, put out in 1951 a book called The
Sea Around Us and five years later, another, The Edge of the Sea, fascinating
accounts of the life, the habits of the seas, scientifically precise and
enlightening.

But Miss Carson suffered from a disability which only rarely affects first-rate
scientists, she wrote very well – too well to advance her scientific
reputation. In 1962, she put out another book, shot with anxiety and fired by
anger.

Her beautiful writing could not disguise her strong contention that the
indiscriminate use of weed killers and insecticides constituted a hazard to
wildlife and to human beings. The Silent Spring was, you might say, the first
environmental classic. It was a slow and then a solid bestseller. It seeded the
birth of the environment movement and led pretty soon to the banning of DDT and
eventually a whole range of insecticides and pesticides.

Looking back on all this, from this small beginning to the involvement of large
populations in all the industrial countries, most of us, I'm afraid, who are
not in government still blame them – big business and big government.

Though, while we are all victims of the Industrial Revolution, we are also its
heedless beneficiaries and with all the habits we've picked up with our gadgets
from gas ranges to refrigerators, sprays, detergents, cars, heaters, we, each
of us, get rid every day, one way and another, of a pile of energy and refuse
and then scream when we see the stinking mountains of landfill. But most of us
have no intention of joining a car pool, foregoing all plastic or Styrofoam
containers, walking instead of using public transport.

There's a young man in Berkeley, California, John Javna and his woman partner,
Julie Bennett, who have published, with their own money, another little book.
They could afford to print only 25,000 copies which vanished in four days.
Within a month, over a million were being snapped up. It's called 50 Simple
Things You Can Do To Save The Earth – separate trash, how to travel to work,
ask the electricity company to give you an energy audit, stop, or make your
cities stop junk mail which would save millions of trees a year. Put a plastic
bottle in the toilet tank, it saves one to two gallons a flush. And 45 other
simple, not very troublesome suggestions. If 30 million people took Javna and
Bennett up on it, they'd do more in a year than our federal government has done
in 20 years.

Happily, some city governments have made laws out of the John and Julie tips,
which reminds me, I must now go and obey the new New York City law, and put out
the garbage in three separate piles. One, kitchen and other trash. Two,
bottles, glass and plastic. Three, newspapers.

"If you don't do this from now on", a note from the city reminds me, "you are
liable to fines and, after persistent violations, imprisonment."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP