St Patrick's parade ban - 30 June 1995

I was up in Boston the day the United States Supreme Court made a ruling, which
scandalised some people and delighted the rest about the armed service veterans
who organised the annual parade through the streets on St. Patrick's Day.

In that old city, the place where the American Revolution began, there is by
now a fine stew of types and immigrant nationalities: Czechs, Italians,
Russians, French, Canadians, some survivors of the original Anglos who founded
the colony and sparked the revolution, though we're a dwindling lot – in New
York City, the wasps, the white Anglo Saxon Protestants, practicing or not,
compose exactly 6.2 per cent of the population. Talk about a minority!

However, I was saying that although Boston is a fine racial mixture, the Irish
are, how shall I put it, the lawyers would say controlling… not quite. But in
the second half of this century they have disputed and overcome the political
dominance of the old colonial families, the Cabots and Lowells and Lodges and
Saltonstalls, these old wasps may still recite nostalgically the old rhyme:
"Behold this good old Boston, the home of the bean and the cod, where the
Lowells talk only to Cabots and the Cabots talk only to God," their day is
done. By the 1960s, Massachusetts was most powerfully represented in Congress,
no longer by Republicans named Lodge and Saltonstalls, but by Democrats named
McCormack and O'Neil and Kennedy, so you can imagine the St. Patrick's Day
parade is the biggest and grandest most boisterous parade of the year. It has
been more boisterous, not violent but bubbling with friction and tensions since
1992. In that year, a new group, and mark that word 'group', it turned out to
be decisive in the Supreme Courts decision – a new group appeared marching
alongside the veterans and waving a banner with the strange device:
Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston. They appeared over
the strenuous protest of the veterans and their organiser John 'Wacko' Hurley.

Any other group wanting to march in the city's parade: the Irish American high
school bands, the bartenders of the old sod, any group has to apply to the
organisers and this the homosexuals did and John 'Wacko' Hurley turned them
down. Whereupon they went to court putting on the docket for the first time the
case of Hurley versus Irish-American Gay and Bisexual Group of Boston
Massachusetts – notice the plaintiff is an individual. The US Supreme Court
does not adjudicate between state law and federal law or two warring
corporations, its job is to decide whether the constitutional rights of an
individual have been violated or abridged. Thus, the case that made segregation
unconstitutional across the country was called Brown versus Board of Education:
Brown was an eight year old little girl.

So in the case of the Boston homosexuals and bisexuals, after they'd marched in
1992 and 93, the veterans, the organisers of the parade cancelled the one for
1994, did you ever hear of such a thing? No St. Patrick's Day parade?

The following month, the judge who'd allowed the gay group into the parade, was
upheld by the Massachusetts State Supreme Court, the crucial opinion, written
incidentally by an Irishman said: "History does not record that St. Patrick
limited his ministry to heterosexuals or that General Washington's soldiers
were all straight. Inclusiveness should be the hallmark of the parade." Plainly
the state courts saw the issue as one of minority discrimination. Of course
John 'Wacko' Hurley and his veterans did not bow down and give up. They took
the case onwards and upwards to the United States Supreme Court, which overrode
and overruled the Massachusetts Supreme Court in the most interesting and
decisive way.

The Supreme Court said that the South Boston veterans group had every right to
bar the applicants on the issue, not of discrimination, but on the first
amendment, namely the guarantee of freedom of speech. Wait a minute I can hear
some people say, the court was upholding the principle of free speech by
denying it to homosexuals and bisexuals? Yes, as a group. I better say at once
that this was not, as so many rulings unfortunately are these days, a five to
four decision. It always strikes me as unfortunate to say the least that in
this country, some of the most vital questions of a democratic society come
down in the end to the opinion of one person, the one who splits the vote, the
tie vote of four to four.

The US Supreme Courts ruling on the veterans appeal was unanimous: nine to
nothing, very rare and for once the justice who wrote what is usually called
the majority opinion spoke for all of them. Parades, wrote Justice Souter, are
a form of expression, in this case, an expression of the beliefs of the Irish
American veterans, a private organisation. The Massachusetts State Court had
said that a parade was in the legal definition, a public accommodation. In many
other appeals against discrimination, if public accommodation is proved, that's
to say if a club occupies public land or uses public equipment or services,
then its own membership must be open to the public without regard to race,
religion and colour, whatever.

That was the dividing point between Massachusetts and the US Supreme Court. As
a private organisation, Justice Souter said, they could not bar any one person,
they couldn't for instance bar homosexuals or bisexuals for marching in their
parade as individuals, but if the gays organised their own group, marched as a
group, and carried their own group message, they were in effect conflicting
with the private group by stressing a message that the organisers don't wish to
convey. Justice Souter scolded the Massachusetts Court by saying that the
state, the commonwealth and Massachusetts, if it disapproves of a private
person's statement, has no legitimate power to compel that speaker to alter his
message by including one more acceptable to others. In pithier words a famous
Massachusetts congressman said about the judgement: "The point is no one said
what the parade organisers did was right only that it was constitutional. The
beauty of the constitution is that a lot of things that aren't right are
constitutional. Freedom of expression includes the right to be bigoted." A
handsome concession from Congressman Barney Frank who is himself a declared
gay.

So the night after the court spoke, South Boston was for the most part a merry
Irish compound, gay in the old sense but there was no disturbance, no nasty
run-ins with the police and, most remarkably I think, no reported ugly baiting
of gays in bars and saloons. As you can guess this unanimous judgement by its
very unanimity is bound to affect other cities far and wide. New York for
instance has expected trouble every St. Patrick's Day but luckily has had
little of it, and the question now in the light of this judgement: is the New
York City parade a public accommodation or a private march? Most New Yorkers
now feel confident it will be declared to be private since it is organised by
the ancient order of Hibernians. And the boy scouts of America have taken aid
and comfort from the Souter ruling: they exclude atheists and the openly gay
and now believe they can go on doing so, in light of the Constitution, which
Congressman Frank wisely warned us can sanctify bigotry when it's an expression
of free speech, a reminder of Justice Holmes's unpleasant truth, that freedom
of speech means freedom for the speech we loathe.

And who is this Justice David Souter? He was chosen by President Bush to
replace the retiring arch liberal Justice Brennan and though every president
says he picks a judge not to make laws, but to say if they're constitutional,
every president picks judges who are thought to share his political bias.
Franklin Roosevelt was so fed up with the conservative rulings of the Supreme
Court in his second term, he decided to set a retirement age and also to
increase the size of the court and pack it with fine objective unbiased New
Dealers. The court itself slapped him down on that one. Well David Souter is 55
and Yankee, a New Hampshire countryman, a bachelor, a churchman, unassuming,
scholarly, former state attorney and appeals court judge. I believe this is the
first case in which he's written the majority opinion. Most of the time though,
he's been the fifth man who turned a tied vote into the conservative
mainstream. He's had over a year to ponder the Boston parade decision and trial
lawyers who are hot for gay rights think this judgement is correct. And that
thought irresistibly recalls the practice of the great Justice Holmes who when
he went onto the court in 1902, heard the arguments of both sides, along with
the other justices, and if he'd been chosen to write the court's opinion, went
home and wrote it at once, and at the earliest opportunity delivered it to the
court. He soon found out that his colleagues began to mutter that he was
brilliant but superficial.

If ever there was a non superficial jurist in the English speaking world,
Holmes was it, so after a year or two he followed the same habit and the same
rapt attentiveness to the arguments, and if he was designated to write the
majority opinion he went home and as usual immediately wrote it, but then he
slipped it into a bottom drawer of his desk, and he left it there for months
till he was required to deliver it to the court. When he did so, by that time,
everyone agreed that no more profound ruling had ever been handed down by the
court. Later in life, Holmes, recalling this amendment of his habits said: "He
found it better to let his opinions age in the wood".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP