Judge Zobel and the Louise Woodward verdict - 14 November 1997

You'll understand, I think, why it's so much easier for me to talk now about
the case of Louise Woodward than it would have been during the trial, or after
the jury had handed down its verdict.

I had a letter or two protesting about my silence in this matter but they made
up in hysteria what they lacked in numbers. The main burden of several
protests, and of all the more indignant ones, was what was generally called the
barbarity of the American, of the whole American, penal system. This certainly
was the instant response of many English people.

Some of them had, no doubt, thought long and hard about the testimony of the
two camps and concluded, when the verdict came, that to convict Louise Woodward
with malicious intent to kill the baby entailed monstrously hard punishment.
But others, one man who wrote three times, were simply victims of instant
chauvinism of a primitive kind I thought had died in the 1920s. How dare an
American court charge a 19-year-old English girl with the grotesque crime of
killing a baby? Of course she's innocent.

Well first, whichever way the verdict had gone, I should have wanted to say,
what do you mean by the American penal system? There is such a thing but it's
not involved much of the time in the life of American citizens. Do you remember
one of the most famous sentences in English literature – they order these
things better in France.

Well, I have to say once again what I've been saying at discreet intervals for
over 50 years, when people from another land, even I regret to say, quite often
close friends, when they say that's the law in England, how do they handle it
in America? The only possible response, even though it can sound rude at the
time, is what part of America, which of the 50 states are you talking about?

State laws, not national, not federal, are what Americans live by most of the
time. It's the laws of a particular state that are binding on their citizens
and residents and anybody caught for an offence on the fly. There are no
national grounds for divorce. Each state has its own. It has its own
educational system, banking laws, transportation laws, alcohol licensing laws.

The far western state of Oregon is the only state so far with a law legalising
assisted suicide. One state, Maryland, say, has very stringent gun control
laws. In Nevada they're very loose. And way down yonder in New Orleans offers a
striking individuality.

The state of Louisiana once covered one-third of the whole of North America and
was mapped, owned, occupied by, if you like, the French. When Napoleon, who had
been atrociously beaten by the natives of Haiti, in a rehearsal for what was to
be an invasion of the United States, when he sold Louisiana to the United
States for four cents an acre, many French customs and practices were
abandoned, but many practices of law in the Napoleonic Code stayed firm in the
administration of justice and they're there today. I once covered a trial in
Louisiana and it was a revelation.

California, along with Arizona, Nevada, New Mexico, the south-western states
that were first conquered by Spain, these states were for a long time the only
ones to enforce a Spanish legacy, a community property law, whereby a divorce
decree required the husband to divide his whole property and hand over half to
his parting wife. He does this each time, so a big movie star, married and
divorced three times in California, will wind up with one eighth of his worldly
goods.

Each state has its own property and income tax laws. Every American, wherever
he lives, in Connecticut or Timbuktu, has to pay the national, the federal
income tax. However, those of us who have the pleasure or misfortune of living
in New York City, pay three separate income taxes – federal, New York State and
a city income tax.

So the first, and most important, thing to bear in mind in considering the
Woodward case, is the simple, large fact that no federal penal statute was
involved. She was being tried by the Massachusetts criminal code.

Yes, every state has its own criminal code. Massachusetts, as you know, was one
of the first colonies to rebel. The port whose waters were said once to have
turned brown from the brewing of tea leaves, was the port of Boston and when,
after the Revolution, the colonies formed separate states, some did not
christen themselves states. Virginia was the Old Dominion. Massachusetts and
Pennsylvania, to this day, are Commonwealths, a word you've perhaps heard more
of in the past few weeks than ever before.

The criminal code of Massachusetts is therefore very old, very venerable and
has had some legal giants interpreting it. Justice Holmes, Justice Brandeis
will, I hope, spring to mind. And, as with every other state, the Massachusetts
code has its own peculiar provisions, most original of which I ought to say at
once, provided a blessed break for Louise Woodward, a statute which allows the
judge in a criminal trial to overturn the jury's verdict. I believe there's
only one other state that allows this, what Judge Zobel used to achieve what he
called a compassionate conclusion.

It was noticeable in the press comment from around the country that most
Americans were amazed, delighted, or appalled by that statute. It was the first
time they'd heard of it. I'm talking, of course, first about the power of the
judge to moderate the verdict and take it down from first to a second-degree
murder to involuntary manslaughter.

Incidentally, before the judge re-sentenced, friends in Britain wrote to wonder
why, as they put it, she was not allowed to face the lesser charge of
manslaughter. Well it was Louise Woodward and her lawyers who asked not to
offer the jury a manslaughter charge, over the strenuous objections of the
prosecution, and the judge let them have it. They took the very daring risk of
offering the ultimate murder charge or acquittal. They gambled that no jury
would dream of convicting her for murder, with acquittal as the only
alternative, they would take it.

I ought to add too, that the Massachusetts record shows that this privilege of
the judge in a criminal court has been exercised very rarely indeed. One expert
guessed about once in 99 trials. So Judge Zobel showed courage verging on
audacity to do it in this case.

If the Appeals Court, the Massachusetts Appeals Court, refuses to allow his
re-sentencing, Judge Zobel will suffer irreparable damage to his reputation,
which is enviable. He's a veteran, a scholarly judge and the best word for the
defendant and her family is, judging from the rare precedents, that the
Commonwealth, the prosecution, will have a very difficult time getting a
reversal.

Most informed lawyers think, too, that the defence will have a next to
impossible task to have the manslaughter verdict withdrawn, in the assertion of
her innocence. The legal consensus is that the judge went as far as he dare,
perhaps farther, in reducing the sentence. But his denial of a passport or of
any thought of her leaving Massachusetts was his reminder, Miss Woodward is
still a convicted felon, that a baby is dead and that it was in her care.

Since the re-sentencing, you've no doubt heard about the publication of an
astonishing document, a public letter signed by 49 doctors, expert
pediatricians from around the country, condemning the defence's medical view
and saying the medical evidence overwhelmingly supported the prosecution's case
that the damage done to the baby was a classical case of violent shaking impact
and that it would be just about impossible for a baby to suffer a severe brain
injury and then function normally for three weeks. Well it didn't take 49
doctors to make the jury share that belief, but the Appeals Court can not,
ought not, to take this massive protest into account, only the testimony given
before the jury.

It has been said, and rightly, that no case has so mesmerised the American
public since the trials of OJ Simpson. But the general interest goes beyond
that of a melodramatic and exotic murder case. The Woodward case reaches into
the anxieties and the daily life of most families. You could say, as a social
fact, that the case is one of the unanticipated consequences of the feminist
movement.

The liberation of young women from the age-long expectation that every girl's
life is to look around for a husband in her late teens, to be married in her
20s, to have children and stay home to care for them until they're grown to
adulthood and fly the coop.

Put another way, the Woodward case is the most dramatic of many reminders in
our lives, that when more than half the young women in the Western world go out
to work, that most of them want children and have them, there is a new
universal anxiety at large, the secret fear, as one woman commentator put it,
in the back of every mother's head, that the people she's left her kids with
are likely to hurt them.

One good thing that has come out of this ill wind, is the sudden realisation
among working parents, nanny and au pair agencies and surely governments, is
that the au pair and nanny businesses are too casually organised. Already in
this country there's been a move for a Congressional enquiry into the running
of the au pair programme, which is a federal concern, being run by the United
States Information Agency.

Let us hope, when this happens and the professional standards are raised and
conditions of work better defined, that the investigators and the governments
will not overlook the root problem – how to reconcile the au pair's vision of a
cultural adventure with the employers' wish for inexpensive child care.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP