The arrest of Dave Winfield - 12 August 1983

I've noticed an odd thing about commentators during the silly season or the dog
days or whatever you care to call this appalling summer, which unlike the brief
but stifling European heat wave gives no sign of ever letting up. The oddity is
the fact that whereas in the spring or the glory of the fall, we don't feel we
are failing in our duty if we talk about things that maybe trivial to
governments but important to us. But when the winter blizzards paralyse the
cities of the plain or when as now 95% of the country is panting in
temperatures somewhere between 90 and 105 degrees, we feel guilty if we don't
go on about Chad and Nicaragua and Lebanon and whether the United States had
anything to do with the latest coo in Guatemala.

Well I'll tell you as one who battles everyday not very successfully to become
what are fathers and grandfathers called the well informed man, I have to
confess that like the rest of the human race, a revolution in Central America
maybe a catastrophe but a toothache is an emergency. Something almost as bad
hit me the other day and for 48hrs or so, I honestly didn't care very much
whether Mr Reagan overthrows the INAUD or becomes their buddy.

For some reason I've forgotten, I had to fish out an old video tape. I put it
on and what I saw was a shower of sparks, visual sparks and the colour wobbling
through the spectrum. The sound was okay, the tape was listenable but
un-watchable, weird. I put the thing aside as a defective tape though nothing
had been wrong with it the last time I played it and then I put on a fairly new
tape, the same thing. In increasing alarm, I went to one or two cherished sets
a series of my own programmes, some dramatic series I'd kept, some of the more
memorable things like 'Upstairs, Downstairs' to serve them all my days, several
golf championships, the head to head battles between Nicholas and Watson, which
if they aren't unforgettable ought to be. About 100 tapes in all, same thing. I
called in the doctor in the person of the BBC's, the New York BBC's Television
Engineer, the tapes had shrunk in the inferno of my apartment, which is a
delight for most of the year since I'm on the top floor the 15th floor of a
building overlooking the lush foliage of Central Park at a height, which offers
the view of an airplane coming in for a landing. The effect of a shrunken tape
I gathered is rather like what would happen if a gramophone record had shrunk
and the needle instead of hitting each track precisely hit somewhere in-between
at a wider interval than is necessary. Anyway, apparently nothing can be done.

Like about 4 or 5 million other people in this country in Britain I believe a
much larger proportion of the population, I have over the past 10yrs or so
acquired a library of video tapes, some kindly provided by the parties of the
first part the BBC, a couple of American networks, the rest taped by me during
the transmission of the programmes. By the way, this is still an illegal act in
the United States, the movie studios are fighting it and we may have to wait
for the Supreme Court to tell those, us 4 or 5 million when we may expect to go
off to jail.

If I seem to be offhand about this prospect, I ought to say that every
Constitutional lawyer in the country believes that this crime is practically
un-punishable and the law it breaks is enforceable just like prohibition when
more Americans drank hard liquor first manufactured and then drank frightful
stuff it was than ever before it since. The way it could have been stopped just
as the way they can stop us taping Coronation Street or the Wimbledon Finals is
for the Department of Justice to recruit several million new agents who would
invade our homes and flourish a warrant with the cry you can't do that their
here.

The Reagan Administration devoted as it is to low domestic spending and high
deficits, figures that to stop you and me in our career of crime would require
a new bureaucracy at an additional cost to the budget of billions of dollars,
the price say of 1 supersonic bomber their not about to do it! Well to put an
end to this melancholy story, I should explain the one unexplained item, have I
not got air conditioning? I have very effective, its mounted in a bathroom that
then through ducts and vents feeds a study and an adjoining bedroom, but when I
go off to the country at the weekends I turn it off and the apartment is left
to the mercies of being on the top floor of a building with a tar roof, which
has the effect of charcoal broiling grilling a tender steak. The Superintendent
of the House came in the other day and almost keeled over when he saw that the
temperature in the kitchen and the long hall was 104. My engineers tell me it
is too much, I am the victim of the magic of modern technology, you can open
and read a a very old book that's been slumbering in 100 degrees, a video tape
apparently boils and expires.

Well not too worry, some things are too big to morn about. Some years ago, an
old Secretary of mine being instructed while I was out of town to throwaway all
bills, bank statements, tax returns more than 6yrs old, which is the statutory
limit on the governments power to do an audit, she unwittingly shall we say
threw away 25yrs of my diaries. She was being a sensitive soul slightly aghast,
I said this is so awful, we'll say no more about it and we never did! That is
one ill wind that blew some good, no reader is ever going to have to sit down
to my memoirs.

Well I was saying the dark days abound in fascinating stories, which are always
being nudged aside by our foolish feeling of obligation to talk about the
burning issues which after all are going to be resolved one way or another
without our help, so I propose to catch up with a few things that have
fascinated more Americans than can ever know where Chad is or who is on who
side in Nicaragua.

First, there is the heartbreaking case of the murdered seagull, a case which
riveted the attention and inflamed the emotions like nothing since the arrest
of Dr. Crippon and Ethel Le Nerve on that transatlantic liner. The scene was
deceptively serene, pastoral a night baseball game, a hot night in Toronto with
a sever of a wind picking up the mist coming off Lake Ontario. The New York
Yankees were playing the Toronto Blue Jays as always the outfielders were
warming up tossing the ball between innings to each other, seagulls floated
over the stadium and winged over the field. One valiant and very popular Yankee
Dave Winfield finished warming up in the middle of the 5th inning and tossed an
extra ball to a ball boy standing near the Yankee ball pen, the ball took one
hop and landed on the head of a seagull that was taking a brief nap in right
centre field, death of one seagull. The ball boy got a towel and wrapped the
little corpse in it and respectfully left the field. Dave Winfield was
overcome. When the game was over, he was more literally overcome by plains
clothes officers who arrested him for the crime of murdering a protected
species an offence under Canadian law punishable by a fine of $500 and 6 months
in jail. He was taken off to a nearby police station to the stupefaction of his
team mates and the next morning the disbelief of the baseball fans of North
America.

You know American Presidents whenever their called on to pay tribute to our
neighbour to the North always boast about the undefended frontier 3,000 miles
long. Well I can tell you, the United States Army Chief of Staff was about to
send to that Frontier the 57% of the Army that is not watching the American
ramparts overseas, but in the nick of time, the Canadian Crown Attorney in
charge of the case looked over Section 4.02, sub-section 1A of the Canadian
Criminal Code, had a long telephone conversation with Dave Winfield and to the
enormous relief of the Pentagon and the American population dropped the
charges.

I don't know if anyone told the Crown Attorney that the odds against hitting
arresting seagull at 50 yards with a tossed baseball have been figured at 1,000
to 1. The other items that have struck me as being probably more important to
most people at the moment than wars or rumours of wars have all to do with
women. Sigmund Freud after 40yrs or more studying and listening to women for
the 50 minute hour on the coach said in something close to despair "what do
women want?" Well we've lately learned that most women have had the effrontery
to want to equal pay for equal work and equal rights under the law for
everything that has been considered since Roman times a peculiar privilege of
men. As I said last time, bully for them!

We've also paid respectful attention to social scientists who've told us that
marriage is on its way out especially the nuclear family, which has nothing to
do with radiation except for the initial radiance of the June ride. Well we
knew all this until last week when a comprehensive survey came out and it turns
out that about 80% of women want marriage, they hope for a lasting marriage and
75% of them expect fidelity on both sides. This is a shocker, I don't think
Queen Victoria who had considerable experience of the relations licit and
illicit between men and women would have put those figures any higher. On top
of this, there's just appeared a survey of what American woman want by way of
giving nourishment to their babies and here there really has been a dramatic
change of mind.

In 1900, 80 American women in 100 breast fed their babies, most of the rest
employed wet nurses. In 1970 only 5.5% of American mother's breastfed, today
almost 6 times as many and the preference still going up. It does look as if
the sociologists were going to have to go back to their drawing board or
astrologer or abacus or whatever it is they use to make their profound
predictions of the next lurch or trend in human society.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (Â©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts Â©BBC

Letter from America scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP