Tip O'Neill - 14 January 1994

It's been almost a century and a half since the coincidence of the Irish potato
famine with Samuel Cunard's first regular steamship service across the Atlantic
made Cobh the first compulsory stop after the sailing from Liverpool and made
Boston the American port to receive the first great tidal wave of impoverished
Irish.

One of these was a bricklayer Thomas O'Neill and the other evening his
grandson, who was sitting at home – an old man 81 years old, broad in the beam,
a shambling great body topped by a big face, a swatch of yellow-white hair, a
bulbous nose and the look of a genial codfish – he was sitting there spending a
simple evening. He was eating popcorn and watching a basketball game. Then his
hand fell on his lap and an hour or two later a true American original was dead
and gone. And perhaps also the domination of the city bred Irish politician
Thomas P O'Neill Junior was the name universally called "Tip", a quintessential
Boston Irish Catholic Democrat whose first job was that of a 14-year-old
trimming hedges for the gentle folk at 17¢ an hour and to his last job was
Speaker of the House of Representatives. For 10 years, he was there at the eye
of all the political storms and at the controls of the American legislative
system.

I realise that's a large sentence and I ought to say it once what the speaker
is in the American system and what he's not. Like the speaker in a
parliamentary system, he presides over the House he keeps it in order and
decides who shall speak from the floor. This role has a combination master of
ceremonies and referee, is I believe, just about the extent of a parliamentary
speaker's power. In the American system, these are the least of his duties and
indeed most of the time he deputises the referee's job to colleagues of his own
party while he's off exercising all the other powers that make him the highest
ranking officer of the Congress not just of the House, but of the Senate too.

The first striking difference is that he's not chosen to be just a referee, a
chairman. The party that wins the most House seats in the previous election,
the majority party automatically chooses the Speaker and he becomes the leader,
the political leader of his party in the house. Just as influentially as a
prime minister, he sets the agenda, he picks parties' members on the select
committees and on the powerful Rules Committee, he guides the movement of bills
through the committees, weighs their chances of passage on the floor and he
alone decides which bills to call up for a debate and which to bury. And if he
deeply dislikes a bill, it's tough to bring it to a vote.

Finally, the speaker is third in line of succession to the presidency. If for
instance when Mr Nixon resigned, if there had been no vice president in office
– and that has happened – then the speaker would have gone to the White House.
So the the death of a man who was speaker of the House for 10 years throughout
the troublesome Carter years and the resounding Reagan revolution can have left
a mark on American politics in history deeper than that of many Presidents. Tip
O'Neill's mark is vivid and attractive because he was a jolly, generous, sly,
larger-than-life representative of a vanished type, not just a Boston Irish
politician, half the Boston city council today are Irish, but a resoundingly
successful Irish American populist politician on the national scene.

So how about John Kennedy, Bobby Kennedy, Senator Ted Kennedy? Well they'd gone
an extra generation from a poor immigrant to lace curtains to college to a
tycoon's brood, but all the Kennedys starting with Jack learned the game at Tip
O'Neill's elbow walking through one neighbourhood after another day after day
calling on Mrs Hennessey and the Italian barber and the Chinese laundryman,
helping this man get a job, bailing that man's son out of jail, making a point
of going to weddings of all denominations, to be prompt in rescuing people from
a tenement fire, help out a sorrowing widow, be in touch with the home baseball
team, hire, beg, borrow motorcars to pick up the old, the halt, the sick come
election day.

Forget the fat cats for the time being, he used to say, they'll follow the
votes, stay with the locals. All politics, his favourite slogan, "all politics
is local" and politics is about jobs, when it's not, it's about money – who
gets what.

So as a political mentor Tip O'Neill stressed to his protégés one duty they
must fulfil all the time, the dispensing of small favours to small people and
when the time came to take action on a larger stage, like contriving majorities
in the House, you used persuasion first and compromise after which, of course,
but always leave the gentle reminder of old political debts and the strong hint
of favours yet to come or yet to be withheld.

In the high summer of a famous presidential year 1960 in a hotel in St Louis, a
scene took place that sounds like some forgotten episode from Preston Sturges's
1940 film The Great McGinty, which is still the funniest and most savage movie
satire on American politics. Three men have just risen from the head table and
excuse themselves from a large fundraising breakfast, they were off together to
the men's room, which is a very odd thing to happen in life because as John
O'Hara once remarked, only women go to the bathroom together.

The man who led the way was an old solid citizen and, to the joy of the other
two, a very wealthy supporter of the Democratic ticket, his name was known
wherever two or three Americans were gathered together to bend an elbow and
quaff this man's renowned product – he was one of America's most famous
brewers. The other two, the younger was a long-necked beanpole who looked
younger than his early 40s, ropy hair and a mocking green-eyed look. He was one
John F Kennedy, the Democrats' presidential candidate. The other man was by
comparison a huge man shambling broad-bean, you'd already guessed, with the
face of a genial codfish, Thomas "Tip" O'Neill. They arrived at the men's room
and the old brewer took out from his pocket a stack of papers and the rest of
the scene is told in Mr O'Neill's own words. "How did we do?" asked Kennedy.
"We raised 29,000," said the brewer, "I've got 17,000 in cash here and 12,000
in cheques." "Great," said Jack, "give me the cash and give Kenny O'Donald the
cheques". "Geeze," I said, "this business is no different if you're running for
ward leader or president of the United States." Mr O' Neill of course does not
say whether the pocketed cash was duly reported as a campaign contribution.

Even as late as 1960 campaigning was, shall we say looser, than it is today,
though nothing like it was in the days of Mr O'Neill's famous predecessor the
slow-talking fast-thinking Texas bald head Speaker Sam Rayburn. I remember Mr
O'Neill wrote almost with a note of tenderness how he helped the re-election of
a young congressman who'd been a good ally. Sam called him into the office
reached into the bottom drawer and handed him $10,000 in cash. I always assumed
it came from lobbyists and from his rich oil friends in Texas, but the ethnics
of the Congress were very different in those days.

Well, different or not, there's no question that Tip O'Neill throughout the
great decade when he held more legislative power than anyone in Washington
managed with uncanny skill always to stay on the bright side of that twilight
zone that separates what is expedient from what is unlawful and he was in
politics all his life.

Grandson of an immigrant bricklayer, he grew up in a city, which at the
beginning of the century quite glaringly and shamelessly put Irishmen in their
place by displaying in employment exchanges and shop windows "Nina" signs, "No
Irish Need Apply". The bigotry of the old Yankees and their monopoly of power
surprisingly stirred little bitterness in Mr O'Neill, but only the strong urge
to introduce the new immigrant Irish, Jews, Italians and other have-nots to the
beauty of the ballot box. My first political hero, said Mr O'Neill, was an
Irishman named Lomasney who met immigrants at the boat, took them off at once
to register to vote before he found them a lodging or a job. On election day
they showed their gratitude by accepting a marked ballot and palming the clean
one, which was then slipped to Mr Lomasney to be marked off for the guy in
line.

Tip O'Neill started as a truck driver, he was shamed by a nun into getting a
year or more of college and then he ran for the Boston city council and then
for the Massachusetts state legislature and from there to the United States
House of Representatives and he was there 25 years before he got the call to
ascend the throne of the Speaker. He always said he knew all the tricks but
practiced the ethics his father taught him, a clean and honest life remember
your responsibility to you fellow men and remember always where you came from,
he had very simple ideological aims to lift people in his state out of menial
lives and bring them into the middle class. And in Washington, always to
remember – and he kept shouting this during the regime of Ronald Reagan who
believed government was itself a problem, a nuisance and interference – always
remember that government exists first to help the poor, the sick, the old and
the handicapped, which is a terribly discredited old-fashioned belief, which
Roosevelt's first and second New Deals came to make into law. Roosevelt said,
too, Tip O'Neill was like God to me. That's how old fashioned Mr O'Neill was.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP