1000th letter - 24 March 1968

I wish that this thousandth letter could be about the spring or American
children, or any one of the many amiable things we've talked about down the
years.

But it must be about the thing that bewilders the American people like nothing
else, in all these thousand weeks. For last week, the administration was
brought to the bar of a standing committee of Congress. And nothing, either in
the parliamentary or a federal system, can offer such an inquisition as a
congressional enquiry, which is the nerve system of what Americans like to call
the democratic process.

And nowhere is it seen to more impressive effect than in the cross-examination
of a secretary of state by the Senate foreign relations committee. Which, among
other things, has the power to reject ambassadors and treaties proposed by the
president.

So now, the committee was anxious to recall the president to his constitutional
duty to seek the advice and consent of the Senate on a war that had got away
from both of them – the undeclared war in Vietnam. Here was the secretary of
state, called as the president's understudy, and subjected to the third degree
by the representatives of the people.

And, if that sounds a little lurid or sentimental, let me remind you of the
cast of characters that sat like a court of judges the other day, and
challenged Secretary Rusk from ten in the morning till 6.30 one day, and from
nine to two the next. There was a farmer from Vermont; a mining engineer from
Montana; a Rhodes scholar from Arkansas; the schoolteacher son of a hardware
merchant from South Dakota; an electric products manufacturer from Missouri; a
stockman from Kansas; a professor of Far Eastern history; a former secretary of
the air; six lawyers – not too many to reflect the preponderance of lawyers who
sit in Congress, and who do, after all, make the laws.

None of these men had been in the Senate for less than twelve years and the
farmer had been there 28 years, and two others for 24 years.

Secretary Rusk had resisted this call for two years, but then there was a
well-substantiated rumour that General Westmoreland wanted another 200,000
troops, and suddenly the world expressed its distrust of American policy by
losing its confidence in the dollar.

For two days, Secretary Rusk was questioned and quizzed and lectured to and
pleaded with by a committee whose old ration of hawks to doves was
significantly shrinking. The role of Chairman Fulbright, as a scold and
ironist, could now be presumed. So could the ringing patriotism of Senator
Mundt of South Dakota. And the troubled curiosity of young Senator Church of
Idaho. And the holy wrath of Senator Wayne Morse of Oregon, God's favourite
maverick.

But, last week, only Fulbright and Morse stayed with the usual script. The
others were sufficiently disturbed to think aloud with more honesty and
eloquence than they had shown before, and all of them maintained a gravity and
courtesy such as men do when they’re scared, when they’re losing an attitude,
and acquiring an anxiety.

Nothing was more startling than Senator Mundt's suspicion that elections in
south Vietnam were not alone worth ensnaring half a million Americans into the
continental bog of south-east Asia.

And a bugle sounding the retreat is not more ominous than the confession of
Senator Symington, a resolute hawk, that he was now a prey to misgiving.
Senator Symington had been saying for years that the war had better be won or
written off since the day was coming when the United States would have to weigh
the cost of it in gold that wasn’t here.

He has always been indulged by his colleagues and friends as a man riding a
comical hobby horse. Last week he had the sad satisfaction of being taken
seriously. And, at last, the American casualties in Vietnam surpassed those of
Korea; a turn which I suggested a year ago would be the hardest test of the
peoples' tolerance of the war.

So, we were starting all over again with the fundamental questions: how had it
come about? Was it indeed a crusade, or a vast miscalculation? Would Asia
crumble to Communism, if south Vietnam failed? Was it the wrong war in the
wrong place, or the right war, in the wrong place? Was the United States the
only man in the boat rowing in time?

A hundred books and a thousand editorial writers have recited and disputed the
political origins of the war, and enlarged on the human tragedy of its conduct.
What matters, or will come to matter, to most people I think, is not any new
balance we can strike in the old argument, but the realisation that America,
which has never lost a war, is not invincible. And the very late discovery that
an elephant can trumpet and shake the earth, but not the self-possession of the
ants, who hold it.

So, when I say how did it come about, I am not thinking of splitting the hair
between the south-east Asia treaty's pledge to resist aggression, and the
American protocol that stipulated Communist aggression. I mean how did the
American people move from their early indifference or complacency to the
recognition of a nightmare?

Well, the war crept up on us with no more menace than a zephyr. South Vietnam
was only one of many strange place names that joined the noble roll call of
countries which America, in the early glow of its world power, swore to protect
and defend.

If Russia, that atomic dinosaur could be scared off Iran, and Greece and
Turkey, and foiled in Western Europe, it never crossed our minds that we
couldn’t intimidate Asian Communists, who fought with sticks and stones.
Certainly it would have been churlish to deny these brave little countries the
handful of American technicians they needed to train their armies.

Well, Johnson came in and for a year or more, the shadow of Vietnam failed to
darken the bright procession of legislation he drove through the 89th Congress.
It dawned on us very slowly that the American technicians were turning into
American soldiers. Then we admitted that the men were off to the rice paddies
and not the desks behind the lines. The draft felt the chill and the college
boys and the Vietniks were born. It was not, with most of them, a conscientious
objection to war itself. Most, I think, would have admitted that Hitler had to
be stopped and that Korea, the first United Nations' war, was a good war.

But they were baffled by the morality of this war which killed more civilians
than soldiers, and devastated the land we were sworn to protect. A war in which
there were no attacks at dawn, no discernible lines and few human restraints
either of rules or weapons.

Napalm and fragmentation bombs came into the language and sickened us, though
our own strategical bombing of Dresden, in the second war, had been worst than
Hiroshima, and millions of women and children had been routed from their homes
in Europe too. War, the administration could only remind us, was hell. So we
piled up the forces and piled on the force, and dropped more bombs than all the
bombs dropped in Europe and Africa in the second war.

These, and many other doubts and disasters were aired and tossed before Dean
Rusk. The administration’s position had something of the straightforward
grandeur of Johann Sebastian Bach; if only Bach were the tune that's called
for.

The theme was that the war in Asia was a continuation of the European struggle
– first against Hitler then against the Russians. The United States was pledged
to resist aggression against free nations. If one pledge was betrayed, then the
other wards and dependents would panic and succumb to Communism. The countries
of south-east Asia are a stack of dominoes and if one falls, so will they all.

It seems to me that anybody who ridicules this theory is obliged to say who and
why it’s wrong, and to suggest some better way, of ... as Dean Rusk puts it,
"organising the peace" – either through the United Nations, or through some
other alliance that can guarantee preponderant power.

Preponderant power, that has always been the true deterrent, in spite of the
Christian rhetoric that breathed so piously through the preamble to the treaty
of Westphalia, 1648. And through the preamble to the charter of the United
Nations, 1945.

All these favourable balances of power have expressed that power through their
willingness to use their ultimate weapon. With the British it was the navy, and
it was through their navy that they could patrol the seven seas, put down wars
in Asia, confine all big wars to Europe, as a backstop for landbound allies.

Today, it seems to me, the United States is the world’s greatest power, but
only through its nuclear power. And what is never acknowledged, the universal
taboo against the use of this power, disarms America at a blow, and leaves it a
large and rich, but far from omnipotent, power capable of fighting one or two
unconventional wars with conventional weapons. This, it seems to me, is the
real American position in the world today and the reason why its best aims are
frustrated.

The United States has 132 military bases abroad and solemn treaty commitments
to come to the aid of 43 nations if they are attacked, or what is more likely
these days, disrupted from within. The earnest and gentle Senator Church put
his finger on this Achilles heel by asking the secretary if the great conflict
was not between commitment and capacity – in other words, America maybe right,
but is she able? How did it come about that this country led successfully by a
soldier, then an alert foreign affair student, and then by the shrewdest of
politicians, committed itself to play St George to 43 dragons?

We must go back, I think, to what I called the early glow of American world
power in the early 1950s. That is when the pledges were given, and when the
cost of them was never counted.

The Communists, not to mention the nationalists and the millions of Asians who
simply want to see the white man leave their continent for good, had not
attempted a test of American power. As late as the day of Kennedy’s
inauguration, the United States was still flexing and rippling its muscles for
lack of exercise. And on that day, the president delivered himself of a
sentence, magnificent as rhetoric, appalling as policy.

Secretary Rusk very much moved, recited it the other day to the committee as
the touchstone of America’s resolve, "Let every nation know whether it wishes
us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any
hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe, to assure the survival and the
success of liberty."

This, I suggest is fine to read but fatal to act on. It maybe the wish of a
strong nation to do this, but in reality, it will not support any friend or
fight any foe or bear any hardship, or support the burden, say, of a civil war
in its own land, in order to rush to the aid of 43 friends, and fight 43 foes.

Vietnam, I fear, is the price of the Kennedy inaugural.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP