Pope John Paul II's visit - 5 October 1979

There has been nothing in my time like the popular reception of Pope John Paul
II.

Now of course the public exposure of any famous figure is magnified today by
the presence everywhere of the television camera. And, having had a deal to do
with the media myself, I know how easy it is by a careful placement of one
camera to make the microcosm of the screen convey the feeling that a whole
town, not just one building, is in flames; that not just one farmyard, but the
whole countryside is at war; that not just a gathering of 100 people, but the
whole population of a city has turned out to greet a rock group or a
politician.

It's the whole aim of resort cities in what we call the "Sun Belt" in their
tourist advertisements to leave the impression that the state of Arizona is one
vast desert with all the wild flowers in bloom, that Florida is a continuous
beach where tanned men and nubile girls bask on golden sands by a foaming sea.

I remember, it must have been 40 years ago, when a rather crummy seaside town
in Florida wanted to boost its tourist trade, it did it with the wide
circulation of a single photograph of a girl in a bathing suit beckoning to us
from under a palm tree. A wry old professor, the father of American economic
geography said, "This picture only went to show that constant photographing
could not harm one tree". If the camera that took that beguiling photo had
moved by six inches, it would have shown a run-down bar and trucks pounding
along the two-lane highway close by the ocean shore.

But it is not possible to have cameras on trucks following the Pope along 10
and 20 miles of his route throughout Boston and New York and Philadelphia and
balloon the actual numbers, the huge continuous throngs along the sidewalks
who'd waited since dawn for the moment of a single cheer and waited, on those
early days, in a misted drizzle. "The choice of the day for our meeting", he
said down at Battery Park looking across to a ghostly Statue of Liberty with
his hair awry and his cloak flapping, "the choice of the day was not the best".

None of us, I think, who saw some similar occasions can forget the arrival in
New York of Eisenhower from the wars, the ticker-tape parade for General
MacArthur, the delirium of a five-mile stretch of lower New York and Broadway
when John Glenn came back from the first orbit. Pius XII, formerly Cardinal
Pacelli, came here in 1936, an erect and sombre figure and he received an odd
welcome. Paul VI too went to a Mass in Yankee Stadium in 1965 and the great
crowds, singing and swaying, at nightfall is not easily forgotten, but these
were understandably famous religious occasions.

The visit of Karol Wojtyla, the first Polish pope, has eclipsed all of them and
turned a pastoral visit into an occasion of, you might say, national rejoicing.
I doubt, I take that back, I don't doubt, I'm sure that no monarch, no
astronaut, no statesman of any country could possibly have aroused the
populations of the cities in the way of John Paul II. He said over and over
that this is a pastoral mission, that he's here as the successor of Peter. He
wore, at all times the fishermen's ring, as a pastor visiting his flock, but
thanks to the personality of this pope and the steady eye of television on him,
half the people of America felt at one with the ope for the first time in
history.

I suppose people will try for a long time to come to analyse why this should be
so. First of all, there is the plain fact that whereas before now the pope has
been a remote and cloistered figure whose views on life came to us from
published encyclicals and the briefest glimpses of him waving or intoning from
the balcony of St Peter's. This pope was eager to come out from the cloister
into the world.

The original cause, the invitation, for this American visit, we shouldn't
forget, came from the Secretary General of the United Nations and with many a
former pope, if he'd been installed in the television age, this would have
meant an address to the General Assembly of the United Nations and the single
Mass in some great stadium. But we have to put it down to nothing but the
character of John Paul II himself that he used this invitation as the
opportunity to go into cities in the East, in the Midwest, and meet and greet
all sorts of people on their own ground.

He accepted the obvious itineraries down Beacon Hill and out on to the Boston
Common, ticker-tape parade down Broadway, but he requested also to go into the
slums of Rocksbury near Boston,and into Harlem and out to a humble church in
Iowa and, always, the main message was to the young people.

So if you combine the novelty of television with the novelty of a gregarious
pope, you have only to add the extraordinary personal charm of the man himself,
his benign vigour, the unwavering waggish and tender smile he had at the ready
for children held high; for blacks waving from behind a lamp post or a tree;
the sudden gravity and gentleness with which he spotted and touched the
handicapped along the way.

All this was magnified and kept by the surprise of his fine speaking voice, a
sort of resonant intimacy that stilled crowds of 50,000, half a million, an
assembly of statesmen and a Madison Square Garden teaming with lusty and
mischievous kids.

There's another thing, and I'm sure that it has been the unforgotten ingredient
of his triumph. Millions of Americans, Catholic, Jewish, religious and
irreligious people who came here 80 or more years ago, from pilgrims in
northern and central Europe, and people who came here in our time from Hungary,
Romania, Czechoslovakia, not least Poland, any of us who'd lived in this city
for no more than 20 years know or have met scores of them. Such people escaped
from repression and made a new life and here, perhaps more than anywhere, such
people identify religion apart from any man who survived repression among his
own people who, as he put it, before the Assembly of the United Nations "would
be dishonest to the great cause of man if I should keep silent, I who come from
the country on whose living body Auschwitz was constructed".

I should guess that the personal history of this pope in his young days
certainly is better known to Americans than to any other people except the
Poles. He was only 19 when the Second War broke out with the invasion of his
country. Krakow, his hometown, was under Nazi occupation when his father, the
non-commissioned officer,, died and the young Karol went to work as a labourer
in a stone quarry and, after that, in a chemical factory and in the evenings
acted in an avant-garde amateur dramatic group.

He had a couple of severe accidents from a streetcar and a runaway lorry, but
once he was over a fractured skull, he began to study for the priesthood. This,
in itself in 1943, with the Gestapo standing by, does not suggest an easy life;
he joined what in fact was known as a "flying university", it was an
underground seminary, with its location, if I may risk the simile, never more
fixed than that of a floating poker game. They studied and prayed in cellars,
cottages, garages, with a guard on hand. It took the liberation of Poland to
make it possible for him at last to be ordained as a priest. Of course, he knew
he lived his daily life among people who were tortured, imprisoned, whisked off
one night and never to be seen again except as a bag of anonymous bones in a
concentration camp.

All this is well remembered here and you could see the proof of it in the lined
faces of many old immigrants and the tears of younger ones as he moved among
them insisting on the joy of his faith. You don't have to be very old in this
country to appreciate that the Pope's visit and the general triumph of it is it
a startling thing in the America of 1979, it reflects a swift and dramatic
change in the popular view of Roman Catholics and Catholicism. Two generations
ago, labour exchanges and newspapers had little printed notices under their
listing of available jobs, "No Catholics need apply".

Twenty years ago, no more, it was thought it was inconceivable that a Catholic
could be elected President of the United States. One of them, a gamely and
greatly popular mayor of New York, Al Smith, had tried it 40 years ago, but the
politicians say that to get to be president it doesn't matter how many people
are for you, so long as there are not too many people who hate you.

Al Smith was beloved in New – much of – New York City, but nationally, as a
Catholic simply, he was also well hated and he went down before the hating
legions of the Klu Klux Klan and redneck delegations from the Protestant South.

John Kennedy ducked the issue for a time, but was well advised that sooner or
later he would have to face it as rumours and myths spread around the country
that in any great political crisis his first advisor would be the pope. In a
single speech in Houston, Texas he exploded this malevolent rubbish and no more
was heard of it. It used to be only 30 years ago that Catholics were poorer,
worse educated than the generality of Baptists, Methodists and certainly
Episcopalians. Today, they are – outside the South – on the whole better
educated and better off than these other denominations, but as the Pope
reminded the 20,000 Catholic children in Madison Square Garden, an ordinary
Catholic school education still entails sacrifice. American Catholics carry a
double tax burden: they pay for the public schools and their own parochial
schools, it's a grievance and an equity, if you like, that still burns.

Finally, if we are to find another and stronger clue to the mass feeling that
John Paul II has arrived at home from home, we ought to remember that no other
big country has grown in Catholic strength like the United States. Forty
thousand of them in 1790, 21 million in 1938, only 40 years later, 51 million,
one American in four, and the most rapid and high rates of conversion have been
among American blacks.

It is something for the liberated and the hedonists and the politicians – not
least the Communists – to ponder.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP