Nixon's resignation - 9 August 1974

Nobody has ever denied America a gift for melodrama in its history as well as
its literature, but I’ve noticed there’s an equally reliable and lamentable
tendency in Europe to report even the gravest American political upheaval as
some sort of comic horror film.

Watergate, it’s true, started out as an almost absurd late night movie – a raid
two summers ago on one of the two political parties’ headquarters by six men
claiming that they were saving the country from a takeover by Fidel Castro. In
the beginning indeed, Watergate was freely called here the Watergate Caper; and
once the men were caught, tried and imprisoned, everybody breathed again. Not
least the President who said that the culprits had been punished and that was
the end of the affair.

Through the summer of the 1972 presidential campaign, very few people knew more
or suspected more to justify what seemed at the time the preposterous charge of
the democratic candidate Senator George McGovern that Watergate was a symptom
of the most corrupt presidential administration in 50 years, and he was
thinking then of the money-grubbing and bribery scandals of President Harding’s
regime in the '20s. A little later on, Senator McGovern said this was the most
scandalous regime in American history.

Well presidential campaigns are never noted for sober language and nothing much
more was heard about it until it came out that one at least of the burglars had
been a close adviser of the president. That’s when the president made his first
public statement assuring everybody that nobody in, or ever connected with, the
White House had anything to do with it. And then those two young reporters from
the Washington Post started to dig and found that the real pile of dirt –
enormous sums of hush money – lay, so to speak, in the basement of the White
House.

In all the intervening public airing of this malodorous affair, we have to
admit that there’s been a wealth of melodramatic and even comic detail. But as
the blame began to be placed more and more at the door of the White House, we
also came to see that the deepening suspicions about President Nixon’s inner
circle bewildered the American people, brought the American system into
contempt abroad, and threatened, as they still do, the strength of the North
American Treaty Alliance, the ability of the United States to bargain about
arms with the Soviet Union. Threatened, in a word, the defence of Europe.

Now long before these fears were widely dispersed among sensible men, some
newspapers – both here and abroad – began to jump the gun and talk about
impeachment. They inferred and actually welcomed the possibility of impeachment
from a riot of rumour and uncorroborated testimony. For the longest time, it
was the unsupported testimony of one man, John Dean. Most of these gun jumpers
here were already sworn enemies of Mr Nixon, especially liberal papers and
commentators who, when the same roughshod inferences about their friends were
being drawn by the late Senator McCarthy, howled in protest about the
scoundrelism of damning a man before he could defend himself or assuming a
man’s guilt on the basis of his indictment by a grand jury.

Well we did go through a disreputable period when McCarthyism was again the
weapon, but it was attached to the other foot. And then the digging went deeper
and the dirt piled up and it became plain as a stink bomb that most of the
smell was coming from the White House and impeachment became a possibility and
then, in the past few months, a probability.

If the American people floundered for a painfully long time in a fog of
bewilderment and cynicism, they were brought back to a sense of the toughness
of their system and the responsibility of the Congress by the recent and, as it
turned out, the decisive public hearings of the House Judiciary Committee.
These were the hearings that ought to have been televised at length abroad for
I believe they would have shown that, in a crisis of power, the federal system
has serious and effective weapons which make the people of the United States
and their elected representatives sovereign, and only the people.

Not many Americans, I believe, could tell you offhand what the House Judiciary
Committee is about. They may know from the textbooks that it’s the body
empowered to screen new laws, to look into (on behalf of the Congress) any
legal dispute between the other branches of government that might affect the
constitutional power of the Congress. It also is given the job of drafting
articles of impeachment of a president, a vice president or a federal judge. It
is, you might say, the DA, the district attorney, of the Congress. It prepares
the case, or it says there is no case.

Now since there has only been one case of presidential impeachment since the
Republic began, naturally none of us on the outside has ever seen the judiciary
committee at work. And I’m always in two minds about the wisdom of televising
the proceedings of any national legislature, but I’m certain that the decision
to let the judiciary committee’s hearings be televised – not in part, but, as
we say, gavel to gavel – was not only wise, but was God sent.

Here we saw 38 men and women, all of them experienced lawyers, talking,
debating with good temper, cogently, often subtly, discussing the grounds for
impeachment far more thoughtfully than most newspaper editorials anywhere have
done.

The great fear that many people had was that the committee would be seen as a
simple two-way mirror. If you’re a Democrat, you look at things one way; if
you’re a Republican, another way. The first debates deepened this fear in many
people because the votes to recommend each article of impeachment seemed to
follow the party bias.

It was possible for last-ditch Republicans to harp on their theme that the
whole of Watergate was a Democratic plot, but then once the drafting of the
articles was done and the committee began to argue over them and amend them, it
became pretty clear that the opponents of impeachment had, to put it mildly, a
point.

From mountains of testimony, from the vast and murky evidence of the
presidential tapes, they all agreed that the president had demeaned himself as
a man, that the tone of his discussions with his aides was vulgar, tricky, and
lamentable in the highest officer of the land. But they held to the point that
a man might be vulgar, devious, even foul-mouthed, even personally immoral,
even dishonest, but unless he was dishonest in the actual performance of his
presidential duties – in other words, unless he had failed in the oath he takes
on the day of his inauguration, the oath faithfully to execute the laws of the
United States – he might still not have committed an impeachable offence.
Inference from all that testimony was not enough.

There was no clear, they said, direct evidence, nor testimony, that the
president knew about Watergate or had tried to cover it up before the date he
said he’d first heard about it, 22 March 22 1973. They stuck with this point.
But the seriousness and fairness of the committee appeared when the Democratic
legal counsel drew up two articles of impeachment: one, that the president had
evaded income taxes; the other that he’d lied to the Congress about the secret
bombing of Cambodia.

Now it’s difficult for a public man to keep track of all the details, the
allowances, the exemptions he may claim on his income tax. We are all at the
mercy of a tax accountant or a lawyer. They decided, wisely I think, to give
the president the benefit of the doubt.

On the secret bombing of Cambodia, they began to think of Kennedy’s entirely
secret plan to invade Cuba. The fact that it failed does not exonerate him from
the secret assumption of a power that the Constitution denies him. This, too,
seemed very dangerous ground, so Democrats swung over against it and it was
defeated.

On the main charge that the president had obstructed justice, some Republicans
swung over. You know if you hear of a felony and don’t go to a judge or a
policeman and report it, you are liable to a criminal conviction. The committee
decided there was enough evidence to warrant recommending that article of
impeachment to the house, and the first count of the house when the hearings
were over, private count, showed that the president was pretty certain to have
a large majority against him.

Still, there was for ten members of the committee out of 38 that missing link –
incontrovertible proof that the president knew about Watergate and had tried to
suppress the knowledge of it before 22 March 1973.

And then this week, it came as undeniable as a summer lightning storm. The
Supreme Court, you recall, ordered him to give to the courts more tapes. His
lawyer heard them and was amazed. He’d never been told what was in them, and he
told the president that if he didn’t release them, one in particular – he, the
lawyer – would quit the case.

So with ghastly reluctance, the president released the thunderbolt, the tape on
which he clearly heard about Watergate and then ordered Haldeman to get the CIA
to stop the FBI investigating it – positively, clearly, in pretty rough
language. The date of that talk was 23 June 1972, only six days after the
break-in, nine months before the president claimed he first heard about it.

In itself it is damning in the extreme, but it also casts a new and damning
light on many, many ambiguities of the tapes already out. He knew. He covered
up. He lied steadily and unblinkingly to the press, to many a public audience,
to the people.

Within 24 hours, the ten holdouts on the judiciary committee, Republicans and
some Southern Democrats, reversed themselves and said they would now vote for
impeachment. The head count in the house showed an overwhelming majority
against him. His support in the Senate dwindled below the one-third he would
need to save him.

So now he could resign and assure himself of $156,000 a year pension and
allowances, or be impeached, convicted and have $18,000 pension as an old
Congressman and an old sailor. He could still face criminal prosecution once he
was restored to ordinary citizenship, so he might bargain for immunity, as Vice
President Agnew successfully did. He might go on believing, against all the
omens, that he’d salvage one-third of the Senate.

These were the awful alternatives he faced as the leading conservatives in the
Senate met to decide whether to tell him he had to go. And the rest you know.

In the enormous reverberation of his downfall, we should remember that what
doomed him in the end was the 8-0 verdict of the Supreme Court three weeks ago
that he must deliver up what turned out to be the fatally incriminating tape.

It was the assurance the country has sadly needed that, in any showdown about
the supreme power in the land, the court, representing the people of the United
States, is supreme and not the president, whoever he is.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP