Operation Desert Storm - 17 January 1992

It seems this week has been devoted in print and on the tube to worrying about
the footloose republics that once comprised the Soviet Union, but mostly to
remembering Desert Storm.

The 16th of January, being the day the war began a year ago, was of course not
to be overlooked by the Republicans, to remind people of a swift and famous
victory, but by the Democrats who can go about contrasting with many
manufactured sighs, the George Bush who mobilised half a million troops and
thrashed Saddam Hussein in a hundred hours than the George Bush just returned
from a trip to Tokyo, whose main purpose, according to the Democrats, was to
beg the Japanese for mercy.

So long as the recession drags on, the Democrats who are running for the
presidency can hammer away at this theme of the martial George Bush abroad and
the faltering George Bush at home. Look here, upon this picture and on this,
one candidate quoted, and it didn't matter that the small crowd stamping in the
snows of New Hampshire didn't know or care much who was being quoted.

Apart from this mechanical theme, the Democrats have problem with remembering
or celebrating the desert war. President Bush caught them out when, a year ago,
they started complaining of the fact – and it is a fact – that since the
Congress declared war on Italy in 1941, the United States has participated in
many little wars on the say-so only of the president of the United States. Even
though the constitution says that the power to declare war rests exclusively
with the Congress. The Democrats at the turn of last year were getting ready to
start bawling "no more undeclared wars", when President Bush said, quite right,
I'm going to put it up to you. So he did and the Congress voted by handsome
majority to back him. Moreover, and this was something that even the Democrats
who urged economic sanctions but no war could not ignore, the Security Council
of the United Nations had voted unanimously for the first time to take military
action.

The other memory the Democrats don't want to revive is the number of them who,
right up to the moment when the guns went off, argued that economic sanctions
alone would be enough to cripple Saddam Hussein. Anybody who believed that then
has surely had to have a grim second thought. In the light of the findings of
that United Nations inspection team, which has unearthed all sorts of nuclear
materials* and facilities, in spite of the cataclysmic bombing and the
sanctions. Mr Bush well knows the discomfiture of the Democrats about the war
and the availability of their old speeches and protests and he isn't going to
let go of the one prominent Democrat who spoke and voted against the war all
along and he, Mr Bush, must be very grateful to him – he is no less than Mr
Mitchell, the Democrats' leader in the Senate. Up in New Hampshire this week,
Mr Bush said, with well-feigned disgust, if I'd listened to him a year ago,
Saddam Hussein would now be in Saudi Arabia and you'd be paying $20 a gallon
for gas.

An aspect of the war that the President's critics have fastened on with more
confidence is the order to cease fire as soon as the Saddam legions were seen
to be retreating north, hence the failure to block the city of Basra and so
surround and capture not only two divisions of the Iraqi Republican Guard, but
600 tanks and that fleet of helicopters which were soon be used to suppress the
Shi'ite rebellion. The answer to that is one the president will stand by, that
the United Nations mandate had been fulfilled, which was to liberate Kuwait and
that the damage being inflicted on the tanks and trucks and guns and men of the
retreating Iraqis, was already horrendous. General Powell, the chairman of the
Joint Chiefs, had the decisive word here. What was streaming headlong north, he
told the President, was a broken army, thousands of soldiers no longer able to
fight, running for their lives. To subject them to massive aerial bombardment
would be, he said, un-American and un-chivalrous. President Bush listened and
agreed and ordered the ceasefire. That decision also is enough to parry
criticism that the Allied forces should have gone on to Baghdad. That was no
part of the United Nations sanction and would undoubtedly have led to long
occupation and spreading outrage throughout the Arab world.

About the CIS, I suppose we have to call it, or the loose collection of
republics on the loose that for 70 years formed the Soviet Union. Rarely an
evening goes by that we don't see something, hear something, that requires us
to cross our thumbs and hope for the best through the winter. The bread queues,
the Lenin-Stalinist demonstrations in Moscow, the boast of the rather
impressive Mr Zhirinovsky, that he will have 99% of his administration in place
to change the guard and succeed Mr Yeltsin by mid-April at the latest. And in
one long and unforgettable scene, the reminder that among the hungry, in the
breadlines, are hundreds of nuclear physicists whose salaries have gone or are
in doubt, who are either getting offers or soon will, to be restored to a
comfortable, if not a lavish life by any one of 10 or 12 countries that have
nuclear ambitions or a capability already well underway.

Talking of changing of the guard, do you remember the name Angela Davis? Seems
strange to be bringing her name in just that way when you consider that 20
years ago there were committees of young people formed, all over the world, to
set her free. Certainly I know there was one in Golders Green and surely there
were chapters in Bombay and Berlin and Stockholm and on and on. Well, Angela
Davis was a young university teacher in the University of California at
Berkeley, across the bay from San Francisco. She was beautiful and black and
bright and she was a down the line Marxist, which in those days meant
unquestioning devotion to the big man in the Kremlin, whoever he was. At the
time, in the spring of 1972, it was, he was Leonid Brezhnev.

Anyway, what should she have been set free for? She was charged with murder,
kidnapping, criminal conspiracy and with buying the guns that were used to kill
a judge in his own courtroom. Almost as soon as she was arrested, these
committees of sympathy sprang up all over the place. If you ran into any one of
their placard carriers, they'd tell you that Miss Davis didn't have a chance of
a fair trial any more than the two black brothers who were on trial in
California for killing a white prison guard. Miss Davis swore they didn't have
a chance of a fair trial either. But the two brothers were acquitted by an
all-white jury. Miss Davis called the verdict beautiful. She herself had a,
presumably, fair trial and was acquitted of all charges, after which she
promptly made a triumphal lecture tour of the Soviet Union denouncing the
United States and, among other things, its system of so-called justice.

Well, I think it's fair to say that until this past week, she had vanished from
the news as completely as Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid. By the way, they
came roaring back into print after a team of forensic experts dug up a pair of
skeletons in Bolivia and believed them to be the remains of none other than
those infamous, free-wheeling outlaws. The astonishing news on the Angela Davis
front, now that she's middle-aged, black and beautiful, is that she's been
tossed out of the Communist Party of the United States by Gus Hall, the
81-year-old boy from Minnesota who is the perennial general secretary of the
party in America. In 1983, Mr Hall wrote his last book which was called, Karl
Marx: Beacon for Our Times. Two years later, Mikhail Gorbachev came to power
and began to put into effect the liberal reforms of glasnost and perestroika,
which greatly pained Mr Hall and keepers of the true faith everywhere. The
succession of Mr Yeltsin didn't help the party here at all and its numbers
dwindled and shrank. But old Gus Hall was not to be shaken, not even by the
succession of Boris Yeltsin. His response to the idea of abolishing the
Communist Party was to trim the wick of the flame in this country and cry a
plague on all reform, including the, as it turned out, impossible idea of Mr
Gorbachev to introduce democratic freedoms and a measure of free marketeering
into the Soviet Union, but still keep it firmly within the stockade of the
Communist Party.

Well, Mr Hall decided that as far as the party in America was concerned, not
only did it deplore Mr Yeltsin, it deplored almost as much, Mr Gorbachev's
democratising reforms. Mr Hall, at the recent general meeting, came out for the
grand old party, back, he proclaimed, to Lenin and Stalin. But Miss Davis had
already indicated the way she wanted the party to go. It was the way of
Gorbachev. She made a speech or a statement which was uncannily almost word for
word taken from the declaration of faith that proved to herald Mr Gorbachev's
downfall. The same with Miss Davis. She was deemed to be a heretic and has been
excommunicated. She is no longer, by the American party standard, a true
Communist. The news item that carried this story had a sombre closing sentence.
Following on Miss Davis's expulsion, it said, massive defections from the party
are to be expected. You have to wonder how massive those defections can be in a
party whose full strength in a country of 255 millions is just under 20,000.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP