OJ Simpson's civil trial - 20 September 1996

A partner in your firm say steals a thousand dollars. He can be sued by the
state on a criminal charge of embezzlement. But in a non-criminal suit, in a
civil suit, you can sue him too because he took your money and deprived you of
the uses to which that money might have been put. It's a very old, indeed a
medieval idea, the right, after a criminal trial, to have a civil trial on the
plea that the criminal deprived you of the services of a relative, a friend of
whoever was the victim.

And so last Tuesday in California the second OJ Simpson trial began. A civil
trial. Not in Los Angeles proper, but a mile or two up the coast in Santa
Monica, which for sixty years or more was a small residential resort city. It's
now a large residential resort city, but with its seafront and its beaches and
palm trees, a pleasant enough place, a discovery made in the past few years by
the homeless who've become a problem that Santa Monica just now is wrestling
with.

Santa Monica then, a new venue for the new trial. And a new judge who has been
swift in setting new rules of procedure which will attempt, he says, to banish
what he calls, "the circus atmosphere of the first trial," which ended, you may
recall, in the former football star being acquitted of the murder of his wife
Nicole and a man, a waiter friend, who had stopped by her house to return some
eyeglasses that had been left at his restaurant.

First, who is the plaintiff? Who is suing for – in the legal phrase – loss or
deprivation of services? This civil suit is being brought by the family and the
state of the dead wife and the family and the state of the dead friend. And the
charge is that OJ Simpson caused their "wrongful" death.

The judge in the criminal trial was a Japanese American. The new judge is also,
it happens, a Japanese American, one Hiroshi Fujisaki. On the first day of the
trial he at once made things tough for the media, the lawyers, not least for
the gaping multitudes who sat petrified or stupefied through the many, many
months of the televised criminal trial. The new judge announced there would be
no televising whatsoever, no photographs in the court room. Neither the
lawyers, nor the plaintiffs, nor the defendant could talk to reporters or
anyone outside the courtroom about the case.

On the publication of these restrictions, there was a vast intake of breath of
incredulity across the land. I don't know how it is in your country, but there
was a time in, certainly the courts of the Eastern United States, when these
were the normal rules. In the trials I covered, everything from perjury to
fraud to murder to a court-martial, the presiding judge always said that the
lawyers should not discuss the case with reporters, and once a jury returned
with its verdict, its members were warned not to talk publicly to anyone, or
either publicly or privately, to the press.

But as with many other Western customs and mores, the rules have slackened
somewhat down the years and television has been the very successful devil's
advocate in maintaining, that to keep the cameras out of practically any public
place – and many private places – is a violation of that battered standby, the
First Amendment, which guarantees freedom of speech, free speech having most
recently been defined as the burning of the American flag, the filming in
intimate living colour for national network television and, for all to see, the
collision of male and female genitals. Just, you may be sure, what Washington
and Madison and Benjamin Franklin and Hamilton and the other great men had in
mind when the First Amendment to the Constitution was composed.

However, even with no television and no lawyers' interviews, there are enough
differences in the requirements of a civil trial – especially in the legal
definition of guilt – to tickle the curiosity even of the high-minded who
pretended to take no notice of the criminal trial.

First, in a civil case the jury does not need to keep to the standard of
finding guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. It is required to weigh only a
preponderance of the evidence. More important still, more favourable to jurors
who are wobbling, in California civil trials, the jury does not need to find a
unanimous verdict. A decision of nine to three would constitute a verdict. So
to begin with, the great majority of experts who've been tapped for an opinion
agree that finding a verdict of guilty against OJ Simpson will not be as
exacting as it was in the criminal trial.

On the first day of the new trial, the judge moved with astonishing speed and
decisiveness, and I have to remark, that even with the most austere and modest
men, the fact of not being on television does encourage them to get down to
business and cut out, as Jelly Roll Morton said about jazz piano playing: "Cut
out that picture-show right hand".

The judge also made the defence's case harder to plead by greatly restricting
what it could say about the malodorous policeman Mark Fuhrman. Remember him?
Some people thought he lost the case for the prosecution single-handedly by
swearing he'd never used racist language until a taped interview was found
which was a foul recital of racial obscenities. He was the one who the defence
said had planted that bloody glove that was found in OJ's driveway.

The judge said they couldn't use that tactic, that characterisation. If they
believed there were other killers, they must prove it with specific evidence.
Also they could not mount a general attack on the Los Angeles Police Department
as corrupt or a particular attack on their allegedly clumsy handling, the
defence said, contaminating, of blood samples. That tactic had led the defence
– and evidently in the end, the jury – to believe that Simpson had most likely
been framed.

None of these vague charges, these sinister presumptions could be entered, the
judge said, without evidence. "There is," he said, "a legal standard you have
done nothing to comply with. You've tried a shotgun approach. I want chapter
and verse."

All these new rules and new rulings are bound to be questioned on appeal, and
it looks even now as if there would be lots of appeals. The expert guess is
that the trial will take at least four months and the appeals maybe a couple of
years. And what, you may ask, is in it for the plaintiff, especially Mr
Goldman, most prominently Mr Goldman, father of the dead man? Of course there
being no criminal charge, no criminal conviction, the Constitution forbids
anyone's being tried twice for the same crime if acquitted the first time. What
Mr Goldman and the other plaintiffs could get would be a heap of money. But the
question has already arisen: how much more money can Mr Simpson be relieved of?
He's said to be practically bankrupt now. Millions have gone out on both sides
to the old lawyers and there will be more to the new.

The most Mr Goldman can secure from a guilty verdict, from an upheld guilty
verdict, is the satisfaction or the frustration, of knowing that he was
deprived of the companionship, the affection, the life of his son by a man who
was responsible for his wrongful death.

You might guess that the effect of these strict new rules and restrictive
rulings would dampen the public's ardour in following the case, but the same
appeal to the First Amendment is already being made, the same itch to eat
forbidden fruit, the same impulse that makes Americans suspicious of any
politician who doubts that everybody has a right to know everything discussed
in private. The signs flicker all over the place that many reporters will think
up every sort of dodge to sneak under the curtain of silence the judge has
lowered on the case. You may be sure that for the next few months the tabloids
in every country will have a field day inventing juicy rumour and elevating
hearsay into what they call, "fearless reporting".

One evening in mid-week, a news anchorman commenting on the fact that second
generation Asians – first generation Asian Americans – are rising conspicuously
in American society. He'd mentioned that the two judges on the two Simpson
trials were Japanese Americans, and he went on at once to the frustrating news
of that splendid woman astronaut, with her grown children and anxious to see
them, who was not exactly stranded but stalled in space. She was meant to be
home six weeks ago, but first problems with a booster rocket and then the
approach of two hurricanes grounded the good ship, the good shuttle, Atlantis,
which, at last, was off to rescue her from the Russian space station Mir, the
friendly Russian space station, aboard which Russian space officials say she
has done yeoman or yeowoman service.

The anchorman glided effortlessly from the name of the Simpson judge to the
woman astronaut because he couldn't help reciting her beautiful name. It is
Shannon Lucid. I wonder where that came from. I'll have to find out and add it
to my list of favourite American names, a mild hobby which started when I
discovered, as, alas, all Englishmen must, that the United States is not and
has not been run by Americans of English origins for some time, say a century
or so.

Here in New York, my breed, the WASPs, might claim to be the most depressed
minority ever, or rather the most suspect. In the seven million people of New
York City, there are just over six per cent white Anglo-Saxon Protestants
whether practicing or lapsed. Some time we must go into the baroque story of
American names. How about Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis, Warren Gamaliel
Harding? For the present, I'll have to leave you to figure out how the late
jazz pianist got to be christened Thelonious Sphere – not globe – Thelonious
Sphere Monk.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP