Tobacco brands at the 1991 World Baseball Series - 1 November 1991

This is going to be a talk about a baseball occasion, but not a talk about
baseball. Well in the late evening of what has been called the first dark day
of autumn they were doing or abandoned their usual television programme and
tuned into CBS, the network that this year bought, at the usual prodigious
price,the exclusive televising of the World Series, the play-off for the
baseball championship between the two teams which at the end of the season led
their separate leagues.

This year the contest was between the Minnesota Twins and the Atlanta Braves.
The series is always played for the best of seven games, of course it's not
always necessary to go to seven, in fact it's rare. But this year when the
Atlanta Braves arrived in Minnesota on the Sunday, they were all-square, three
games each. Somebody would have to win the final game, if it took all night. It
has indeed taken till two or three in the morning.

Well, half an hour before midnight on that bright, tingling Sunday, there was
no score and the last innings, the ninth was over. Baseball, you'll have
gathered, abhors a draw and so they go into extra innings. So Atlanta went in
again and went out again, with no score. It was now up to Minnesota. All they
needed was one run. Turned out that with two men on base, all they needed was
one hit and Minnesota had won one to nothing. They were the 1991 world
champions.

We learned on the following Tuesday that about 90 million had watched all or
some of the seventh, the last game, at home and another 10 million in bars,
restaurants or college dormitories. I don't off-hand remember another event
which has attracted to the tube 100 million of America's 255 millions. Baseball
fanatics will spend much loving time going over what it seems were at least a
dozen records and oddities of the series.

For me, two things stand out in memory which have nothing to do with the
playing of the game. One is the picture, the cutaway shot that you see over and
over again, of the men in the dugout, the batting team waiting their turn and
their manager. The manager, any manager, is usually in his 50s or early 60s and
is portly, has a capacious bay window anyway, that is itself practically a beer
commercial. The manager is always stoical, rarely expressing any emotion. He
paces up and down and from time to time he spits and then he goes back to
chewing. The camera pans across the dugout and the sprawling, leaning, hunching
players and almost all of them are chewing, one I recall, an exception,
delicately blowing small balloons of bubblegum. But the fascinating thing to me
is what the rest were chewing was tobacco.

They must be the only trade, profession in America, that retains the habit.
Why? I can only guess it's because ball players, baseball players, always did
chew and so, as little boys, saw their heroes do it, they learned and do it
still. When I arrived here in the early '30s, gum chewing was universal and
tobacco chewing was as common among rural characters and ball players as beer
swilling and in the lobbies of most hotels there were, down by the legs of the
easy chairs and sofas, spittoons, dignified always by the name of cuspidors. As
the chewing habit declined, the cuspidors vanished. Today, I believe they are
as rhare as hitching posts.

Well this year's World Series was not unique for the chewing and spitting
proclivities of the players but, on the last night, a camera, swooping round
the stadium, steadier for a moment on two words flashing in lights. They were
the name of a brand of chewing tobacco. Two days later, a prominent item on the
evening news was the decision of the Federal Trade Commission to forbid the
shooting, filming on television, of signs that advertise tobacco in any form.
Now cigarette advertising here, as in many other countries, has been forbidden
on television for 20 years, but the commission specified the appearance on a
nationally televised sporting event of a brand name of a tobacco from now on is
verboten. This is bad news for a lot of people.

I'd better say first how powerful the Federal Trade Commission is. It was
created by act of Congress in 1914 as, I quote, an independent quasi, quasi
judicial commission of five members, to promote fair competition by preventing
cabals and illegal combinations in restraint of trade between the states. Such
powerful combinations were rampant at the time and, as often happens, a
disciplinary body created to police one sort of illegality stays on, watches
out for many others. Such as with the FTC price-fixing or other discriminatory
agreements between producers or distributors.

Lately, we've heard more of the FTC as the judge of fraudulent or deceptive
advertising, as with the advertising of foods that falsely claim low fat or no
salt or no cholesterol. But now they've taken a big leap sideways into the
fringes of advertising and, for the first time, question whether it's legal to
allow a roving television camera to show, in passing, a stationery poster,
sign, billboard for a product which is, by law, banned from direct television
advertising. I hope I'm making myself clear.

By act of Congress television ads, commercials for tobacco are forbidden, so
also for liquor, spirits, strong drink if you like. Beer commercials hang on,
though not without incessant protest from teetotallers, child guidance groups,
parents' associations and other purists. But what the FTC seem to be saying now
is that if, during the televising of a sport, when the camera's going about its
business of following a football or cutting to the cheering crowd, it suddenly
reveals a cigarette or a whisky poster, oops, the network is in trouble.

Of course I'm sure the chewing tobaccos firm is already mobilising its lawyers,
ready to arrive in court like an army with banners, protesting that their
sacred rights under the First Amendment, freedom of speech, are being violated.
Perhaps the FTC will just cite the chewing tobacco guff as a warning, but if
they're serious, then heaven or some collateral sponsor help the firm, the
products that actually sponsor sports events. For instance, one of the biggest
tournaments in the tennis year is arranged and sponsored by a well-known brand
of cigarette. Its name and logo are plastered all over the place, not least on
the wall behind the baseline. There's no way that the cameras can show the
action without catching shots of the brand name, which, of course, is the whole
idea in the first place.

That particular sponsor has been weathering attack for some time, for linking a
healthy sport with an unhealthy habit and many top players certainly are
uncomfortable with it, just as any public person in the United States is
uncomfortable to be associated with cigarette advertising in any form, since
every pack sold in the United States and every advertisement, large or small,
in any magazine or public place, is required to print in bold letters beneath
the full colour photos of laughing girls and muscular men, one of the many
warnings from the surgeon general, to the effect that smoking can cause
emphysema, cancer, heart disease, can harm pregnancy and so on. Imagine, if
this prohibition were introduced in Europe, where I sometimes think it's
impossible to see a football match and even, in some places, a golf tournament,
without seeing also whacking great billboards advertising some beer or, so help
us, whisky.

I said there were two memories of the 1991 World Series likely to stick with
us, apart that is from the actual sporting details, as memorable items of what
you might call social history, which is after all, my bag or cup of tea. Well
the second item will be remembered longer than the scoring statistics, I
believe because it's typical of a growing movement across the nation, among
so-called minorities, Hispanics, blacks, homosexual men and women, for equal
status as citizens and equal protection of the laws. An outgrowth of the
movement is a rash of sensitivity to what has long been normal idiom, terms of
description. We are never to say Orientals, but Asian Americans. Blacks must
now be written about as African Americans, so on. Now the lowly Indian has
risen up in protest. He is not to be called an Indian but a Native American.

One of the competing teams in the baseball finals was from Atlanta, as I said,
the team is called the Atlanta Braves. The Braves was chosen to signify, in the
old American sense, fine, fearless warriors on the Indian model. The Atlanta
fans have a gesture they use to applaud their heroes and to urge them on. It's
known as the tomahawk chop and as you can imagine, is a slicing movement
through the air with the forearm. Seeing 20,000 fans perform this in unison is
a rousing experience, but not any longer to the Native Americans. Two tribes
have formally protested for the first time. They see themselves mocked.
Everybody tries to brush it off lightly but I have the feeling that such
ceremonials, such names are on their way out. After all, said Arsenio Hall, the
very engaging young black, I mean African American, who runs a late-night talk
show, after all, he said, my people don't take kindly to the Cleveland Browns.
How would you like a team called the Iowa Caucasians, unless, of course, it was
a basketball team?

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP