The CIA and Kuwaiti conspiracy - 2 November 1990

Last Wednesday afternoon, the Iraqi ambassador to the United States called a
press conference in Washington and, by courtesy of the cable news network, I
was able to attend it.

It lasted a full hour and the point of it, to which the ambassador returned
again and again, was the document he said his government had found in a file of
secret documents, abandoned and not destroyed by Kuwaiti officials who had fled
their country after Saddam Hussein's invasion.

Now this document, marked top secret, was purported to be, I think I'd better
say at the beginning that instead of having this story stumble through thickets
of allegedlys and reportedlys and purported tos, I shall simply recite as fact
what the Iraqi Ambassador said was fact, being understood that it's the Iraqi
version and nobody else's.

Well then, the document is a memorandum, written in November 1989 by the then
security chief of Kuwait and reporting a meeting he held somewhere near
Washington with the director of the United States Central Intelligence Agency,
Mr William Webster, in which they agreed to share military, social and
political information about Iraq, with the purpose, in the long run, of
bringing it down or – in the jargon of diplomatic memoranda – destabilising the
economy of Iraq.

There was one actual quote from the Kuwaiti official, one General Fahad Ahmed
Al-Fahad, saying that he and Mr Webster agreed that it was important to take
advantage of the deteriorating economic situation in Iraq.

On Wednesday, the Iraqi ambassador, Mr Al-Mashat, said this document was one of
other proofs in Iraqi hands, proofs to substantiate Iraq's claim that the
invasion of 2 August was undertaken to forestall a conspiracy, involving among
others Kuwait and the CIA, to drive down the price of oil and greatly damage
the economy of Iraq. Mr Al-Mashat spoke darkly of other – what at one point he
called physical evidence – of this conspiracy.

Now this document, which I must say in the recital sounded plausible at the
very least, had been handed over to the Secretary General of the United
Nations. The original was in Arabic and the Secretary General obliged by having
it translated into English. Both texts were made available to the media people
assembled in the Iraqi embassy.

It's the first time, I believe, that we've had any official, or that we've been
offered any official, version from the Iraqi government, of a rumour that has
been running rife through Baghdad, as we saw the other Sunday in a remarkable
series of interviews by an American reporter with many Iraqi housewives, young
and old.

The rumour, which sounded more bizarre than ridiculous, since it was being
confidently repeated by obviously serious women, the rumour was that the whole
crisis in the Persian Gulf had been contrived mainly by the CIA, that Saddam
Hussein had consequently been baited into his assault on Kuwait, to provide
President Bush with a pretext for sending a huge military force into Saudi
Arabia with the intention of bringing down Saddam Hussein.

On Wednesday, when the ambassador had finished reading the text of the alleged
memorandum, he went on to moralise or rationalise his government's attitude to
the United States. Baghdad, he said, posed no threat to the United States, but
if the United States chose to go to war, any attack would be catastrophic.

You're going to receive major destruction, thousands of people killed on all
sides, mass murder against Iraqi civilians. It would be a long and murderous
war, he said, and the United States would bear the consequences of it
throughout the Middle East, for many generations.

Apart from the ambassador's predictable editorialising, the document seemed to
me, and I'm sure to other reporters present, to be serious enough, plausible
enough, to require an answer from Mr Bush, from Secretary Baker, from Defence
Secretary Cheney, perhaps.

But on Thursday morning I could find no mention of the ambassador's press
conference or of the document and its serious charges in the New York Times or
the evening New York Post and only the briefest mention of it in a Long Island
newspaper, inserted in a despatch from Baghdad, which carried the headline
"Iraqis ready for war".

Of course Mr Al-Mashat said that once his document had been released, it would
be instantly condemned by the American government as a fake, a forgery, an
absurdity. And sure enough, the only official response here was from an
anonymous spokesman for the CIA, who said that the allegations and, by
implication, the document, were total fabrications.

I suppose most of us, most of us citizens of any of the, what is it, ten
nations supporting the United Nations embargo, I suppose we'd say the document
probably is a fake, but the only point I wish to make now is that it was given
to the Secretary General of the United Nations, it was translated by the UN and
issued from its headquarters and I'd have thought it deserved some recognition,
if only by way of denunciation from Mr Webster, the director of the CIA.

By the way, there was at that Iraqi press conference, a moment of quiet
hilarity. The ambassador ended his reading of the so-called document by calling
off, presumably for the benefit of the Kuwaiti security chief, Mr Webster's
private telephone number, something even the onlooking reporters don't have and
a few of them, of course, immediately started to copy it down, when Ambassador
Al-Mashat cocked his head, implying it would do them no good.

The number, he said, was changed last Friday, the day apparently that the
Iraqis handed the document over to the UN for translation. Now this may well be
a red herring, a fake, a fraud, a bare-faced fabrication, but it will be given
the widest possible publicity throughout the Arab world. It ought to have been
reported seriously, in serious papers and the White House must surely have
learned long ago that silence in such matters implies guilt.

Well these, what is it now, or soon to be, 380,000 American troops in the
desert cast a long and menacing shadow across this country and its domestic
affairs and no doubt will play a part, impossible now to guess, in next
Tuesday's congressional elections.

President Bush, once the curtain came down on the budget farce, took up his
campaigning for besieged Republicans, by reverting to the Gulf crisis and
talking tougher than ever about Saddam Hussein, saying he was deeply concerned
and doing something about the American hostages in Kuwait.

Rather rash talk, you might say, considering how little such talk helped
President Carter and President Reagan on the same infuriatingly impotent theme.
Mr Bush's popularity, which a couple of months ago was up in the low 70s, 74% I
believe, a record at this stage of a presidency, is now down to 48% and free
falling.

Every town he goes into, to campaign for a Republican, of course the faithful
applaud. Noticeably they don't cheer, they applaud politely, they hope he's
right. But in several places something has happened that I don't believe has
happened to Mr Bush before, deeply embarrassing.

Most conspicuously it happened up in Vermont, on a late fall day in an old town
with the fading scarlet of the maples and the dying gold of the oaks, an ideal
setting for a couple of Republicans to appeal for a revival of the old values.
Hard work, frugality, close family life, loyalty to neighbours, the values, in
truth, which most of Mr Bush's audience live by.

He'd gone there to give aid and support a Republican congressman who is
reported to be in trouble from his opponent, the former mayor of Burlington,
always known as the former socialist, yes socialist mayor of Burlington. Well
you'd certainly believe that this congressman would be grateful for the
president's help, considering that he's not only a young chap, at the end of
his first term in Congress, but also he's Vermont's only congressman.

Can you believe it? Vermont is one of only six states, some of them out west,
quite large, that are so sparsely populated that they rate only one
congressional district. Vermont is the only state in the north-east that has
only one congressman. Two senators, of course, like every other state, but only
one congressman, as against New York's 34. California has 45 and when the
re-districting is finished on the basis of the 1990 census, it will have
50-odd.

Well, young Mr Peter Smith, the lone Vermont congressman and a Republican, must
have been in a daze of pride and joy when he heard that the President of the
United States was coming to speak on his behalf.

However, the damage done to the President by his dithering, flip-flopping over
the budget talks was so evident that Mr Smith got up and spoke against his
distinguished sponsor, telling the crowd he was all for a super tax on the very
rich, which the president had been hotly against and eventually talked down.

An embarrassed president followed Mr Smith and, the Washington Post reported,
looking flustered, the president stumbled in and out of a speech text and then
said, "We have a sluggish economy out there nationally, that's one of the
reasons why I favour this deficit so much".

He looked down at his text and his brow crinkled. Favoured the deficit, is that
what he meant? The crowd, it said, looked puzzled.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP