Colonel Oliver North's trial - 20 September 1991

This letter is really two or three PSs, postscripts, to earlier letters done,
one a week ago, the other earlier in the summer. Because, in some cases, the
facts have gone surprisingly beyond my guesses or a new element has crept in,
or a facetious or a satirical remark has come true in life. Proving once again
that there are some sides of life impossible to satirise. The facts will
satirise themselves.

Well, last week, some of you may recall, I marvelled at the five-year
prosecution of that former Marine Colonel, Oliver North for his part, his
principal part in the Iran-Contra scandal. Which not to bring up any more than
the two main facts was about the secret sale of arms to Iran and the use of the
proceeds to arm the Nicaraguan rebels after Congress had passed a law banning
all military aid to them. Colonel North was the man who set up the secret
pipeline to the rebels. He was at the centre of the whole operation, which the
Reagan administration, at first, strenuously denied.

Then there was a big television circus, a congressional investigation, at which
was revealed the lurid details, the foreign helpers, the people involved in
what amounted to the conduct of a secret foreign policy being run mainly by Mr
Casey, the head of the CIA, by Colonel North and by his boss, a Mr McFarlane,
the president's national security advisor. The most amazing feature of this
whole elaborate and costly plot was that while President Reagan was hot for
giving aid of every sort to the Contras, probably the hottest exponent of aid
in the United States. Yet, he didn't know or couldn't remember a thing about
any of it, about the arms' sale to Iran or the use of monies to arm the rebels.
To this day, Mr Reagan maintains his ignorance of these thundering facts.

Now, I said last time that so much sinister and possibly criminal behaviour was
revealed by that congressional investigation that a special independent
prosecutor was appointed to look into bringing several people to trial. This
would normally be the job of the department of justice, but that department,
including its head, the attorney general, was very active in the business of
denying any involvement by any members of the administration, high or low. The
prosecutor's name was Mr Lawrence Walsh. Mr Walsh did bring criminal actions
against a range of conspirators and eight of them were convicted. But how about
the central figure, the leading conspirator, Colonel North? Well, he'd been so
much in charge. He'd been here, there and everywhere. So much so, that the
Congressional committee felt they must get from him everything they could. Now
the Constitution says that no man may be required to testify against himself in
any criminal case. And there was the strong chance that Colonel North might
respectfully refuse to answer all questions on grounds of self-incrimination.

So the Congressional Committee offered Colonel North immunity from prosecution
on anything he might testify to in its hearings. That meant that at the end of
the hearings, if the special prosecutor still wanted to bring the Colonel to
trial on criminal charges he would have to find evidence outside everything the
Colonel had testified to before Congress. It seemed at the time to innocent
onlookers a whacking concession to make to the Colonel and a very large
obstacle to put in front of the special prosecutor. I took this point up at the
time with various politicians and learned lawyers. They were all very kind,
tolerant of my naïveté. But explained that there was such a wealth of
incriminating evidence that there'd be lots to spare from the congressional
hearing which could be effectively hurled at Colonel North in court of law. I
see.

Well, as you know, Colonel North did come to trial, on 12 criminal counts.
Partly because the jury had heard some of them spouted on the television, also
because they suspected Colonel North was covering up for a boss, higher even
than Mr McFarlane, they threw out all but three of the charges and convicted
him on them. He appealed. The appeals court judge said one was irrelevant and
he set aside the other two as being legally insufficient. So the Colonel was
now a free man. Not quite. That's where we were, he was, when I talked last
week.

But then, as I mentioned, his boss, Mr McFarlane, was called by the appeals
court judge to a special, a very odd hearing, but of a sort that, I predict,
will become more and more common. Mr McFarlane, North's boss and President
Reagan's national security advisor, was, as much as anyone, Colonel North's
most serious accuser. But the judge asked him now, "if the appearances of
Colonel North before that Congressional Committee had coloured or in any way
affected his own testimony at North's trial?" At the end of the hearing, Mr
McFarlane said, "Yes, it had". In other words, the special prosecutor, through
Mr McFarlane, had violated the Colonel's immunity. That was all it took. The
judge threw out the whole case and Colonel North is free.

Of course he was jubilant. He said before a cluster of microphones and a wall
of cameras that he had been "completely exonerated". Well, yes. Legally
acquitted but, as he put it, vindicated? He was set free, as the New York Times
put it, because the prosecution couldn't prove he'd had a perfect trial. Four
years ago, Colonel North freely confessed to many things. He had deliberately
lied to Congress, he had destroyed, shredded lots of incriminating documents.
He had used some of the profits from the Iranian arms' sales to build an actual
security fence around his house. The special prosecutor's comment was that the
congressional grant of immunity had indeed placed in his way a huge obstacle.

What come out of it I think is a lesson which Congress should be the first to
learn. In investigations that might lead to criminal charges, think twice about
granting immunity from prosecution to any key witness. Make up your mind.
Decide to hold a congressional committee hearing or leave it to the department
of justice to mount a criminal case. This lesson gets up and screams to be
learned. But I fear, as I hinted last time, that the temptation to hold an open
congressional hearing has become irresistible ever since the hearings offered
politicians the opportunity to go on television and if they talk before the
cameras long enough to earn, at no cost to themselves, the national recognition
that movie stars and rock performers have to earn from years of work and
exposure.

Does anyone remember the closing line of a talk I did during Wimbledon week?
About a player named Prpic. A Yugoslav. After the upheavals in that country and
the war between the Serbs and the Croats, I suggested that maybe on the
programme Mr. Prpic might not want to be listed as a Yugoslav but a Serb. Well,
as the young man said to the judge, "it seemed amusing at the time". Well,
during the Flushing Meadows' week, the playing of the American Tennis
Championships, another Yugoslav, a more highly rated young player with a
thunderbolt of a serve, Goran Ivanisevic, announced that if he is picked to
represent his country in international competition, he will not play for
Yugoslavia but he will play for his country, Croatia.

There are, as I mentioned last time, four, now five, congressional hearings
going on. All trying to monopolise one or other of the 24-hour television
channels. The one which, however, has for the time being faded from the screen
is the hearing of the Senate Judiciary Committee to pass on, to approve or
reject the president's nomination to the supreme court of a black man, Mr
Clarence Thomas. The five days in which he has appeared and been questioned
exhaustively about his views have contained many ironies.

The senators who might have been expected to back almost any black nominee, the
passionate liberals, Senator Ted Kennedy and Senator Metzenbaum of Ohio are
dead against him and are certain, I should say, to vote against him. Mr
Thomas's most fervent supporter, idolater almost, is a Southerner, Senator
Strom Thurmond, now 86, and the Democrat who in 1948 walked out of the
Democratic convention because President Truman was preaching integration.
Senator Thurmond was a lifelong segregationist. But Mr Thomas is his man
because he is that comparative rarity, a black conservative. There seems little
doubt that Mr Thomas will be approved by the Committee and then by the whole
Senate and will move next month to fortify the already firm conservative
majority on the court.

At the end of his five-day ordeal, Mr Thomas thanked everybody and recalled his
poor childhood and the discrimination he overcame. And he concluded with a
sure-fire cliché, "This could happen", he said, "only in America."

This is always the safest possible declaration of patriotism. Even when it's
pronounced with blazing sincerity, nobody ever stops to say "Is that true?" How
about a poverty-stricken Welsh boy who got to be Prime Minister of Great
Britain? Or an illegitimate Scottish crofter? A Somerset orphan brought up in
poverty, left school at 11, became British foreign secretary? I think the
deadliest riposte ever given to this sentimental refrain must surely have come
from Nikita Khrushchev, when on his 1960s tour of this country he wound up as
principal guest at a luncheon in Hollywood. His host was the head of a studio,
once a Greek immigrant. And he it was who told to the sound of dripping tears
how his poor family had come to America, how he grew up humbly, how in the end
he'd become the grand mogul of a Hollywood studio. He turned poignantly to Mr
Khrushchev and intoned, "Only in America".

Mr Khrushchev got up and told briskly and with no embroidery about a shepherd
boy, son of a coal miner, went onwards and upwards and became head man of the
Union of all the Soviet Socialist Republics. The shepherd boy turned to his
host, "Only, Mr Skouras, in the Soviet Union".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP