Great American frauds - 9 February 1996

There are times when big important news is knocking at the door that you ought
to talk about, but something small and fascinating happens that you itch to
talk about. This is such a time and although many things happened in this past
fortnight - trouble in Bosnia of a sort that we'd feared, with the Muslim
arrest and detention of those two Bosnian Serb generals and then the oncoming
presidential primaries - yet America has just lost a great fraud and I must
talk about him. Every nation has its scoundrels, crooks, criminals and every
nation has its frauds but once they're exposed they're usually done for. In
America, if a man has the gall, the chutzpah to attempt a really spectacular
deceit and then proclaim himself as a fraud, he becomes admired, even lovable,
and appears in television talk shows. I'd like to remind you of a couple of
famous frauds before we come to the life and death two weeks ago of Rudolf
Walter Wanderone.

The first great American fraud who comes to mind was born not a hundred miles
from here in a village in Connecticut in 1810. He seems to have had an
unremarkable boyhood, except that he was in a place and a time that saw the
birth of what was later in the century to be called a travelling circus,
colloquially, the round top. The boy we're talking about, Phineas Taylor
Barnum, was only six years of age when the rather astonishing news was noised
about the countryside that a man just across the Hudson was putting on a show
on the village green, guess what, an elephant, something no more familiar to
Connecticut Yankees in 1815 than horses were familiar to the American Indian
before the Spanish brought them over. Young Barnum saw this show, put on by a
man named Hachaliah Bailey who bought the animal from an English sea captain.
Pretty soon young Barnum was following Mr Bailey's show as it grew bigger and
added monkeys and a bear, a bear that danced. Young Barnum must have had the
conman's strain in his blood.

He took a leap in incredulity beyond Mr Bailey. Barnum had little interest in
the wonders of nature, He chose to invent natural wonders and then challenge
people to believe in them and many did. He was later reputed to say there's a
sucker born every minute. At the age of 25 he bought an old negro woman – now
this remember was 50 years before slavery was abolished - he bought one Joice
Heth and the question is unanswered to this day, whether she told him that
she'd been George Washington's nurse or Barnum told her she'd been George
Washington's nurse. Washington was born in 1732, so if it was, she'd have had
to be at least 110. Young Mr Barnum was not going to split hairs. He said she
was just over 160.

He soon set up his own little round top, took Joice Heth around with him, she
was surprisingly spry for her age, and dreamed up other freaks. A bearded lady,
nobody had ever seen one of them. A two-headed woman, wow. Of course along the
way some spoilsport, a doctor, say, would declare that a bearded lady was
unlikely and a two-headed woman an anatomical impossibility. So, said Mr
Barnum, comical anatomical and I hope he loves his mother, or whatever the
Oedipus schledipus crack of the day was.

Just when people began to doubt the freaks of Phineas T Barnum, he produced one
that was remarkable but also believable. His masterpiece of this sort was the
discovery of a dapper, elegant and apparently entirely unselfconscious midget,
whom Barnum christened Tom Thumb, General Tom Thumb. By then Barnum had bought
out a New York museum, called it Barnum's American Museum, put together a
travelling company of freaks, unlikely animals, more believable physical
oddities and General Tom Thumb. Then Barnum looked around for a mate for him
and found a pretty, elegant, charming, may I say, little lady. They married and
lived happily ever after. Barnum took his museum on a European tour. He called
it the Great London Circus and achieved the peak of something or other when
invited to Windsor, he presented General and Mrs Tom Thumb, standing arm in arm
in twinkling evening dress, on a small side table, to Queen Victoria and Prince
Albert.

It ought to be said that Barnum led a blameless private life, never committed
an act of punishable fraud, defended his claims for two-headed women by saying
the public knew when they were being fooled, but admired ingenuity and always
from him, got more than they paid for. He wrote his autobiography and subtitled
it The Prince of Humbugs, which reminds me of another prince, Prince Michael
Romanoff, who became a prosperous, even a lovable figure in Hollywood because
he was neither a prince nor a Romanoff.

Harry Gerguzin was from birth a mystery child. He was born in Brooklyn or he
was born in Lithuania. The immigration authorities said Lithuania. Either way,
he was here from the age of six, put into an orphanage, then another one, then
tossed out. Right after the end of the First War he showed up in Paris, which
was just then bouncing with bogus and some genuine Russian nobility. Harry
Gerguzin decided then and there, decided to be Prince Michael Romanoff, the
last of the doomed royals. His genealogy was doubted and he was incarcerated on
Ellis Island. He escaped. Somehow he did a quick job of rehabilitating or
inventing his respectability. He applied for admission to Harvard and was
received blushingly by the president of Harvard, no less. The college wanted
routinely to have a record of his education. Alas, all his scholastic honours
had been burned during the Russian Revolution. The Harvard people smelled a
rat. They were right. He was thrown out.

How he kept himself alive and nattily dressed, I don't know but he passed some
phoney cheques, he was deported, he went to gaol in France for swindling but
somehow stole quietly back into America and next thing you know, I knew, was
the desperate Depression winter of 1932-3, a vaudeville theatre on Broadway
advertised an act featuring Prince Michael, the last of the Romanoffs. I took
this at face value, I knew nothing about him, but I went in, saw him come on
stage to the pomp of the old Russian national anthem, a curtain came down
bearing the two-headed eagle and out came a squat little man with a toothbrush
moustache, jug ears, tails, a white tie, leaning against a collar about eight
inches high. Was this a joke? Of course, it was, a gorgeous joke. His act was
no more than the recital, in a preposterously grand British accent, of memories
of life in the court of Nicholas II. Dim stuff. The band played the anthem
again, the curtain fell, a pattering of applause.

He quickly gave up on that act and he drifted out to Hollywood, got a few bit
parts, then a couple of writers, humorists – Robert Benchley and the droll man
from Georgia, Nunnally Johnson – decided it was a great pity he was losing his
invented identity as Prince Michael Romanoff. He was an amusing cove and they
raised enough money to back him in a new restaurant to be called Romanoff's. He
ran it for the rest of his happy and highly profitable life and you were a
privileged character if you could get a superior reservation at this plush
restaurant, with the fine food and the formidable double eagle on the plates
and the menus. "It just showed," said Nunnally Johnson, "what a good American
boy can do if he only applies himself."

And now, while we were all busy watching the Congress shut down by the new
young Turk Republicans and dressing ourselves to the eyelashes against the
continental ice storm, another truly great fraud died and he must be saluted.
Rudolf Walter Wanderone. A fat man and a charmer, he died in late January. For
the first 60-odd years of his life he was totally unknown to fame, except among
the raffish characters who infested pool halls. Wanderone's meal ticket was his
billiard cue. He roamed the country from one dim pool hall to another, taking
on all comers and it seems, taking most of the money. He would have remained
unknown to people outside this seedy world if, in 1961, there had not appeared
a movie. A fine, tense, quietly comical movie, famous and much shown to this
day. It was called The Hustler and the fictional hero was just such a character
as the fat man from New York City. Quite, I may say, quite coincidentally, the
movie hero was called Minnesota Fats. The character was fascinating,
marvellously played by a comedian of national fame, playing it very suave and
straight, Jackie Gleason. It was a big hit, critically and popularly. It was no
sooner out than a man, our fat man and charmer, emerged from the underworld of
the pool halls to announce that he was proud to have had a movie based on his
career. He was, he said, Minnesota Fats.

The author of the novel totally denied the claim, he'd never heard of Rudy
Wanderone but Mr Wanderone resolved to become Minnesota Fats and made a
national tour. He went reminiscing on television just like Mike Romanoff
Gerguzin. He cashed in in a big way. He didn't care if people questioned him
about his name and persona. One journalist wrote grudgingly: "He certainly
looked like Minnesota Fats, or some fats." He handled his money well and he
retired to a luxury suite in a Nashville hotel. At the end he walked around,
feeding pigeons, bowing right and left, signing autographs. It was typical of
him that he didn't care about his age. He was, he thought, they thought, 83 or
maybe 95, who knows. I think he had his finest hour in death when a banner
headline appeared in the New York Times, which is at all times a stickler for
respectable accuracy. It said, "Minnesota Fats is dead".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP