United Nations' first reporters - 19 June 1992

We've had here in the north-east a marvellous spring and one quite rare in
alternating dry brilliant warm days more like the fall with showers and brief
downpours, so all the parks and the woods have a midsummer lushness and people
who live on suburban plots swear they can hear the grass growing.

Well, I can only put it down to the spring and its special ability to irrigate
old memories that the other day I saw a name in the paper, a by-line and a
place, a dateline and I was instantly back in the Opera House in San Francisco,
goodness, 47 years ago at the grand opening of the United Nations, I mean the
the first plenary session of the conference of 51 nations at which the United
Nations was born.

The dateline on this Tuesday's newspaper piece was Paris and the by-line was
Flora Lewis and I will not waste any time in identifying Flora Lewis, she was
simply the most beautiful journalist to cover that nine-week conference, which
is saying something when you consider that there were about 600 accredited
journalists and many of them were not journalists but movie stars and Beverly
Hills society. For San Francisco is only 400 odd miles north of Los Angeles and
in April 1945 just about the smartest trick you could pull – a declaration of
chic far beyond going to the Derby or the first night of the opera – was to
wangle a press card for the opening weeks' doings of the United Nations.

I remember in the famous hotel where Enrico Caruso fled from the 1906
earthquake in his pyjamas, in that hotel most of us – the press, print and
radio, no television yet – were accommodated at least two to a room. In those
days, it would have been a grotesque indulgence for any newspaper proprietor to
act on the principle, which is routine today of one reporter, one bedroom, one
bath. We all signed in for our credentials as I recall on a top floor of that
hotel and having acquired them I remember the day I arrived going down in a
packed elevator lift with other members of the fourth estate who had also
signed in using I presume their own names. At any rate, I found myself squeezed
up against two Washington reporters I knew, a New York woman financial writer
of what we used to call mature years, a lovely blonde one Lana Turner being
nudged or bullied by one Groucho Marks and panting heavily over us all was the
already solid flesh of Orson Welles with his new wife, the ravishing Rita
Hayworth.

I never heard of Lana Turner covering anything, but Orson Welles was there on
behalf of a New York evening paper for which he wrote a column, I don't
remember his attending any of the press conferences, which clocked in every
hour on the hour of all the separate UN bodies that were then forming, but Mr
Welles set up shop on his own in the very large Western Union basement where we
filed our copy. By set up shop, I mean he was there not to attend press
conferences; he was going to give them. I'm afraid he wasn't very successful as
flying wedges of reporters came sailing in to get at their typewriters, he
would wave at them and clear his throat resoundingly like a barker at a
pleasure beach sideshow. We'd stop for a minute or less, long enough to admire
his ravishing wife who was attending meekly behind him and then get down to our
own business.

Well, modestly conspicuous among this circus and usually sitting there on the
second row of the mezzanine of the Opera House at plenary sessions was this
stunning girl, Flora Lewis. And I make no apology for using the word "girl"
instead of the new compulsory, politically correct "woman". Flora Lewis was not
much more than a girl she couldn't have been. Here she is today, I ungallantly
repeat 47 years later, the Senior Correspondent of the New York Times of all
the New York Times correspondents. She's based in Paris, but files from any
place she deems to be significant in the passing parade of international
politics. And she wrote something the other day in that piece in the Times that
brings me a warning reminder to lay off presidential politics and the election.
Miss Lewis's piece begins, "For virtually the first time since the war," she
shows her age there she can't mean the Desert War, she must mean the Second
World War, "Europe has been following the American presidential campaign as a
mildly interesting spectator sport. Until now there was always anxious
attention, people felt their own fate was at stake, they knew," she says, "for
many years after the devastation of the war that they were materially dependent
on America." Now she says in effect, the end of the Cold War has dramatically
slackened the suspense, the new Europe has a new confidence as it enlarges and
consolidates and as an example, quote, "Denmark's rejection of the Treaty of
Maastricht is seen here as far more critical than who runs the United States
government for the next four years."

I can appreciate for the first time that that may well be true, so saving some
melodramatic turn of events like the Democrats asking Boris Yeltsin to run or
Mr Bush standing down in favour of Dan Quayle, let us cease from fretting about
the election, let me imitate the gesture of that mellow old Texan Mr Sam
Rayburn, the late Speaker of the House who at the end of every legislative
session would beckon to a favourite crony and suggest that they retire to his
office breakout the bourbon and forget politics or, as Mr Rayburn used to put
it, "come, let us strike a blow for Liberty".

So in the gloaming – it's a very swift gloaming at this latitude –
nevertheless, in the gloaming of last Tuesday evening, an old 19th-century
paddle wheeler bobbed jauntily through the waters of the lower bay. And a lady
who was the guest of honour of this little cruise said "what a wonderful way to
finish my time in New York to be in the harbour and have the Statue of Liberty
hovering benignly over us", she was a Mrs McMenamin and the cruise was setup as
a farewell party by the board members of Nightingale-Bamford, one of the most
famous of New York's private schools of which the lady has just retired as
headmistress. She thinks she has, as she put it, "a few books in my system" and
she wants to get them out, she once, she shamelessly declares to be a writer. I
humbly hope she will begin on an unfortunate sentence she left us with that
could well do with a little reshaping. I want to write a book she says about
restoring gender specific schools to the public school system – that is the way
some even very fine educators write in this country, restoring gender specific
schools, what does it mean? Nothing frightening at all, it means girls schools
and boy schools, separate.

McMenamin is as you might guess specially interested in schools for girls and
not mixed, she says that her 22 years at Nightingale-Bamford have supported her
belief that some girls benefit directly in getting an education focused on the
needs of women and she's convinced that, quote, "anchoring girls in their
gender gives them the kind of strength men have had for centuries", presumably
from boys only schools.

I ought to say for the innocent in such matters that the word "gender", which
used to be a grammatical classification for nouns and pronouns indicating
whether they were masculine, feminine or neuter is now used religiously by the
more dedicated feminists instead of the word "sex", which I suppose is today
steaming with all sorts of meaning, though I haven't seen any use of gender,
which implies the existence of a neuter sex. Interesting.

Well, while this retired headmistress was sailing down the Hudson, 3,000 miles
away, across the bay from San Francisco, an even more famous women's college
was winding up its academic year and wondering how its going to go on surviving
as an exclusively women's college. It is Mills College, founded 140 years ago,
only four years after the first sparkle of gold in the tailrace of that young
Scotsman's sawmill. Mills College has remained through all the changing in
educational fashions of this century a women's college.

Two years ago, its board of governors acting on the distressing knowledge that
the enrolled student body was growing smaller every year, the overwhelming
fashion of the past 20, 30 years or so being to amalgamate the sexes, whoops of
the genders, the board announced it would begin to accept the male of the
species excepting what another educator lamentably calls "the principle of
gender duality" or what the old New York song calls boys and girls together.
The board of Mills College reckoned without the student body or at best guessed
wrong about the prevailing sentiment, the 775 girls/women simply struck, they
wanted no part of gender duality. People who had never heard of Mills College
certainly saw on a tube the staring scene as the president announced to a
cheering, storming rally that the board had changed its mind and Mills would
remain a women's college.

In a private place, a well known journalist has written, "people should have
the freedom to be with their own kind". I was at dinner sometime ago with a
very a very ardent lady who wanted all clubs whether on public or private land
to be compulsorily mixed. I'd always felt that on private property, Irishmen
have a natural right though there are no natural rights in the Constitution, a
natural right to club up with other Irishmen, chess players with chess players
even men with men, Jews with Jews etc. This young lady was rampantly against
the idea "you men". I said "every social club in America must be a mixture of
whites, blacks, browns, catholics, protestants, atheists, Jews, males, females,
gays etc", "Right" she said, "What are you going to do," I asked her about the
70,000 women's clubs in the United States?" She thought deeply for a minute
"I'm against them," she said.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP