The final flight of Blackbird SR-71 - 9 March 1990

The other day a water main burst on Manhattan’s Upper East Side beneath a
street in the 70s, a neighbourhood usually referred to as upper crust or
fashionable or the part of town housing the well-to-do.

In the days when silk stockings were like mink today – worn only by wealthy
women – the voting district that embraced the 60s, 70s and 80s on the East Side
was known, and still is, as the silk stocking district.

I stress the toniness of this neighbourhood because although there had been two
or three water-main breaks in Manhattan in the past year, the gentry had had no
cause for alarm. They’d happened up in Harlem and near the river on the Upper
West side, in midtown on the West Side, in more proletarian parts of town where
a leaky roof, heating breakdowns, decaying tenements, have come to be part of
the geography of daily life.

But as a lady of my acquaintance said, when the main broke near Park Avenue in
the 70s, what are we coming to? The residents of swank apartment houses,
high-rises, handsome brownstone houses were without water, heat – some of them
without lift service – for several weeks. They discovered that the crumbling
infrastructure of the city, like death and taxes, is no respecter of persons.

I began to take a morbid interest in this form of decay in what we used to call
the power grid, and now everywhere call infrastructure, when several years ago
one of the main conduits that carry the steam for the city’s heating system
exploded and caused a breakdown of heat, light and power over a
densely-populated section of the island. Incidentally, Americans always talked
about steam heat, it was the French who invented the term, chauffage central,
translated in England as central heating.

I say that that disaster happened several years ago, it may have been ten, but
it marked the time when all the old cities of the east and midwest began to
report a spate of bursts and breakdowns of the physical underpinnings of their
water and power supply, and such over-pinnings as bridges.

The estimate of how many big main bridges in this country that are coming close
to a hazardous condition varies from 600 to several thousand. By the way, I
never hear about similar problems in, for instance, London. Are the 18th- and
19th-Century underpinnings made of sterner stuff than the copper, iron, steel
or the splendid tough robber-baron materials that gave the American cities of
the late 19th-Century foundations that were supposed to last forever? Be
interesting to know.

Well, while I was listening to some testimony before a committee of Congress
about the coming assault on the federal budget of repairing inter-state bridges
across the great rivers, another whole department of decay came into view that
we’d, I’d, given little thought to. The jets.

The jets? We’ve had them for only, well just on 30 years and most of us who’ve
been flying them hadn’t anticipated the day when most of them would begin to
wear out. The day is here. At least the warning is out, the day is not far off.

On Tuesday the Federal Aviation Administration, the FAA, announced a new
department or rather, a new programme, a set of compulsory rules to deal with
corrosion control. In 1988 a Boeing 737, one of the newer, smaller jets ripped
open in midair over Hawaii, and the government, the FAA, called in the industry
to review the condition of the whole jet fleet.

After 18 months this joint committee has got out a list of compulsory
precautions and rules. Many of these rules are already followed by the big
airlines, but so far there have been no compulsory radical guidelines for the
smaller carriers.

The first conclusion was that the jets are ageing – most of all, the jumbo
jets. The rules will affect, to begin with, 115 jets in service and eventually
will effect all Boeing jets, at a cost of just under $2.5million per 747, the
jumbo. Eventually, also means about 1500 jets will be subjected to this
rigorous regular form of inspection and of course in the long run, replaced.

The long run is estimated at 25 years, just about the deadline for the old
jumbo Cunarders by which time, on the big ships, the electrical wiring tended
to corrode to the point where it wasn’t worth the cost of rebuilding the whole
system.

The FAA rules require that all parts known to be vulnerable to metal fatigue
must be replaced at specified intervals. Every plane over 20 years old must be
completely overhauled once a year. Suspected corrosion in any part must be
reported to the FAA at once. Places that must be inspected most often, are the
underpinnings of galleys, and lavatories, and so on.

The day these rules were issued one of the marvels of aviation, the pride of
the air force, was retired from service. The Blackbird SR-71 was for many years
the super spy plane. For 25 years this model – which needless to say cost the
earth and the sky – has flow reconnaissance flights over enemy territory, enemy
undefined, though no prizes are to be offered for guessing the country that the
Blackbird flew over.

It cruised at 80,000 feet and its cameras could identify, from there, the
design and make of a hubcap on some innocent motor car out for a spin in the
Siberian countryside. The Blackbird is a victim of the budget cuts that are
going to be made right across the defence establishment, from super spy planes
to the men who man the army and navy bases here in the United States.

Anyway the Blackbird was given a final whirl, to fly from Los Angeles to
Washington. It did it on Tuesday in a new record, 1 hour 8 minutes and 17
seconds. It landed at Dulles International airport hard by the air and space
museum which is to be its final resting place. Even now I can’t tell you how
many Blackbirds are still in reserve, and the air force isn’t telling anybody
the secrets of its design and capability. The obsolete Blackbird is still top
secret. Security, you know.

There’s an unreal tragi-comic aspect to the retirement of the Blackbird which
sooner or later must occur to anyone alive and sentient in May 1960, when
President Eisenhower and Mr Khrushchev in their delegations and 600
correspondents arrived in Paris for a superpower summit and suddenly Mr
Khrushchev stormed out of Paris and President Eisenhower came glumly home and
there was no summit.

On 1 May the Russians announced that they had shot down over the Soviet Union
an American reconnaissance spy plane and captured the pilot. President
Eisenhower was highly indignant – nonsense, there was no such thing. We didn’t
do such things.

Well, the Russians published enough details about the plane and its pilot to
give President Eisenhower one of the most acutely embarrassing moments of his
life. All right he said, but you do it.

Of course both sides did it and had been doing it for Lord knows how long. But
it was then, 30 years ago, a stratagem that the American people knew nothing
about. Reconnaissance spying from a great height was absolutely top secret and
it was a well-kept secret.

But now we have an American president who, after the headlong course of history
in the past six months, is an admirer of Mr Gorbachev – as aren’t we all – who
wants to help him transform the Soviet Union into a federation of multi-party
democracies, who is rooting for Mr Gorbachev to succeed.

We’ll do anything to help him and we’re about to sign another treaty to cut our
nuclear capabilities and to reduce conventional forces, and join with the
Russians in working out the terms of German reunification.

The days of mutual suspicion are over and there is nothing remarkable, or to be
commented on, in Soviet satellites whizzing over the United States and American
satellites whizzing over the Soviet Union each spying on the other, day and
night, in a spirit of mutual trust and admiration.

In that spirit, as everybody knows, we have for the first time since the Cold
War began, an American president and a secretary of defence who agree with the
Congress that the United States can now, with confidence, drastically cut its
defence budget.

It was certainly a new day when, a week or two ago, a Republican secretary of
defence announced that he was going to close down army and navy and old air
force bases in 23 states and prepare to relieve the soldiers and sailors and
airmen and women and the maintenance crews and the civilian employees of their
jobs.

The Democrats have been screaming for most of eight years to slash the defence
budget, now they’re screaming about the closing of the bases, why? Because the
great majority of them are in electoral districts represented by Democrats.
Why? Because the Democrats were the people who saw that the bases were built in
their districts in the first place for the glory and the employment of their
constituents.

How did the Democrats have the luck or the power to do this? Because for most
of 50 years, the Congress of the United States has been run by the Democrats.
It’s an interesting reflection on what we call a two-party system.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC.

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP