Oliver North’s role in Iran-Contra - 10 July 1987

I came here to tell you the truth, the good, the bad and the ugly. That has a
manly, no-nonsense rhythm to it and it might be a famous line from a movie
starring Gary Cooper or Jimmy Stewart.

It came, in fact, from the upright, bemedalled figure of the redoubtable Marine
Colonel North, who shortly after that Beirut magazine broke the story of the
secret sale of arms to Iran, at a time when President Reagan was urging the
allies to back his policy of a boycott on all such sales – the name of Colonel
North, who he was, what he was about tantalised the press, the media of more
countries than the United States.

And when it, shortly, came out that the funds, some funds, profits – Colonel
North calls them residuals – from the arms sale had been diverted to support
the counter-revolutionaries in Nicaragua at a time when Congress had prohibited
military and paramilitary help to those countries... ever since then, we’ve all
been itching to hear from the man who was at the control centre of the job.

Finally after seven months of hearing from practically everybody else the man
himself appeared smartly before the Congressional select committees. I’m not
going into the body or the details of Colonel North’s testimony just yet.
There’s much more to come and especially from his old boss Admiral Poindexter,
but there is a point the colonel made early on the first day which goes, I
think, to the root of all covert, hidden, secret operations whether done by
agents of Great Britain, the United States, the Soviet Union, France, Israel or
whoever.

It’s a point very embarrassing to governments everywhere and in fact they don’t
like to bring it up in their parliaments or other legislative bodies. The point
was made with blue-eyed intensity by Colonel North when he reminded, kept
reminding, the joint congressional committees that both the shipment of arms to
Iran and the diversion of funds to the Contras were covert operations and that
covert operations are essential to national security.

I’d like to throw in at once that there wasn’t a senator or a congressman
sitting there who would deny the point and the same is surely true of every
member of a House of Commons or the French assembly. The lawyer for the
committee walked right into this point with a very early question. He put it to
the colonel this way, “In certain Communist countries the government’s
activities are kept secret from the people, but that’s not the way we do things
in America, is it?”

The colonel would have been correct in answering, “Nonsense, the great bulk of
our government’s activities are reported but every administration has covert
operations going on all over the world which its agents are sworn not to
report, in fact to deny.”

What the colonel said was this, “I think it is very important for the American
people to understand that this is a dangerous world, that we live at risk.
Covert operations are essential to protecting the country and” – here’s the
nasty, undeniable point – “covert operations, by their very nature, are a lie.
They are based”, he said correctly, “in deceit”.

He was really echoing down the decades the famous line of Winston Churchill,
not spoken aloud I believe to the British public or any other public body, “In
wartime truth must be protected by a bodyguard of lies”.

The crucial word there is "wartime" but Colonel North was proceeding on the
understanding – which is surely shared by many governments including democratic
governments all around the world – that in the continuing Cold War governments,
however regretfully, have to mount secret, hidden, covert operations through
their intelligence agents and that the very secret of their success is
deception both in word and deed.

So Colonel North, having once asserted this definition – he didn’t concede or
sadly admit it, he asserted it – he could say from then on whenever the
committee’s lawyer asked something like “Did you shred this documents so they
wouldn’t get known about?” or “Did you help in revamping the true chronology of
events in producing a fake chronology to send up to the president and so change
the date when he appeared to know about these things going on?”

Colonel North didn’t hesitate for a split second. He’d say something like “Of
course” or “Correct” and then to the lawyer repeat, like an earnest
schoolmaster patiently getting a point across to a rather thick pupil, “As I’ve
said before, this was a covert operation” and it, all these operations had been
approved by his bosses in the National Security Council, Mr Robert McFarlane
and Admiral Poindexter. We shall hear from him next week.

And it’s very clear by now the late Mr Casey, Director of the CIA, and the
colonel assumed that their authority had come from the president. He had never
heard directly, man to man, from the president or seen a note or memo with the
president’s approving initials. So the central question is unanswered so far –
how much did the president know?

By the way, the president himself believes that Colonel North’s early testimony
completely exonerated him. However as I say on that key question, there will be
more to come. Well after Colonel North gave his chilling but true definition of
covert operations he also said that the president has a right, and he does,
secretly to sanction covert operations in writing through what is known as a
finding.

This is written permission to go ahead with the covert operation – the CIA
regularly requests such findings. – after the attorney general has gone through
the laws, precedents and so on and said yes you can do this. The whole question
of the legal guilt of Colonel North and his many colleagues, assistants,
contacts foreign and domestic, turns on whether a presidential finding and the
permission of the colonel’s bosses in the National Security Council can legally
bypass an act of Congress forbidding anyone in intelligence to supply or help
supply military or paramilitary aid to the Contras.

But in blunt terms that apply to all governments, if a covert operation
approved by a president or a prime minister, by high officers, members of their
administrations, if it leaks out, or as they keep saying here “comes
unravelled”, then are the intelligence agents, the men involved in the CIA, the
KGB, MI5 or 6 or whatever initials your own country’s intelligence agency goes
under, are these people punishable?

It’s always been assumed – and not only by readers of spy fiction – that, once
caught, a spy shot himself or took arsenic or was bumped off if he knew too
much. If I seem to have descended from strict reality and law into pulp fiction
may I say that through the revelations of covert plots that went wrong or came
out into the open in the past what... 20, 30 years, reality has constantly
imitated fiction or perhaps all along the fiction has been the fact.

We – you and I – can’t be certain of that because as I said at the beginning
most people including members of Congress or an assembly or a parliament choose
not to know about or acknowledge such nasty goings-on. In fact, it has been the
regular practice of governments to deny any knowledge of a spy once he was
found out.

When the now-famous Sidney Reilly disappeared in the early 1920s his wife
appealed to his great admirer Winston Churchill to help in his rescue. Mr
Churchill blandly replied that Mr Reilly went to Russia on his own private
affairs. And there’s the now-celebrated case of Paul Dukes, a highly valued
member of SIS, the British secret intelligence service during and just after
the First World War, a fanatical anti-Communist who ran incredible risks inside
Bolshevik Russia.

Once when he was back in London Mr Churchill urged the Prime Minister Lloyd
George to see him. “He will” said Churchill “interest you greatly”, but Lloyd
George, not the most austere of statesmen, wouldn’t do it. He thought it
improper to be associated in any way with his own intelligence agents.

Incidentally, Dukes did manage an audience with the King, George V, who
remarked that “The spy is the greatest of soldiers”. Now that’s the sort of
thing, the work, the methods of intelligence services, that most people today
between the ages of, say, 50 and 80 never knew about for most of their lives –
only the Germans and the Russians had spies.

But two generations have come since to the knowledge of good and evil or the
overt and covert in the conduct of national policy. I suppose the James Bond
films were the most startling bit of popular enlightenment but we knew that
they were fun and nonsense. But then there were the novels of Graham Greene and
John Le Carré and in Britain the excellent television series, The Sandbaggers.

In the 1950s the Americans got the first rather shocking hint that a president
could know about and deny secret operations when the Russians brought down an
American spy plane. President Eisenhower said indignantly, “It was no such
thing” but then admitted it was, with the rather limp afterthought, “Well you
do it too”.

How far we’ve come from the days when the great Justice Holmes’s only comment
on wire-tapping was that it was “a dirty business” and even in the second war,
when the American secretary of war wouldn’t think of looking at a secret memo
from another department, “It would be like opening another man’s letters,” he
said.

Now we have a real-life plot in which, quite gravely, according to Colonel
North’s code book, Israel was known as “bananas”, the United States as
“oranges” and the president was “Joshua”. Colonel North, I believe, would
enthusiastically agree with the lawyer for the CIA who wrote in 1984,
“Espionage is the world’s second oldest profession and just as honourable as
the first”.

By the way, that, er, compelling line of Colonel’s North’s “I came here to tell
the truth, the good, the bad, and the ugly,” was taken from the title of a
western starring Clint Eastwood, another lone crusader.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP