The New York water shortage - 30 June 1989

At the end of April here in New York City little stickers, notices, suddenly
appeared in shops, on blank walls, in lifts, office lobbies and so on saying
simply “Drought emergency. Conserve water in every way. No watering of lawns,
washing of cars.”

Mayor Koch appeared on television. That, I must say, is a vacuous remark –
Mayor Koch appears on television almost every day and has two half-hour weekly
programmes of his own, explaining, soliciting, rebuffing ideas about the street
people, drugs, crime, child abuse, battered wives, day care, rent control,
industries leaving the city and, now, the proposed abandonment of a nuclear
power plant on Long Island which at the cost of several billion dollars has
been getting steam up so to speak for 20 years and has never opened and
apparently won’t, due in the main to the overwhelming conviction of Long
Islanders that in a nuclear accident the population of Long Island would be
trapped and could be evacuated through the poisoned air only into the humid
jungle of New York City.

Much good the mayor’s brave, unceasing question time appearances do him. In
every borough of the city, among every racial or ethnic group, Anglos,
Hispanics, blacks, and among every age group from teenagers to geriatrics his
favourable rating is no higher than 29%. He’s running in a game but weary
fashion for re-election in November but is, at the moment, given almost no
chance to win.

Still, he’s an entertainment in himself and on public matters that are less
than heart-rending he preserves his light touch. So on 1 May when those warning
drought emergency stickers appeared he came on to say – no car washes, let your
lawn enjoy a weed or two, no water to be served in restaurants, take a quick
shower, he said.

The city reservoirs were at 48% of capacity when they should be, after a normal
snowy winter and rainy spring, about 90. Well, we had less snow through the
winter than at any time in the past 50 years. Things looked bad. Thereupon we
have the wettest May ever recorded. June kept up the downpour – floods of warm
water in a city as sticky as the Amazon jungles.

By the middle of June we’d had in all, in six weeks, 30 inches of rain, which
is just two inches short of our average annual rainfall. The reservoirs are
flooding the neighbouring lowlands and, naturally, people who live there up the
river wanted to know what the mayor was going to do about it – it’s his doing,
isn’t it? Everything bad that happens in the city and its environs is his
business.

He appeared on the evening news for about 15 seconds leaning back, his elbows
out, his hands clutching the back of his head, relaxed, a Cheshire cat smile.
What to do now, Mr Mayor? He said, “Take a long shower and any restaurant that
fails to serve two glasses of water per customer will be prosecuted.”

We can talk easily about such a light topic because this morning I woke up and
I thought it was the first day of fall. Our hideous prevailing summer winds,
which come across hot ocean, either from the south-east or the south-west, had
collapsed before the blessed north-west wind which comes across 3,000 miles of
dry land and pushes every memory of smog and heat haze and summer stew out to
sea and leaves you with a crystalline city that makes you think that overnight
your eyesight has been miraculously restored to 20:20, the balmy temperature an
unbelievable 66 degrees.

Well, by the time you hear this talk the chances are about 10-1 that this
freakish break will be over and we shall be back to blazing leaden skies and an
oven of a city in which even the newspapers feel like towels in your hands. The
effect of this tonic break on me was to banish depressing thoughts from the
mind, especially thoughts about pressing public topics which 24 hours ago I was
resolved to talk about.

My whole inclination is to forget the chronic ordeals of the republic, the
contentious judgments just handed down by the Supreme Court in the last week of
its current session, and talk about happy things, about issues that are always
settled, contests in which there is always a winner, in a word, say, about
Wimbledon.

We have a sports commentator on the early evening news who always ends his
report with 30 seconds of shots of the sensational or funny baseball players of
the day, unbelievable catches snatched from the bleachers, a player sliding
into third and toppling the umpire.

On the last day of the Eastbourne tennis tournament the reporter said to
camera, “Meanwhile in England John McEnroe is getting ready for Wimbledon.” Cut
immediately to McEnroe shouting a four-letter word at the umpire. Cut back to
the reporter saying rightly, “Yes he’s ready”.

How I wish I were there to see the outrageous child Monica Seles and the
Russian 16-year-old who set the Kremlin in a tizzy by saying “I want the money
I’ve earned”, most of all that dark-eyed, bouncing pixie Sanchez who danced
around in Paris, snatched returns – sometimes, it seemed, from the stands –
darted for ungettable drop-shots two inches from the net and in many other
incredible delightful ways made a monkey out of the incomparable Steffi Graf.
But it cannot be. All this time I have been saying under my breath “Mea culpa”.

Last week, some of you will remember, I talked about the extraordinary ruling
of the United States Supreme Court in saying that to burn the American flag in
public was not an act of desecration if you did it for a political purpose,
that the act was in principle sanctioned by the First Amendment to the
Constitution which protects the freedom of speech.

As you will recall, this judgment was the last word in the case of a young man
in Dallas who at the Republican convention there in 1984 burned a flag while
his comrades chanted “America red, white and blue, we spit on you”. He was
prosecuted under a Texas statute which makes it a crime to desecrate the
American flag. Forty-seven other states have similar statutes all of which,
it’s now assumed, are null and void.

Well, in the days after the court’s ruling the country blew up in a storm of
protest. Veterans of the armed forces of course were the most vocal – the older
the veteran, the louder the protest. Radio and television stations across the
continent had their telephones jammed by indignant citizens. Marches in many
cities with waving placards.

One troop of protesters got together outside the Supreme Court itself and
burned a judge’s robe, a prop robe. The Congress put off, for the moment, its
normal business.

The Senate was the first to rally and – a very rare event – all 100 senators
were present and voting. The result, on a Senate resolution expressing
"profound disappointment with the Court’s ruling" –- 97 for, 3 against.

In both houses there was a prompt call for a Constitution amendment
specifically saying that the desecration of the American flag is a crime. After
that, the Senate got busy drafting an alternative form of what it calls
"corrective action", namely a new law.

Now skipping for a moment the rights and wrongs, the opposing views, if the
Congress is mad at a judgment – which it sometimes is, and this time is madder
than ever – it of course it has the power to write and pass another law which
will try to evade the particular clause or word of the Constitution that was
interpreted in the offensive way.

But writing into the Constitution an amendment which defines an exception to
the First Amendment is a very different business bristling with trouble, for it
might start a whole slew of new amendments to the definition of free speech.

Moreover, to be adopted, a Constitutional amendment must get a two-thirds
majority vote in the Senate and then go to the 50 state legislatures and then
receive a three-quarters majority in each chamber. This can take years and
rarely happens. The last amendment was made in 1971, lowering the voting age to
18 when there was really no argument. So the chances of a new amendment –
which, by the way, President Bush wants too – a new amendment on freedom of
speech, are very remote.

The present one, the first, has lasted 200 years and successfully upheld
hundreds of different applications of the phrase “the principle of the freedom
of speech”. As for the alternative – passing a new law – the problem for the
Congress there is that if it specified that the flag was sacrosanct and outside
the protection of free speech,that would inevitably end up before the court,
which would surely strike it down.

Much of the clamour and indignation in the Senate was colourful and eloquent
about the sanctity, the cherished symbol, of the flag. Only one voice was heard
saying, in effect, if the flag is so sacred, so special, then why down the past
20 years have all the ruling usages of the flag, incorporated by Congress in
1971, why have they been ignored or violated? So that the very prohibition that
I mentioned last time – that the flag may not be used on a commercial product –
has gone with the wind.

Flags on bikinis, on jeans, on T-shirts. I think the Congress would, in the
end, have a hard time convincing the court that a national symbol worn on the
bottom of a stripper is less of a desecration than a solemn burning as an act
of political protest.

When the blood of the angry citizens cools we shall see if the Congress or the
president or any state legislature can write a law which strikes a workable,
legal, compromise between the two extreme views expressed in the Senate, one
from a Democrat, “The greatest travesty in the annals of jurisprudence”, the
other a Republican who described the speeches of his colleagues as “an exercise
in silliness and hypocrisy”.

To strike a legal, workable balance between such extremes would be quite a feat
and, I should guess, will never happen.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP