Christmas, and Alistair Cooke meets a computer - 31 December 1993

Washington this past week was extraordinary to behold, an empty capital that
might have been expecting an invasion.

All the senators and the congressmen and the women, all back where they were
born or have lived all their lives, that's the rule and the supreme court
closed and the president back in Little Rock, doing what president's always do
when they go home – strolling along main street waving at small children,
hustling into the local barber shop not yet a unisex style emporium, embracing
the local dentist and the hardware store owner like long-lost brothers, being
photographed on White House orders out with two buddies in camouflage fatigues
hunting, shooting pheasants.

The point being made on the soundtrack that one of the three old buddies is a
paid up member of the NRA, the National Rifle Association, which for nine years
fought any federal gun control legislation. These pictures on the evening telly
show that the president is broad minded and while eager to stop bad people
killing people doesn't want to take rifles away from good old boys out in the
woods in search of game pie.

This Christmas, we gladly left crackling, tooting, roaring New York. This
Christmas it was Vermont's turn. It's probably no news to you that just about
every airline in America except a couple of small ones is bankrupt or teetering
on the verge or boasting that the millions it lost last month mean nothing
since the company is about to be, as one executive put it, creatively
restructured. This means the creditors may get 25 cents in the dollar; the
airline will say "tough luck" and try again.

Consequently, all over the country short flights between small cities 2 or 300
miles have now gone back to propeller planes, which as you know to your sorrow,
have to fly through the weather instead of over it.

We've had small jets, 727s and their variants flying for so long on this run
from New York to Burlington then northern Vermont that it was a shock to arrive
at LaGuardia and find ourselves suddenly back in the early 1950s before the
introduction of the jet. Once the plane was called of course it had a smidgen
of mechanical troubles so it was a little late, but when we finally went off to
board we went down to two flights of steep stairs, rough, I noticed, on one or
two old codgers in their 70s then stopped at a gate, then we were directed by a
steward into, I kid you not, a bus and driven off half a mile to another part
of the airport. We were now directed to a third aircraft on the right and
patter along in a perishing wind, it was 10 degrees or 22 below freezing, climb
a rope, well a plastic ladder and try to stuff yourself into one of 32 seats.
Propellers start to hum and zoom and scream and finally we take off and I was
back again in 1944 with the United States Air Force with the air transport
command wobbling and bouncing and lurching all over the sky till we hit a
fairly clear stream. Some fun.

On the return journey coming down was worse and I heard the by now totally
unfamiliar sound of a little boy barking I thought, no he was vomiting. The
airline makes no apology or even announcement about the sudden and seemingly
permanent suspension of jet flight. Of course, they're busy saving money, jet
fuel gobbles up two, three times the rate of a prop plane. Saving money in
spite of their constant assurances that while last year was rocky, the coming
year is going to be cool or as we used to say, hunky-dory. To turn the knife in
this unanticipated wound, the fare cost this time almost twice what it cost
last year.

However, we did after an age bounce down in Burlington and were picked up by my
son-in-law and off on a 40-minute trip that never fails to amaze. Everywhere
unending blankets of snow through the meadows and up into the low hills and
then the stiff forests of fur and spruce in the mountains going up to high very
silent snow capped peaks. The amazement is stirred by the fact that after only,
well I said two small storms didn't I, so four inches one day, five the next.
All the roads from the big divided federal highways to the smaller state
highways and then to the county two-lane roads and finally the winding mountain
roads all clean as a whistle, the snow piled along the edges in neat high
ramparts, thanks to the massive snow ploughs and the big separators that
whooshed the stuff away from each side of the machine. And if lots more snow
does come and you have to go out, there's always the consoling thought that the
car or truck or whatever is a four wheel drive on snow tyres.

So up on the mountain road to this white old colonial farmhouse, everything
glistening white, the white house in the white buried garden and the white
rising mountainside beyond and above it all, what Johnny Mercer called a "blue
umbrella sky" for three days and magical nights a still very silent landscape
coated with delicious Christmas icing. The only humans in sight were three
bouncing Disney dolls in blinding scarlet and green, all but the dullest
colours are blinding in this sparkling light.

The dolls are the living dolls of three granddaughters, the baby aged seven is
a very active imp and after clomping knee deep in the crisp and even sees it's
time to come in and scrape away on her fiddle at the man she calls Mr Bach, JS
that is. She learned from the age of three the Japanese system and I must say
the results are remarkable. Soon after her breakfast on Christmas morning, the
little pile of presents was left beside the tree and the father and the three
girls collected round the prize present and when we left two days later they
were still at it, Poppa's new computer.

I ought to say that for the past 10, 20 years I have resolutely refused to buy
to learn to use a word processor to the beseechings of my high-tech friends to
put away my ridiculous portable manual machine born in 1960s still going
strong, I respond with one question. "Does it write better prose?" they all
mutter and eventually grumble "well no, but..." However, I have to say that
after watching the operations of this new computer, I was at one with the
cooing goggle-eyed girls. After an hour or two, the eldest girl appeared to
have a whining complaint, "What is it?" asks her sainted father; she wants to
know about seagulls.

All right, he says, get into birds and the compule (?) with the portas frigus
(?) mode, she taps this and that, watches the little mooching arrow on the
screen. Up comes a list like a laundry list of birds, okay migrants no, singing
birds, well sort off. Eventually, seagulls, pages of information rolling by
like a paper towel about their origin biology, life habits, distribution, types
of etc. Then suddenly another tap and where are we now at the seashore,
marvellous squeaking crying gull sounds, sounds of a flight or squawk of
seagulls.

Now this was news to me, how about a few biographies let's try Charlemagne,
very good very informative. How about Bobby Jones? Up he comes the immortal one
and another tap, another button and there he is with his inimitable swing,
which the late Bernard Darwin compared to the drowsy beauty of an English
summers day. How about Franklin Roosevelt? Reams of stuff, but also another tap
or two and we hear him doing his never forgotten inaugural speech on the day
the money stopped, 4 March 1933, that high fluting confident tenor, "we have
nothing to fear but fear itself". This machine has been fed the material I
guess, text is the cool word of several encyclopaedias, old news reel libraries
sound recordings from true landslides to the lowly Bobwhite dictionaries,
commentaries and heaven knows what else.

When I eventually staggered off to swipe a touch of Christmas spirit, a present
from Scotland, my son-in-law said in suspiciously lazy fashion, "how about
this?" I moved across the room back to the screen and there outrageously for
all to see with dates and cocky opinions what they now call value judgements
was a biography going on for a page or two at the top in blatant capital
letters "COOKE ALISTAIR JOURNALIST BROADCASTER BORN …" never mind, on and on
for all to see. The Russians had the KGB, we, you can have this computer.

The New Year has come in from the East, the Far East with a thundering bit of
news; it took up to two pages of the New York Times's business section and
bewildering to me technical essay along with knotty diagrams about hydrogen
bridges connecting cotton molecule chains courage. What it all means, is as the
headline put it, a dream unfolds. Tokyo 28 December: Japanese and Americans
working together on the verge of a technological breakthrough, the first
products are already to hand. What a cotton shirt, 100% cotton shirt that
requires no ironing even a dress shirt. This is being hailed as an invention
second only to Thomas Alva Edison's electric bulb.

Of course for 20, 30 years there have been polyethylene mainly blended with one
part cotton and the fibres were coated with formaldehyde impregnated resins.
The new all-cotton boys now remark that formaldehyde can pose a health hazard
so there!

It's not perfected just yet, but by midsummer they expect to be on the market,
the rousing slogan of the inventors is "unplug the iron, mother" so in the
great march of human progress or decline, the flat iron and the ironing board
will soon join the ashtray and remnants or artefacts of an earlier civilisation
and in the decade or so you may see one or both of them up for auction at
Christie's or Sotheby's for, say, $10,000 a piece.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP