Ronald Reagan’s victory, 1980 - 7 November 1980

In the presidential election of 1916 the Democrats did what the party whose man
is in the White House, always does – it re-nominated the incumbent.

He was President Wilson. The Republicans chose an associate justice of the
Supreme Court, one Charles Evans Hughes, a graceful, bearded man with a
striking resemblance to God, as he was perceived in those days. Apart from his
presidential physique, Hughes appeared to have united his own party and the
Progressives in a suspicion that Woodrow Wilson was preparing the country to
enter the First World War.

On election night, when the word came in that Hughes had carried the two most
popular states, New York and Pennsylvania, and Indiana – the bellwether of the
midwestern vote – it was clear that he had been elected. Wilson went to bed a
defeated man. And next day, he began to make the necessary arrangements for the
transition, the transfer of power. True, California had not been heard from,
but California was not, in those days, the giant of the electoral college.

Two nights later, shortly after midnight, the telephone rang in the home of
Justice Hughes. It was a news agency reporter wanting to speak to the justice.
A sleepy butler answered, "I am sorry sir, the president has gone to bed". Said
the reporter, "Well wake him up. And tell him he’s not president any more". It
was true – California had gone for Wilson, and tipped the scale. It took three
days though, to be sure of it.

Last Tuesday evening at a quarter to six, three hours before the polls had
closed in California, the telephone rang in Mr Reagan's house in Pacific
Palisades, a lush movie-star colony that lies between Beverly Hills and the
Pacific ocean.

The call came from President Carter – he was calling to concede defeat and
congratulate Ronald Reagan on a fine victory. How could this be, before the
polls had closed in most western states and several in the midwest. Losers
always grind their teeth and wait and wait, usually until the early hours of
Wednesday. But Jimmy Carter, with one dying kick, set up one new record. No
presidential loser has ever conceded so early.

Now, of course the states don’t report their vote as a whole – it’s the
election districts, the hundreds of them within a state, that make their tally
separately. And in the cities, especially where the mechanical voting machine
is long established and accumulates the total as it goes, the votes of even
very populous districts can be delivered within minutes of the polling
deadline.

This nearly universal device would not, however, be enough to tell us on the
basis, say, of 5% of the states vote, who had carried that state. But, for over
30 years now, we have been living in the age of what we first called the "big
brain" and now called a computer.

I remember many years ago going into midtown Manhattan to look at IBM’s first
demonstration model of the "big brain", an electronic marvel, an enormous room
with winking lights and walls riddled with looping wires, an electronic
spaghetti factory. Today ,the Japanese have reduced these marvels to the size
of a fingernail.

Put together the voting machine and the computer and plug them into a
television network and you have a lightning reporter who can be guaranteed to
short-circuit the suspense that used to keep us on a knife edge of anxiety
through the long evenings and the nights of the first Tuesday in November.

Last Tuesday night was unreal. You have friends in for a drink or two and time
to hear the seven o’clock news which on presidential election nights starts the
non-stop coverage of the networks. Normally, for many years, the seven o’clock
news provided one unchanging item, that produced a ribald joke or two about the
networks with all their electronic gear and their maps and their experts
dripping expertise.

Seven o’clock strikes and this mountainous organisation groans and delivers as
mouse. The first return, always from the same village in New Hampshire, total
vote: 11. I remember in 1948 the anchorman saying, "Eight votes for Dewey,
three for Truman. Well there it is, but I guess you could hardly call it a
trend." After that we would all chuckle through the delivery of several other
mice, and go into dinner and come back about ten o’clock, when you could begin
to get some idea of how the eastern states had gone, and the midwest was going.

Not last Tuesday. NBC, which admittedly has a bolder profit than its rivals –
maybe its big brain is bigger or more audacious – NBC positively gave Florida
to Reagan within fifteen minutes of the start of the programme. On the basis of
10% of the vote in a crucial county here, and 5% of a divided city there, NBC
was announcing, at 7.30, that Ronald Reagan was going to have a very
considerable victory.

They switched to their reporter at the White House and it might have been
Wednesday noon. She reported bleak faces, the president's aides looking
forlornly at their cluttered desks, and one or two of the Carter family close
to tears. A few minutes later a couple of our friends arrived and the man said,
"Can we still have dinner?".

Before we finished dinner a brave cheer went up from the telly and there was
Jimmy Carter telling us he’d called Governor Reagan and promising us the
smoothest transition from one administration to another in the history of the
presidency. All that happened then was the rapid and unhindered movement of the
landslide, first in the south, and then through the midwest then into the
north-east, and finally, across the west to make the map one sheet of uniform
blue.

A week ago, it seemed to some of us, though that was no time for me to say so,
that the so-called presidential debates had given the last flick of the whip to
a Reagan whose sprint in the last stretch was unapproachable. If, in the famous
first debate in 1960, John Kennedy looked like a knowledgeable choir boy, and
Richard Nixon like Boris Karloff, in the 1980 debate it seemed to me, Ronald
Reagan looked like an affable salesman and Jimmy Carter like a nervous iceberg.

It may not seem like much of a choice for the leader of the free world, but one
fact we have to face from now is that the television image of two political
opponents is not a human reflection of two political positions. It’s a show all
in itself, like a studio photograph of a bride, or the commissioned portrait of
a university president, or a bank manager. It's undoubtedly meant to be the man
himself but he’s tamed and tailored by the medium into a performer.

From this limited and theatrical view of the two candidates, we did not see
anything in Jimmy Carter that we had not seen a thousand times. He was brave,
judicial, verbose in a technical way, he licked his lips, he trusted as a
debater, to misreading some of Mr Reagan’s acts as governor of California and
he kept on calling him dangerous.

But then we’d look across to Mr Reagan who is a professional, a professional
good guy, in front of a camera, and the last thing he appeared was dangerous;
he appeared engaging, good humoured, his brow wrinkled sorrowfully at Mr
Carter's misinterpretations. He recited, in the idiom of ordinary Americans
speech, his devotion to peace, to the workers, to the families of America, he
longed for the old days, of decent folk and lots of jobs.

And he clinched this simple appeal to half the population with the sunny but
deadly question, "Are you better off than you were four years ago? Do you think
America is stronger than it was four years ago?". Simple, artful and, if you
like, unfair appeals. For nobody is better off, and nobody maintains that
America has, for the past 20 years let alone the past four, made any show of
strength that has impressed the world.

But these two questions turned out to be right on target, for last Tuesday
night, NBC undertook a novelty – what it called an exit poll. They set up many
thousands of interviews with people across the country, people leaving the
polls in election districts statistically chosen as a cross-section of the
peoples' mood. Voters were simply asked what issues had forced them to vote the
way they did?

Overwhelmingly the answer was two issues – the state of the economy, which
means inflation, unemployment, the cost of housing, and the fear that America
is not as militarily strong as it ought to be. Now these issues, of course,
concern politicians of all stripes, not least Jimmy Carter. And most people I
think know in their bones that nobody, except perhaps the West Germans and the
Japanese, seem to be able to stop inflation.

Why, then should Jimmy Carter have to take the blame? First, a simple reason
but one loftily overlooked by election pundits: Jimmy Carter is in the White
House, as Herbert Hoover was when Wall Street crashed. But what emphasised his
incumbency was nobody but Jimmy Carter himself. Instead of doing what Franklin
Roosevelt did in four elections, never mentioning the name of his opponent, he
decided to make Ronald Reagan and his character the issue. The tactic
backfired. The actual sight of Reagan in the debate obliterated the nuclear
button-pressing Dr Strangelove of Mr Carter's fancy.

This is a well-known and fatal tactic in courtroom trials. When the prosecutor
paints too gaudy a picture of the defendant as villain, and the defendant sits
there looking inoffensive, the jury starts to grow suspicious of the plaintiff,
the man who’s doing all this frantic finger-pointing.

And in the end, all the bewildering complexity of the issues that were no more
than touched on, and the great array of issues and solutions that were never
mentioned, all of them, in the end, I believe, came to focus on the human image
of Jimmy Carter.

He is the curator of the mess we are in – if that is what we are in. And maybe,
the country said, we should hand the ball to the conservatives who had been
moaning and groaning since 1964 at Goldwater’s defeat about the bankruptcy of
liberal Democrats and big government. Over simple again, no doubt, but the
answer was shattering in its positiveness.

For the first time in 25 years the Senate will be led by the Republicans and
its most powerful committees – judiciary, finance, armed forces, appropriations
– will have as their chairman, the strong right-wing of the Republican party.
No doubt about it, we are about to live, as the Chinese say, in interesting
times.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP