Memorial Day, 1990 - 25 May 1990

About a year after the end of the American Civil War, in the spring of 1866, a
surgeon who'd served with the infantry from Abraham Lincoln's state started,
with a handful of friends, a society to help widows and orphans.

He set up a post which he hoped would be the first of a national chain. He gave
the society the grand name of the Grand Army of the Republic, and, by the
autumn, by which time people had had time to notice the sad plight of the
neighbouring widows and their children, there were already 39 posts scattered
around the country. And in the November, they held their first National
Encampment.

The GAR, as it came to be called, was the first of the veterans' organisations
and at one time, just 100 years ago, it had close to half a million members.
After that it steadily declined and by the outbreak of the Second World War had
practically ceased to exist.

Other, and eventually more powerful, organisations started up beginning with
the American Legion which came out of the First War and it was supplemented by
the veterans of foreign wars, veterans of Vietnam and many others catering to
the needs, especially, of the disabled.

The last relic of the Grand Army of the Republic is a ceremony which turned
into a public holiday. The second commander of the GAR, one General John Logan,
in the beginning called on members of the order to lay flowers on soldiers'
graves on the 30th day of every May.

It was called, until fairly recently, Decoration Day. It's now known as
Memorial Day. And this is the Memorial Day weekend. It's a legal holiday in
almost all the states of the union, and will be observed with religious
ceremonies, with political speeches, in the south with visits to famous
battlefields of the Civil War and, of course, everywhere, with department
stores' sales, beach picnics and general whooping it up.

It's been moved forward a week this year and the Congress, like most working
and non-working groups, will take a recess.

The occasion has led me to think that somebody should start to lobby for more
national and legal holidays because whenever one is coming up, the president
and the party leaders start to galvanise their flocks, to polish off some
pending legislation, before they all go home.

The most flagrant proof that Congress needs a whip to move it into swift action
will come at the end of June, before the Independence Day holiday, which also
coincides with the end of the fiscal year. By that time, the government payroll
is running out of money.

Every year, we're told in one desperate week, that if Congress doesn't pass an
emergency bill there will be no more wages for the hundreds of thousands of
office workers, post office employees, national park crews, government
hospitals, for anybody and everybody who works for the government.

There's always a cannonade of resounding speeches lamenting the shame of what
is an annual situation. And the house, which is the fount of all money bills,
argues and bemoans and stays up all night, sometimes all of two nights, and at
dawn on the third day comes through with an emergency appropriation and
announces that the republic has again been saved and its million or two loyal
wage slaves will not go without bread.

This past week, with school about to break for Memorial Day, the president,
wanting something to show for any Memorial Day speeches, urged his men in the
house to see through what has been called "the most sweeping Civil Rights Bill
in two decades". It's called the Americans With Disabilities Act and it's going
to cost a whopping outlay of cash.

Airplanes, buses, trains, public buildings, lavatories, offices, factories,
theatres, restaurants, must all construct ramps and/or other devices to help
the crippled. Competent people who are blind or deaf may not be denied jobs for
which sign language or Braille previously disqualified them. The same applied
to victims of Aids and drug addicts who are under treatment.

When the bill was passed in the house by a thumping 403-20, he was a brave
congressman who would come out against the disabled. A great cheer went up from
over 200 people in wheelchairs who'd watched the last hours of the debate in a
chamber inside the house building. It was a moving moment of triumph. The legal
battles over fringe definitions of disability will come later.

That happened on Tuesday. On Wednesday, with Congress hoping to wind up its
current business by Thursday midnight, the Democrats forced into the open, and
to a vote, a bill over which both parties have been wrangling for months, a new
gun control bill.

You may remember that months ago, after a particularly hair-raising mass murder
by a deranged young man using an assault weapon, a small repeating machine- gun
he cradled in his arms, the president approved a bill outlawing assault weapons
but only if they were made abroad. The National Rifle Association raised hob at
the suggestion that the man should apply to the domestic manufacturers who do a
roaring business.

The stubborn argument of the NRA in favour of allowing citizens to own guns has
always been based in the Bill of Rights in the Second Amendment to the
Constitution which says, when the National Rifle Association is quoting it,
"the right of the people to keep and bear arms, shall not be infringed". What
the NRA never quotes, nor the million of gun-toting Americans – the vast
majority, of course, are harmless sportsmen, shooting or hunting, as it's
called here, is a regular weekend occupation of all classes in the south and
west and on the prairie especially, of the poorest country people – what these
honest citizens don't know, and what the NRA always overlooks is the first part
of that sentence in the Bill of Rights, the one condition under which "people
may keep and bear arms".

This is the way it goes, "A well regulated militia, being necessary to the
security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall
not be infringed". It was written and approved by the founding fathers when the
United States had no standing army and didn't intend to have one.

Armies could suddenly be seized and used by kings or other dictators, so the
defence of the realm was left to the citizens of every trade who were, at one
time, required to keep a gun at the ready so that the governor of a state, or
the mayor or whoever, could muster a militia whenever there was a threat of
insurrection.

Needless to say, while we have citizens who belong to the National Guard, the
United States, like almost every other country now has an army, navy and air
force to provide for the security of the state. But whenever gun control comes
up in public, on a night-time television show, somebody's sure to trot out the
second half of the Constitutional sentence, in hushed tones worth of holy writ,
and is never challenged.

The National Rifle Association is one of the most handsomely financed – and
hence most the powerful – lobbies in Washington. And from a politician's point
of view, it can practically guarantee him millions of votes, from humble
countrymen who are outraged at the idea that they might be forbidden to bag a
pheasant or a rabbit for supper.

However, a spate of random murders in shopping malls, in schools, managed to
provoke the ban on foreign assault weapons. The Democrats, except in districts
which manufacture domestic assault weapons, have been slogging away to get all
assault weapons banned.

And surprisingly on Wednesday, months before such an action was expected to
come to a vote, they heard a gutsy speech from an Arizona Democrat who
sponsored it. Senator DeConcini cried out, "There are too many bullet holes in
blue suits, too many women weeping over coffins, too many children without
fathers".

At the end of the debate, he got his bill through by a single vote, 50-49. Only
because it is, in a way, a trial measure – it bans, for three years, the
manufacture and sale of nine types of semi-automatic assault weapons.

On 1 January, a new law went into effect banning all smoking on airplanes
flying within the continental land mass. Put another way, on all flights of
under six hours, from coast to coast. The longest flights take between four and
five and a half hours.

This means that the only plane you can smoke on is one flying from, say, New
York to Alaska, which runs to a pretty heavy price for a cigarette. And last
week, prompted by the new Surgeon General, there was a big outcry, special news
programmes and documentaries on television about the newly-disclosed fact that
the tobacco companies, the cigarette manufacturers, are doing better than ever
in spite of the widespread ban on smoking in public places.

Because although they have lost between a third and a quarter of their domestic
market, they've mounted a very successful campaign to push cigarettes and
cigarette advertising in the Third World. We've seen some very vivid pictures
of Asians and Africans of all sorts and classes puffing away in front of
posters or TV screens advertising American brands.

So now there is a surging body in Congress which wants, in effect, to strangle
the tobacco industry. This would be a body blow to North and South Carolina,
mainly, which live by tobacco – it's the fifth cash crop in the country and the
south is one great base of President Bush's conservative support.

It's a nasty irony for the president that he is, sooner or later, going to have
to face in his own country what is the bane of the cocaine-producing countries
of South America. How to find another crop to replace the one by which millions
of people earn their living.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP