Diane Feinstein's forestry bill - 14 October 1994

Nothing, the man wrote, an apparently genial listener, years ago, nothing is
deadlier than another country's politics. Bad enough, he wrote, knowing regular
chess without having to learn the American form, in which the pawns move
backwards, the bishops play no part and there's no king or queen. He's
absolutely right.

But something happened last weekend in Washington on the last day of the life
of this Congress, a plot and a scene that could have been dreamed up only by
Alfred Hitchcock, the sort of thriller that never never happens in life but it
did. Before I begin, I just ought to touch on Saddam Hussein's massive lunge
toward Kuwait, which we thought had been repulsed and shattered once for all.
The most interesting comment on his motive came from former General
Schwarzkopf, the commander in chief of the desert war, he says, Saddam Hussein
was counting on what the general calls the Carter factor, do as the North
Koreans did and then General Cédras, scare the daylights out of the Americans,
then have former President Carter intervene and make a seeming settlement on
the villain's terms.

All right now, the passing into history in an ecstasy of melodrama of the 103rd
Congress of the United States. A Congress usually simply dissolves ends
whatever debates are left with are droned or a whine. Not this time.

I said last time that the California race for the one open Senate seat was a
Hollywood script, more so last Saturday. Let me remind you of the rough
scenario. The incumbent Senator Diane Feinstein is the San Francisco politician
once mayor with a quarter century's experience of California problems that
disturbed the nation: rotting inner cities, street crime, pervasive drugs,
overpopulated schools, hundreds of thousands a year of illegal immigrants.
She's been an active senator for a newcomer, sponsoring two of the three
successful bills President Clinton got through the Senate. She's opposed by a
Republican new to politics a bland affable innocent who is very very rich and
is backed and fronted by a handsome battle-axe of a wife who knows where to
raise the money and how to spend it cunningly on sound bites that rattle, on
California television, like a kettle drum, all sounding the toxin of Mrs
Feinstein as a down-the-line tax-and-spend Democrat who will soon bankrupt the
state.

In the poll taken just as the Congress was about to rise and run, Mrs Feinstein
was not even a percentage point ahead of the ineffable and in the flesh
practically invisible Mr Huffington.

Since money seemed to be the magical element, Mrs Feinstein has sunk most of
her own small fortune in this, thinking of mortgaging her San Francisco house
to finance competing sound bites. What more could she do except keep on the
boring business of debating the issues?

Well, now we dissolved to Washington and the last day of the Senate, which was
ending in spasms of rancour and ill-will. The Republicans saying that the
president never consulted them much but just showed up for photo-op bi-partisan
occasions. I'm afraid there's much in that charge. And the Democrats saying
that the Republicans when in doubt about a particular Clinton bill develop the
habit of blocking it, so they could say in November, look how little he's done,
and that too is nothing but the truth.

Well, the Senate had one or two final bits of business to finish off and one
big bill. It approved letting the makers of dietary supplements sell their
pills provided they don't advertise them as cures for anything… Now the big
deal, which had appeared around noontime till we get another lumbering
humiliating defeat for the administration, a bill to have the federal
government take over the protection of six million acres of the southern
California desert, a sweeping environmental claim that has not been equalled
since Congress 14 years ago protected a vast expanse of Alaska.

Now this bill from the start was a time bomb, which many senators and Western
power brokers were determined to dismantle. They thought first of development,
the desert you know is extremely fertile – one of the oldest Western maxims is
spit on the desert and a flower pops up. But the main public argument of the
opposing senators was that the bill would cost the National Park Service and by
quick extension the taxpayer a fortune to carry out. The lobbying for and
against this bill has been going on for months, the House shirked it to the day
before it broke up, but at two in the morning it was passed. Now it went to the
Senate.

And who do you suppose invented, wrote, proposed and introduced this bill, none
other than the beautiful Diane Feinstein and she had clawed and insinuated her
way through the rival lobbies to bring this bill to the floor at last. But no
sooner was it there, then it ran smack into the Senate's great roadblock, a
filibuster.

Twenty-seven times in this Congress, the Republicans have filibustered bills
into oblivion, it's a device that's impossible in the House practically, which
can close debate with little objection from the floor, but the Senate has
jealously preserved throughout this century its right to what is called
unlimited debate. The original idea was sensible even noble allowing free and
unfettered public debate would guarantee that in serious matters no majority
could ever trample on the minority.

However, the way a filibuster is used most of the time is to prolong debate on
and on through the days and nights must be continuous and eventually bore an
paralysed the chamber beyond its term of life.

Debate by the way is a fancy word for any continuous speechifying on any topic
that comes to mind. Senators have been known to read slowly and stubbornly
through the books of the Old Testament. The late and long unlamented Huey Long,
I remember, recited an interminable tribute to his dead mother and expounded at
loving length her recipe for frying oysters. This time, as the day and the life
of the Senate waned, one Senator Wallop of Wyoming, I kid you not, Senator
Wallop ordered to have the bill read aloud solemnly articulately all 61 pages
of it. The bill appeared doomed for, to Mrs Feinstein, a heartbreaking reason.
The only way a filibuster can be killed off is to find 60 Senators who will
vote to end debate.

Mrs Feinstein, buoyed up by the support of possibly a dozen Republicans who
broke ranks to support her, saw the day before the possibility that the bill
might pass, but the senators were already on the way to the airport or in the
air or already home. In 24 hours she was on the phone and the fax begging them
to wing their way back and vote.

By the time Senator Wallop was getting his second wind, Mrs Feinstein had done
a hopeful count of 59 Senators likely to vote with her. Obviously, there were
others unreachable or unknowable, but who and where was the 60th vote? Mrs
Feinstein knew very well who it was, she was Senator Moseley Braun from
Illinois a freshman Senator, the first black woman ever elected to the United
States Senate – isn't that perfect Warner Brothers casting? She could save the
bill and the Democrats and the heroic initiative of Senator Feinstein who by
now could stay put no longer, she was pacing up and down and around jabbing
glances at her watch. The Senate majority leader Senator Mitchell was trying to
balance three phones and talking to two.

Senator Moseley Braun had promised to be there, where could she be? One senator
was flown back from Tennessee, another from Arizona, one from Nebraska, another
from New Jersey, a precious Republican from Delaware. The majority leader had
the wit just in time to realise that one trusty democratic vote was that of
Senator Lieberman from Connecticut an Orthodox Jew who would not have of course
be able to travel by train or car between Fridays sundown and Saturdays
sundown, they got him into a Washington hotel on Friday so that come Saturday
he could walk to the capital. But where oh where was Senator Moseley Braun?

She was imprisoned in a manner of speaking, she'd gone down into her garage,
the door closed behind her and her electronic beeper failed she was locked in
there. And – in accordance with any script approved by Frank Capra or Preston
Sturges or Hitchcock – there was no telephone.

We can only leave to your imagination and the nightmare fantasies of Mrs
Feinstein, how the gallant Carol Moseley Braun got out, but she did. She broke
out of the place fuming and trembling, hailed a cab, rushed up the Capitol
steps, raced to a breaking wave of Democratic applause into the chamber.

Senator Feinstein had her 60 votes. Senator Wallop was foiled and gave up. A
senator from Louisiana whose been on the Natural Resources Committee for 22
years said about Diane Feinstein, wheeling and plunging and holding on, it is
the most remarkable one-man, one-woman, one-senator show I have ever seen. The
bill was passed and the six million acres are preserved. President Clinton can
claim one truly major piece of legislation that came out of the sorrowful 103rd
Congress in its death rattle. Whether Diane Feinstein's heroic one-woman show
can off-set the golden clanking of Mr Huffington's millions is something that
would have of course certainly happen in a movie but in life we shan't know
until the morning of Wednesday 9 November, a date that may come to live in
history or infamy.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP