Diane Feinstein - 8 June 1990

"Westward the course of empire takes its way". It's a quotation which, in this
country, is as well-known as any tag from Shakespeare or the Bible.

But I find that if you mention it and wonder idly where it came from, most
people guess that whoever said it was talking about California and repeating,
in another form, the advice of a 19th-Century American editor to "Go West,
young man!"

The surprising truth is that it came from an English divine, or rather an
Anglo-Irish bishop writing in the early 18th century. None other, in fact, than
the great Bishop Berkeley, the philosopher after whom Berkeley College at Yale
was named.

By the way, it's pronounced Berkeley [Burk-lee] in America because that was the
normal pronunciation of that and many similar words when the American colonies
were founded. It was only later that in England the pronunciation gradually
shifted from, for instance, clerk into "clark", and "sturve" into starve and
the Middle English "sur-gent" into sergeant.

Well, what Bishop Berkeley was writing about, with remarkable foresight, was
the prospect of planting arts and learning in America, and the line comes from
a poem with that title. The whole short passage, four lines, goes like this,
"Westward the course of empire takes its way, the first four acts already
passed, a fifth shall close the drama with the day, time's noblest offspring is
the last".

If he were alive today, he would no doubt foresee a sixth act in the human
drama and see the course of empire, by which he meant power, being played out
alongside the Pacific Rim – Japan, China, Korea. Or perhaps, if he was more
clairvoyant still, he would foresee the next great convulsion in Eastern Europe
and only after that settles, then Asia taking over.

But we're brought back to what most Americans assume was meant by the famous
phrase by a newspaper piece, just published, which uses "Westward the course of
empire" as the headline on the dramatic news last Tuesday that came out of
California.

Not the royal tour of Mr Gorbachev which ended in San Francisco to a cheering
tumult of citizens, the like of which has not been seen since the San Francisco
Giants paraded through the town after winning the National League pennant. By
the next evening, the Tuesday, Mr Gorbachev was gone and half forgotten in the
excited anticipation of what was going to happen to a state-wide election.

The governorship of California may seem to strangers very much of a local event
but California, it has been calculated, handles an economy that is surpassed by
only eight other nations in the world. And in America, California, as I hinted
from out there a few weeks ago, has become the most progressive state in the
nation.

On second thought, progressive is the wrong word, it suggests ideology, but I
mean the state which moves first on the big issues which engross, or divide,
the republic. Call it rather, then, the most politically active state.

Well, today, Washington and most of the states watch which way California is
going. Because, firstly, it holds its primary elections early in the spring,
but mainly because California is the most powerful and most populous state,
with more members in the lower house, the House of Representatives, than any
other state. Ten, fifteen, perhaps twenty years ago, it supplanted New York
State as a barometer of national political opinion. So what was the big news?

Superficially, last Tuesday, for the first time in the history of the state, a
woman won the Democratic nomination for governor. The election, of course, is
in November. Dianne Feinstein, a handsome brunette who was the first woman
mayor of San Francisco, set her sights higher so long ago as 1984, when she
hoped and tried to become the chosen vice presidential running mate of Jimmy
Carter's vice president, Mr Mondale.

Remember him? Mrs Feinstein came to be mighty glad she was not chosen. Instead
Mr Mondale picked Mrs Geraldine Ferraro of the New York borough of Queens. And
they were both massacred and lost to politics for ever in Mr Reagan's second
landslide.

So, last fall, Mrs Feinstein announced she was going to try for the
governorship. She was, of course, very well-known in San Francisco and northern
California which is noticeably more liberal in its bias than the rest of the
state.

Most of the California votes, over 60%, are concentrated in a few, teeming
counties in southern California, in Los Angeles County, most of all. And down
there, Mrs Feinstein was an outlander, almost a stranger. But she campaigned
all through the winter there against a more moderate conservative Democrat and
she hammered away at her strong belief in the right to abortion.

This remains a crackling issue everywhere and, if the results of two other
primaries are anything to go on, the Pro-life movement has its back against the
wall.

However, what other states were watching, most of all in Washington, the House
of Representatives, which is the body responsible for the final national
budget, was another issue altogether. And it was decided on Tuesday in a
typically Californian way.

I've talked before about California's devotion to what are called
"propositions", issues put down on the ballot forms, to be decided by popular
referendum. The crucial item this time was Proposition 111. It was stark and
simple. "Ought California to double the state petrol tax?" It's now 9 cents on
the gallon. Were the people willing to have it go to 18 cents?

Outside California even, I think, here in New York, it's difficult to sense the
magnitude of this proposal. California has more cars than people. In a state
that, planted on a map of Europe, would stretch from Birmingham to Naples,
those cars burn up more miles of driving than any other five states in the
union.

The suggestion of a petrol tax has come up in many other states, 15 have passed
it. In some of the prairie states, it has been angrily rejected by the people
on whom the burden would fall disproportionately, on farmers, who have to drive
60 miles to the nearest town, and in some places – in Kansas and Nebraska – run
up about 100 miles a day just patrolling their enormous acreage.

But the vote on Proposition 111 was being watched nationally because of its
symbolic significance. Would it tell President Bush that the country no longer
cared to "read his lips". That, finally, the long Reagan paradise of lower
taxes, or none, was over?

I ought to say at once that Mr Reagan managed to impose quite a wad of new
federal taxes but they were called by other names – revenue enhancements,
mostly. It has been the triumph of Mr Reagan, prolonged by Mr Bush, to have the
people define taxes as income taxes.

And not even the Democrats have moved to propose what many people now believe
is bound to come, a frank rejigging of the federal income tax code, an increase
in the taxes of the top third of the taxpayers.

Well, the Californians answered 111 with a pretty resounding "yes". Every
gallon of petrol will go up gradually over the next five years from 9 cents to
18. It's going to cost every California motorist about $60 a year and in the
next five years will add to the state treasury several billion dollars.

For what? Ah – there might have been the reason for the vote. The money is to
be used exclusively for the repair and maintenance of the state's highways and
to support more mass transport. They're even beginning to rehabilitate the
railways, to take the appalling load of traffic off the motorways.

This, in a state that was the first to build eight-lane freeways. In the late
1950s, the Los Angeles Freeway was one of the wonders of the country. People
used to boast about how they could get from this suburb on the coast to another
suburb far inland in 20 minutes instead of an hour or more.

Well, after 30 years, the whole state is laced with freeways and overpasses and
colossal spaghetti patterns of motorways. But a study, which also may have had
something to do with the vote, came out last week predicting that if things
stood where they are today, by 2000, only 10 years from now, the average speed
of the working commuters – who are just as plentiful both ways, from the
central suburbs into the valleys, from the valleys home to the central suburbs
– the average speed during the three morning rush-hours and the three evening
rush-hours would be just over seven miles an hour.

Pollution, of course, was a factor in the approving vote. Only recently, the
California legislature passed the toughest law controlling the emission of
pollutants. And the motor car is a famous emitter. It may be wrong to deduce
too much from Mrs Feinstein's victory – she is, you understand, only halfway
there.

She will meet in November as her Republican opponent a popular moderate
conservative senator, a United States senator. And nobody at the moment is
saying how that race will go. But the petrol tax decision is likely to have as
much of an effect on the country as the vote on any other issue that will
immerge from other coming primaries.

There was, incidentally, a section of Proposition 111 that loosened previous
limits set on the power of the state, California, to spend public money. So the
famous Dr Arthur Laffer, author of The Laffer Curve which claimed to show that
lower tax rates brought in more revenues – this theory inspired Mr Reagan's
drastic lowering of taxes.

Dr Laffer has been heard from. He lamented the California vote and mourned for
its future. "It is," he said, "a wholesale elimination of the tax revolt." He
confidently predicted the slowing down of California's economy and, if more
states follow its lead, a return to the old Democrats "spend and tax" days.
And, after that, no doubt, the end of the republic.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP