Aphasia and studying the human brain - 15 October 1993

A couple of fascinating items were published this week that reminded me of an
object that was in my boyhood as much a part of the domestic furniture as an
upright piano or, in most rows of houses in the North, an aspidistra. I'm
thinking of a human head on a small pedestal, not the thing itself, goodness,
but a model that looked like marble and was probably polished plaster.

The cranium the part that encloses the brain was marked off into partitions of
various shapes and so you would not think that these markings were guidelines
for a surgeon in those days of course brain surgery was like me in its infancy,
each of the partitions was boldly described by its function, so the moment you
looked at this stolid face, among it you read in one division reasoning, in
another ambition, in another desire and so on.

The idea was that each drawn, separate triangle, rectangle whatever identified
a particular organ or locality of the brain, which was the seat of a distinct
emotion and this was certainly until the First World War, I'd say, propounded
quite seriously by serious men who maintained that they could tell what was
wrong with you mentally that is by the shape of your skull. The theory was
developed by Franz Josef Gall, it was popularised in this country by two
brothers, it was known as phrenology. And I well remember in any town you lived
in, at sometime you would pass by an office or a house with a printed sign in
the window "Dr J Ramsbottom, Phrenologist". Just as many people in those days
believed in phrenology as today I imagine in astrology. But since there was
absolutely no scientific proof of any of it, it faded away to be replaced by
other superstitions and bugaboos.

Today, you would have to haunt the auction rooms to find one of those heads and
the last one I saw brought an outrageous price, in the region, oh say, $20,000
or the price today of a single frame, one 24th of a second of a strip of a Walt
Disney movie cartoon. Well, anyone who saw one of those heads today would
surely burst out laughing, though I don't suppose our laymen's view of what
goes on inside the brain is much more sophisticated, but there are obviously by
now 60, 70 years after the introduction of brain surgery, there are other
experts, people who call themselves neurobiologists, who don't cut and repair
the brain, but develop tests to try and find out what goes on, why and which
part of the brain triggers what sort of motion or emotion.

Two women and a man at the University of California at Irvine, that's south of
Los Angeles, have come up this week with an hilarious, very credible discovery
that listening to Mozart's music improves your score in an intelligence test if
you take it immediately after the concert. The study was of a quite small
sample 18 men and 18 women students at the university and after a bout of
Mozart, the intelligence rating of all 36 went up by somewhere around eight or
nine points. No change incidentally in the pulse rate, so I guess they weren't
listening to Don Juan's, Don Giovanni's account of the 1,003 women he'd seduced
in Italy, no it was exclusively piano music.

You may well ask, what sort of IQ test? I've always felt that the IQ business
was unsatisfactorily vague not to say naive since there are all sorts of
intelligence. I once knew an actor of towering fame who had the most exquisite
theatrical intelligence, he could contrive and woo the subtlest meanings out of
single phrases, off the stage and in conversation about anything else, he was
one very dull you might have thought retarded bloke, so it ought to be said
that the Irvine students heard Mozart and then were given what are described as
non-verbal tests involving questions about the geometric shape of paper objects
that had been folded or cut up. The three researchers say they are now moving
on and are going to test the effect of other sorts of music including
minimalist stuff of course and rock. I'll say no more about the team at Irvine
except to add that if their students after listening to punk rock show any
increase in intelligence at all, I am going to get me a phrenologists head and
start studying it all over again.

Research of a more, shall we say, not more serious but more touching, more
healing and complicated kind is being done just now at Johns Hopkins University
in Baltimore and this is a continuing attempt to discover through brain damage
people how we do our own word processing. All the patients studied are victims
of some sort and there are many sorts of aphasia, which is the loss or partial
loss of the ability to communicate through speech or writing or science, maybe
because something went wrong with the brain centres. The Baltimore study is
concerned with people who have different speech disorders and the doctors hope
that by discovering why some people can recall everything but verbs and
somebody else nouns and somebody else can see everything clearly but can't
pronounce it, they hope that by discovering how the brain has gone wrong they
hope to learn in the foreseeable future to put that part right.

The Baltimore researchers believe they've found out something about our brains
that we didn't know till now, such as till recently, we thought we, we being
linguists and certainly psychologists thought or assumed that the brain
processed words through the original stimulus of ideas and images. You see a
piece of furniture with four legs and a flat top and back there in the memory
bank is the word that is tapped and comes forward "table", but the scientists
studying these people with a brain defect, with aphasia have discovered that
that's not the way the brain responds or deals with words. The brain for all
these ailing people and the fair guess is for us sorts outs words by
categories. Hence, the trouble the man had who could say right off "there's a
crack in the mirror" when crack was a noun, but stumbled on cracking a nut, a
verb, may be, it's tentatively suggested, the brain has separate storage bins
for nouns, verbs, adjectives, also for written verbs as distinct and spoken.

Well, I tell you this may sound awfully laborious and picayune, the scientists
are at the moment looking at the processing of words only, they hope to move on
to sentences, but it will be quite a while before they attempt the grand survey
of human language that some of our modern linguists simply announce as
rediscovered gospel – pick your grandee … But if some of these defects can be
corrected, then we should be on the way to the likelihood in time of curing
aphasias.

The most severe pathetic case I myself have known was of the American
journalist and the prose scourge of the nation HL Mencken of Baltimore, he had
in his mid-70s a massive stroke. He recovered physically and he got his speech
back painfully word by word by identifying objects and learning to say "finger,
finger, spoon, spoon", a heartbreaking fate indeed for a man who'd been the
master of one of the most personal styles in the English language and now was
like a sailor on a raft marooned amid his favourite element. He looked up at
the thousands of books in his library, useless without meaning, he could focus
anything written or printed as well as you or I, but it all made no sense, It
could have been an exotic foreign language.

By the grace of God, I can't think of any other benefactor, he had humour about
his affliction, which may also tell us something about the brain. At that time,
we're in the mid-1950s a fear of China and Chinese Communism was almost as
rampant as the dread of the Soviet Union. Mencken used to go out and walk
around his neighbourhood and when he looked up at the street signs and the
shops names and the cinema marquees, anything with bold printed words in full
view, he said "I don't know what all this fuss is about a Chinese invasion
they're here already".

The Baltimore team and their colleagues and disciples around the country don't
just listen and guess at the puzzling mechanisms going on, they have new
machines that peer into the brain while the subject, the human being is
talking, stumbling, hesitating, listening, writing, reading and their discovery
so far is that the brain reveals, I quote, "a previously unimagined
complexity". Now this may depress them for the time being, but it has excited
one of the researchers to a startling generalisation. He says, "humans can take
a limited set of sounds and arrange them in tens of thousands of different
combinations, words, they can then link these combinations of sounds together
in a limitless variety of sequences sentences and convey and infinite amount of
information." Well I never.

I really don't recall running into anybody of that type, it seems to me I meet
many more people, politicians, advertising, copywriters, lawyers who took a
limited set of sounds arrange them in one or two combinations, link them
together to convey a depressingly finite amount of information. People who have
the gift, which Winston Churchill said nobody could deny Prime Minister Ramsay
MacDonald, the gift of compressing the smallest possible amount of thought into
the largest possible number of words.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP