Equality In New York, Clinton In Russia - 12 May 1995

To put it mildly, President Clinton did not go to Moscow in a happy or
expectant mood.

Ever since it was announced that he would join the British and French leaders
to celebrate V.E. Day in the Russian capital, Mr Clinton was criticised by
practically everybody. Liberals were appalled that he would appear to be
sanctioning or at best choosing to ignore the brutal invasion of Chechnya. The
leaders of the Republicans both in the House and the Senate forewarned the
President that if he were unable to dissuade Mr Yeltsin from selling a billion
dollars worth of nuclear technology to Iran, the prospect for this congress
giving much economic aid to Russia would be, said Senator Dole disastrous.
Conservatives of all parties echoed both lamentations over Chechnya and nuclear
help to Iran, but alone so far as I could see, protested the choice of Moscow
for the main celebration on the ground that Moscow was, throughout the war, the
symbol of Stalin's tyrannical hold on the whole Soviet Union.

What happened between Mr Yeltsin and Mr Clinton in the little time they had
together to talk about these prickly topics we shall no doubt find out in time,
but these political criticisms – which were mounting before the Moscow visit –
were overwhelmed for the time being by the surprising majesty the grandeur of
the Moscow commemoration. What most of us expected was a massive display of
tanks and soldiers and droning bombers and grey men in grey suits saluting from
the top of Lenin's granite mausoleum. First, there was no statue of Stalin and
no mention of him. The new statue looking down over the Central Square was that
of Marshal Zhukov, the defender of Moscow, Stalingrad and Leningrad and the
commander of the final offensive on the Odor that led to the fall of Berlin.

As for Lenin, his name chiselled on his tomb was tactfully covered over with
foliage, and instead of an immense wooden statue of him leading the revolution
with his right fist aloft, there were two even more immense portraits, four
storeys high of a Russian soldier embracing an American soldier. And the bands
played cheerful bouncing marches, one by the immortal Sousa, and folk songs and
the scene that impressed everybody into an awed silence, was that of the 6,000
Russian veterans, solid men blazing with medals, all of whom had survived the
most murderous of the battles.

Mr Clinton's reported comment is one I think that's likely to go into the
dictionaries of quotations: "I just can't get over the faces, their faces are
incredible." Perhaps because these men were so old, so granity in appearance
and most of them wore business suits and caps, they underlined in the most
memorable way the stress that Mr Yeltsin wished to put on the whole ceremony:
the ordeal of the ordinary citizens of those three capital cities fighting with
old guns and sticks and frozen hands, one million of them lost at Leningrad
alone.

Somebody at the White House – we hope of course it was the President – had the
idea or the explanation for the decision to go to Moscow that the American
people had never really taken in the enormity of the Soviet casualties in the
Second World War. It's true, a recent survey asked how many American casualties
in the Second War and how many Soviet casualties, most Americans thought maybe
they lost three times as many as we did. The true answer is 54 times as many.
United States lost half a million men, the Soviet losses, including many
millions of civilians were, 27 million. Mr Clinton said it simply and
eloquently: "I have come here today on behalf of all the people of the United
States to express our deep gratitude for all that you gave and all that you
lost".

After a day and an evening of V.E. Day, the return to the everyday facts of
life was like getting down to a mortgage and an insurance policy on the first
day after a honeymoon. And what, for instance, are the facts of everyday life
to which people returned after the glory and the cheering and the fireworks?
Well I take three instances, the first that came to hand in the morning paper,
each very typical of the sort of problem that Americans are dealing with and
never really solving everyday.

I made a note, three notes at the time, I read about them to remind me. The
notes read: "Code 23, the gaze of Notre Dame and Jimmy Duke of Liverpool the
smoker's friend." A scholarly young woman, 23 years of age, a degree in
psychology went looking for an apartment in New York. She was black, she
arranged to look over an empty apartment with an estate agent, a white woman
who happened to be an immigrant from South Africa. They went off together and
came on the landlord sitting in front of his house. The landlord was sorry,
he'd just had a phone call from his daughter, a friend of hers had just taken
the apartment. The estate agent knew something the black woman didn't and
eventually the two of them brought a complaint before the New York City Human
Rights Commission. The white estate agent told them that her agency listed the
address of the empty apartment with a number attached, 23. It was a regular
thing, a code used by the landlord and observed by the estate agency to alert
the agents not to rent such apartments to blacks or Hispanics, a practice a
lawyer for the commission said that is pernicious and illegal. The commission
fined the landlord $40,000.

I was surprised to read that in the whole of last year, there were only 169
cases, complaints filed on this score, surprised at so few. The Human Rights
Commission is not more than 30 years old. When I first came to New York looking
for an apartment it was 1937. This pernicious and illegal practice was
universal and legal, outside the front door of all the large apartment houses,
blocks of flats there was always a rectangular board on a stand, nothing
furtive about it, standing tall handsome wood panel carefully inscribed with
printed letters in gold. It would say something like: Three to six room
apartments to let, restricted. The single word "restricted" was such a normal
addition, I didn't enquire for some time what it meant. It meant one thing: No
Jews. No need to warn blacks to stay away. In those days – my goodness the word
blacks was highly insulting to begin with – what we politely called negroes –
which is now insulting – wouldn't dream of looking in any part of any town that
carried such signs or such rents.

But in the early '40s, there came along a very active and aggressive governor
of New York – he'd made a name for himself successfully prosecuting first the
boss of the New York City Democratic Party and then a raft of gangsters. His
name was Thomas E Dewey. He pushed through the New York State legislature the
first fair employment practices, law punishing discrimination because of race
or religion and he did the same for housing. He was, by the way, a Republican
in the twilight of the time when the Republicans in this state were the
progressive party and the Democrats with one or two striking exceptions were
routine fairly corrupt machine politicians.

Second note, the famous Catholic University of Notre Dame, which is called here
Notre Dame, has denied recognition to a group of students and graduates calling
themselves the gays and lesbians of Notre Dame. In doing so, the University
spokesman/woman banded no words, chopped no logic, she said straightforwardly
that while Notre Dame has a genuine desire to acknowledge the presence of gays
and lesbians, the university must follow the moral teachings of the Roman
Catholic Church and calls for chastity from all unmarried students whatever
their sexual orientation.

At the same time, the Jewish University Yeshiva has just provided an office, an
indirect subsidy, to the lesbian and gay student alliance at Yeshiva Law
School. The President was as direct and uncomplicated as the Vice President of
Notre Dame, he said: "As a Rabbi I cannot condone homosexual behaviour, which
is expressly prohibited by Jewish law, but as president of a non denominational
institution Yeshiva University must conform with secular law." How come, the
cry went up, that Yeshiva, which is known as a pillar of Orthodox Judaism can
proclaim itself to be a non religious institution? The president could point to
a 1967 ruling or declaration that it considered itself non religious, it did
this to take advantage of tax exempt bonds. Therefore, the Yeshiva's lawyers
point out "Yeshiva is not exempt from a fairly new New York City law, which
prohibits discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation".

Uptown, but several ethnic rungs down from religion and sex, there is a new
American, a former rugger player from Liverpool who's the first, certainly the
most conspicuous, rebel against New York City's new and very strict ordinance
went into effect on the 10th of April against smoking in any public place, and
in any restaurant bar or cafe that can seat more than 35 persons. Jimmy Duke,
the owner of a saloon – he prefers to call it a pub, Drakes Drum – has become a
New Yorker quickly enough to cry, once the law went into effect, 'enough is
enough is enough already'. So he threw out over three dozen chairs and tables
leaving seating for precisely 34 humans. He did the place over. He put in a new
ventilator, he hired a superior chef, he improved the menu, it cost him
$40,000. He renamed the place: Drakes Drum the Smoke Inn, he sent flyers around
the neighbourhood and he simply explained: "I run a pub, I'm not a
psychologist, I don't do behaviour modification." He hopes soon to recoup his
considerable investment. The place is packed night and day with contented
customers who would give the city's Department of Health a fit – they smoke and
eat and laugh and smoke and drink and smoke.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP