A Portrait Of Washington, D.C. - 31 March 1989

I suppose there is no other city in America that expects and deserves a bigger
invasion of tourists at this time of the year than the city which the first
Congress of the United States ordered to be created in the triangular join of
three rivers on a plot of purchased land of 6,000 acres, Washington in the
District of Columbia.

George Washington hired a Frenchman and said “Build me a capital city”. His
name was Pierre Charles L’Enfant. He studied sculpture and architecture under
his father in Paris and, at the age of 22, like so many vigorous young French
idealists, he was taken with the American cause and came here to volunteer in
the American Revolutionary Army and was commissioned a lieutenant in the
engineers.

He was captured by the British at the battle of Charleston and not released for
four years, until the war was over and he was sent home, but two years later he
was back here. He took up various architectural jobs in New York – the City
Hall is his – and in 1791 had the call from General – by then President –
Washington to design, according to the commission, "a noble city on a plain" or
what Thomas Jefferson, who loathed the below sea-level climate of Washington
called "a city to be set on an Indian swamp in the wilderness".

Still, Jefferson gave L’Enfant a set of maps of various capital cities of
Europe as a sort of composite guide. L’Enfant, however, had his eye and his
memory on Versailles. He had the 18th-Century love of long, spacious boulevards
and pleasing prospects and, as a soldier and an engineer, he also bore in mind
the prospect of an advancing enemy.

So in copying from Versailles great broad diagonal avenues crossing a gridiron
of long streets, wherever the diagonals crossed a vertical and a horizontal
street there would be a three-way vista where you could put cannon as a point
of tactics.

But his main idea, his vision, was of a spacious city where there would be
grand parades past elegant buildings. “The plan,” he wrote “should be on such a
scale as to leave room for that aggrandisement and embellishment which the
increase of the wealth of the nation will permit it to pursue at any period
however remote”. To that end, of the 6,000 acres set aside for the whole plan,
over 3,000 were for the avenues which to this day can be as much as 400 feet
wide.

Well, there was shocked resistance to this plan by the Congress and by the
commissioners of the city who had given him the job. On a pretext, he was
dismissed – over Washington’s protest – but after a squabble about alternative
designs and a run-in between a posse of politicians and the greed of
real-estate men, L’Enfant’s plan was more than less accepted and followed.

Of course there were still precious few buildings to bruise this immense vista
of boulevards and avenues. In fact, there were not too many 40, 50 years later.
Dickens, in the 1840s, wrote in a characteristic passage, “Washington is a
place of spacious avenues that begin in nothing and lead nowhere. Streets a
mile long that want only houses, roads and inhabitants, public buildings that
need but a public to be completed.”

But time, and the increase of the wealth of the nation permitting, first there
went up the federal-style buildings, then the classical revival efforts, then
early Victorian, later more forbidding piles of white stone and cement and
marble, more porticos and rows of ionic and Doric columns and saucer domes and
inset arches than you’d expect to find in Rome or Athens.

So it stands, and this week saw the first big invasion of tourists who have
been well instructed by tourist pamphlets and films and calendars and the telly
about the annual arrival just now of the Japanese cherry blossom.

It is out in full flower and the westerners and the Japanese and the Europeans
pad around with their cameras, ride up the Washington Monument, tread quietly
into the Lincoln Memorial and the Jefferson Memorial, explore the wonders of
the Smithsonian Institution, the National Gallery, the new splendid Air and
Space Museum, pause and talk in low tones before the vast sombre slab of the
Vietnam Memorial, stroll along the great avenues and, at set times of the day,
troop marvelling through the elegant glitter of the White House. The dreadful
new meaning that has been given in these late years to security has not, so
far, deprived the ordinary citizen and his family of that memorable ritual.

But what about the drugs, the crime, Washington’s new and unenviable reputation
as the murder capital of the nation? What’s the matter with the tourists?
Haven’t they heard? Haven’t they read the horrified European papers or, come to
that, the horrified American press, including the Washington papers themselves?
Yes, they have.

The rationale for touring was put crisply and sensibly by a young mother from
Milwaukee. Yes, she’d read about it, seen it on the tube, but she brought her
children and toured far and wide just the same. “We don’t plan” she said “to
tour any crack houses or go looking for the turf warfare”.

The main tourist organisation was, of course, pretty nervous in the late winter
about the prospect of a shrunken army of visitors. They decided that to work up
a campaign either of warning or reassurance would only draw attention to the
thing they wished to play down, on the reminder of the teacher who said to the
class, “Now, children, I want you to think about anything you choose, anything
in the world, except elephants.”

It was a smart move. As it turned out, business is booming, up 6% over the last
year. The only relevant note that has been mentioned is the fact that
Washington ranks sixteenth in the nation for the prevalence of crime.

By the same precaution my favourite American city does not make a point of
reporting that, for random street crime around the whole city, San Francisco
is, or was 'til lately, number one. Yet the fact remains that 372 people were
murdered in Washington, and this year, after only three months, the count is
now about 120.

Mr William Bennett, who was Mr Reagan’s secretary of education, has just
acquired as thankless a job as any in the Cabinet. He is the new, the first
so-called "drug czar" and, in order to qualify under last year’s new drug law
for federal funds, he has declared Washington DC to be a high-intensity drug
trafficking area, thus prompting a chorus of cries of "unfair" from the mayors
of many other cities who find themselves in the uncomfortable position of
proclaiming – if not boasting – that their city is just as badly off as a
centre for drug peddling and drug-related crime.

I ought to remind you that, until 1975, the capital was run by a committee of
Congress. In that year Congress passed a law granting the city home rule. It
has a mayor, a city council and most of the other bodies of the other big
cities.

Its mayor is a lively, shrewd black man, Mr Marion Barry, and he has come
glaringly into the national picture since the new and shocking figures on this
year’s murder rate were published and since he has become the object of a Grand
Jury investigation into his own personal habits. He brushes off, as a form of
political slander, the rumbling allegation that he himself has used cocaine.

Speaking the other day before a press club, Mayor Barry got off a sentence that
has echoed mockingly through the press and over the telly. He said, "The
killings apart, Washington has one of the lowest crime rates in the country”.
It’s quite as gloriously silly as it sounds.

He would not have been mocked if he’d said, “If you isolate the small black
section of the city, where the drug peddlers fight and slaughter each other to
dominate their section, the rest of the city is, compared with most big cities,
remarkably crime-free.” That, though clumsy, would be true. Over 80% of the
murders are of competing drug peddlers and most of the rest of blacks caught in
the crossfire.

The Washington picture is, in frightening miniature, the Chicago of the 1930s.
Another city that foreigners and strangers hesitated to visit, but which was as
safe as London or Paris provided you didn’t make a point of visiting those
compact districts for the domination of which the bootlegging Capones and the
O’Banions fought it out to the death.

Washington is peddling ground, not a distribution centre. In desperation, Mayor
Barry the other day said it wouldn’t end until the army and the air force and
the marines invaded and bombed to bits the coca fields and the labs of Colombia
– the nation, not the district.

The question of guns, the new threat of assault weapons, the legal possession
of guns itself – that is another, a national, problem and another talk.

By the way, if you ever go to Washington and visit Arlington Cemetery where the
military and other national heroes are buried you might look out for a modest
monument. It is to Pierre L’Enfant. When he was dismissed as the city’s planner
he asked $95,000 for his services. He got $3,800. It doesn’t say on his
tombstone that he died penniless.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP