Emission controls in California - 06 October 1989

We all know, do we not, what is meant by pollution.

Well, I've found that when it comes to old words that suddenly become
fashionable, it never does, as somebody said, to ignore Dr Johnson.

So I turned to his massive dictionary, put out at intervals from 1755 on, and
find this, "to pollute, to make unclean in a religious sense, to defile". And
by way of illustration, he quotes from John Milton a shocking picture of the
first sinner, Eve, and how she attempted to hide her guilt.

By the way, it was news to me that the Garden of Eden had temperatures below
32°F. Well, according to John Milton, "Eve wooed the gentle air, to hide her
guilty front with innocent snow, and on her naked shame, pollute with sinful
blame, the saintly veil of maiden white, to throw".

We've come a long way from that 200-year-old definition, though maybe it is
still retained in the liturgy of some religions. Today, the word "pollution"
instantly calls up a picture in the mind, or on the telly, of a city skyline
dense with smog. As today's Oxford Dictionary puts it, "Pollute: to contaminate
or defile man's environment".

This past week, the House of Representatives passed two bills, one having to do
with atmospheric pollution, the other – not all that far away from Dr Johnson's
definition – with moral pollution.

The first bill, to be precise, was passed by a sub-committee of the house but
unanimously and, since both parties approve of it and the White House is happy
with it, there's little question that it will become law. It has to do with
reducing the poisonous fumes that issue from the tailpipes of motor cars.

And, if that sounds like a fairly humdrum – I almost said pedestrian – reform,
we have only to consider what it's going to do to the entire automobile
industry in this country to appreciate the comment of the members of the house
sub-committee on health and the environment that it represents "a landmark in
the history of pollution control". Emission controls on the nation, as tough as
those already in force in California, which has been a pioneer in such things,
is about nine years' ahead of the country and 20 years ahead of Europe.

I ought to respond to the question that's already springing to your mind. "If
California controls are so great, how come Los Angeles is the smog capital of
the country?" Well, to begin with, Los Angeles has more cars than people.
Literally. About 3.5 million population and close to 4 million registered motor
vehicles.

And since motor vehicles are responsible for 50% of all smog, Los Angeles
obviously has an appalling start on the rest of us in the brewing of smog. But
since California adopted the controls which are now to be enforced nationally,
Los Angeles has shown more improvement in reducing smog density than any other
city.

What the new law will require of car manufacturers sounds deceptively simple. A
canister, or some other equipment, that will sharply cut down the life of the
three villains: carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxide. This
equipment must be built to last twice as long as is now required in California,
namely 100,000 miles.

The Environmental Protection Agency calculates that the new equipment will add
about $100 to the price of a car. You may be sure that when the new models get
under way, it will cost much more than that. The controls are to be eased in
between 1994 models and 1996. By then, all cars – we'd better say motor
vehicles – on the road must observe the strictest controls that are to be set.
Add $500.

So the theory of the law says that seven years from now, any car owner can be
prosecuted whose car does not abide by the new controls. At the moment, there
are 150 million motor vehicles in America and it will strike any, and all of
us, who are not considering buying a new car, that our present buggy will be
punishable.

As one cheerless motor car manufacturer put it, "First there will be a loss in
fuel economy, second an enormous problem of recall, calling in all the cars
that don't meet the new requirements. Third, to achieve an effect as drastic as
the controls anticipate, you'd have, in the next seven years, to call in every
car made before 1994."

The only people who feel a glow of pleasure at this prospect are the potential
members of a new government bureaucracy – it would have to be a huge one – that
would go out and flag down something short of 150 million car owners.

Though none of the committee men who unanimously passed the bill cares to look
ahead to that policing nightmare, oddly nobody, so far, has protested that the
government is proposing to move in on a citizen's rights.

When the seatbelt requirement came in, there were (and still are) people who
filed suits claiming that their Constitutional rights, freedom of assembly,
were being invaded. I should remind you that the seatbelt law is not a federal
law. It's up to each state, and there's still a flock of states that have not
been able to make the wearing of seatbelts compulsory.

This new law is federal, a national law. And I have no doubt that some lawyer,
for a motor car manufacturer perhaps, is already busy poring over the
Constitution, article by article, clause by clause, trying to spot where it
says, "the liberty of the subject with regard to automobile emission controls
shall not be infringed".

The second bill, about what I call moral pollution, which I'm sure you've been
waiting for, is, unlike most bills, nothing that has been gestating for a long
time. It was prompted only a few months ago by two public exhibitions in
Chicago of the work of two professional photographers.

Not to beat about the bush with prim language, let me say that the exhibits
that caused the rumpus were photographs by one man of homosexual acts and of
children in explicit sexual poses and one photograph by the other man of a
crucifix floating in a jar of urine.

Of course, many ordinary citizens of Chicago were offended, but this private
outcry sparked a small roar of outrage in the Congress. Why? Because the two
exhibitions had been paid for – funded, as we say – by a non-partisan
government agency, the National Endowment for the Arts and the Humanities.

The National Endowment does extensive and admirable work in promoting, backing,
sponsoring, every sort of artistic endeavour from exhibitions to television
documentaries of many kinds, sustains regional opera houses, gives grants and
scholarships to historians, painters, musicians, architects and scholars, so
forth.

Well, it turned out that the two offending exhibitions had been funded by the
National Endowment to the tune of $45,000. The fuhrer of the Congressional fury
was Senator Jesse Helms, a North Carolina Republican and a conservative of the
bluest hue.

He at once drafted a bill to prohibit federal aid monies for obscene or
indecent art and for all works that might offend a particular religion, or any
ethnic group, any race, any age group, or the disabled, of any kind.

Well, from its birth, this bill was dead on arrival, when senators got up to
remark that it would prohibit the publication or staging of enumerable
classics, from Rabelais through Chaucer, Shakespeare. How about The Merchant of
Venice and Othello? And on and on, into any work in which a bad guy was a
Catholic, a Protestant, a cripple, a white man, a black man, and, under the age
group prohibition, young or middle-aged or old. Senator Helms' initiative, as
it was called, went down in a flood of ridicule and sarcasm.

But a great majority of the house, responding to the constituents, remained
incensed at the discovery that the American taxpayer had paid for the
exhibition of small nude girls and boys demonstrating sexual poses.

There were congressmen who were opposed to any bill that would censor anything.
Arts councils, civil liberties groups and many artists screamed "censorship",
but the wisdom, or the prejudice, of the House of Representatives was against
them.

The prevailing argument was that the government cannot interfere in the private
exhibition of anything that the laws of a particular state don't prohibit as
obscene.

Long ago, the United States Supreme Court ducked any national definition of
obscenity but left it up to a state, a city, to decide what would be likely to
offend the local community. Some communities, it appears, are immune to
offence. A judge in Los Angeles recently dismissed criminal charges against the
distributor of a film very explicitly showing a gang rape in a mental hospital.
The judge wasn't sure, he said, whether it would pollute, offend the average
citizen.

Well, the house passed by 381 to 41 a bill which forbids federal funds through
the National Endowment being used for any work, exhibition, that the Endowment
officials consider obscene. And the bill specifies sado-masochism and the
sexual exploitation of children or others engaged in sex acts.

This bill is demonstrably approved by a great majority of average citizens and
satisfies all but the last-ditch civil libertarians and those artists,
so-called, who warn us that the denial of government money to any painting,
photography, film or theatrical representation of anything human beings are
capable of is a sure sign that America is about to succumb to a police state.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP