Haiti - 15 July 1994

Three or four years after the end of the Second World War, President Harry
Truman appointed a new secretary of state, an impressive tall mustachio'd man,
son of a bishop, he looked like a Spanish grandee in tweeds. And in a famous
speech, he said a tactless but very quotable thing about Britain. He didn't say
it with malice aforethought. Indeed, I don't think with any kind of
forethought, it was a minor passing thought in a serious assessment of
America's new role in the world as a superpower.

If I'm not mistaken, I believe at the time America was the only superpower, the
Soviet Union being a year or two away from also having the bomb. Anyway, the
United States was riding high and the most remarkable thing about the reversal
of power in the world after the war was the plain fact that America was now top
nation.

So this new Secretary of State Dean Acheson, it took him months to get over the
explosion of rage that came at him from across the Atlantic after his casual
sentence, "Britain has lost an empire and has not yet found a role". Of course
it was the truth, but it was the sort of truth then that you soft-pedal between
friends.

No such pandemonium greeted President Clinton's declaration the other day in
Berlin that a United Germany was the chief American ally in Europe, the coming
leader of a new Europe and a country with which from now on the United States
had a special relationship. I don't think the phrase has much of an emotional
history in German, but it most certainly does in English and has meant for at
least three generations the relationship between the United States and Britain.
President Clinton effectively on Tuesday uprooted the phrase from its English
soil and replanted it in Germany.

As for the British reaction, as far as I can gather, it's what the old old
Punch used to say, more glimpses of the obvious. Sticking the old label on a
new ally is surely overdue, the strongest links between America and Britain
still remain language, literature, the common law, two centuries of shared
history, no switches of power in the world can break those ties, but what Mr
Clinton has done has been to clear the air of those nostalgic fogeys, many of
them in high places who go on decades too late trying to rekindle Winston
Churchill's tender post-war vision of the United States and Britain together
leading the world along, I think it was the sunny uplands of peace and
prosperity.

All the ferment and the fears we've had over Haiti in the past six months or
so, still have not as I talk hardened into a firm or even recognisable policy,
I think it was about two months ago when war seemed so imminent I had to
preface my little woeful sketch history of Haiti, technically a republic since
1804 and since 1804, a bubbling volcano of coups and rebellions with little
peaceful pause. I had to hedge and say "something may happen this weekend or
may have happened already as you hear these words" and I really have to say the
same thing again except that no invasion I can recall in the history of the
United States has been so frequently threatened, denied, trumpeted, plans
published.

This week, I read the dispatch of a correspondent who was priding himself on
discovering the British island in the Caribbean from which the invasion was to
be is being or has been mounted, so again as I speak it occurs to me that part
of the president's indecision, if we may use a word increasingly used inside as
well as outside, the White House maybe due to his awareness of a public poll,
which shows that two Americans in three are against an invasion. Now maybe that
poll is too downright, takes no account of why people are loathe to attempt
invading yet another country.

I believe there's a conflict in public opinion, which it would take a very
carefully thought-out poll to register between the growing impulse – when you
are faced with so many eruptions of tribal and ethnic and Third World rebellion
– the impulse to let the trouble regions handle their own troubles and the
older deeper impulse in America to feel an obligation to help and rescue your
tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free.

Those probing not to say sentimental words on the Statue of Liberty have had
great political force throughout this century and he would be a much despised
politician who dared to mock them. And yet, the second wave of immigration in
the past 20, 30 years has been so much huger than the one from Europe at the
turn of the century that people everywhere who would like to take in the poor,
the tired, the persecuted of other nations find themselves saying we're not
doing the greatest job of taking care of 255 millions already here and the time
is surely coming when we just can't bring in any more. This dilemma is most
acutely felt with Haiti, every night you see the boats, the hopelessly
overloaded boats pushing off from the Haitian shore, the human overspill
dropping off into the sea and then the United States coastguard hovering into
sight heaving to, taking up a baby or two and ordering all the others back.

Throughout this muddle of emotions in the on-looking American, they intrude
from time to time another unpleasant thought in Americans who remember or have
read some history; it's the grim tedious story of the United States marines in
Central America. Since the first decade of the 20th century, any sort of
political uprising down there that could be realistically thought to pose a
threat to the Panama Canal has not given any sitting president half the
misgivings and bellyaches of Mr Clinton. The president simply sent in the
marines to Nicaragua, to Haiti, to Panama itself. These invasions often into
countries whose basic crop was financed and run by American companies, these
intrusions were never any big political deal for the newspaper reader, most
people I guess hardly knew they'd happened or continued; continued, that's the
word that hurts. For instance, when I first landed in New York, 1932, and
during the following year, I didn't know that American marines were occupying
Haiti let alone that they'd been there 17 years.

After one of the usual coup in 1915, German and French agents went running into
Haiti, those two countries were Haiti's main creditors, they insured the awful
national debt. And President Woodrow Wilson as famous a man of peace as has
ever inhabited the White House at once sent in the marines, they were there to
restore, of course, law and order just as now the pretext, and it's a sincere
one, the pretext for invading Haiti is to restore democracy, a system by the
way they've never enjoyed. So the marines stayed there unreported, little
thought about during the administrations of Wilson, Harding, Coolidge, Hoover,
Franklin Roosevelt, until Roosevelt taking a flyer at the new policy towards
Central and South America, of the good neighbour, Roosevelt took the marines
out in 1934 after a 19-year occupation and the country went back to its normal
instability and was, and is, the poorest nation in the western hemisphere. No
wonder desperate people will risk the sea trip in fleeing from a brutal
military dictatorship and a country whose unemployment rate is over 50%.

I've already heard from listeners who say they have learned to be fascinated by
the OJ Simpson case, the case of a superb athlete and god-like folk hero who
has turned into a tragic figure, a man who guilty or innocent adored his wife
but may have thrown away a pearl richer than all his tribe, a Los Angeles
Othello.

Well, once the preliminary hearing was over and the judge decided there was
ample evidence to order a trial, we are now in the waiting pause between the
arraignment and the trial. The television networks have restored their soap
operas given the World Cup full exultant treatment, Germany, North Korea, Haiti
take their old important places. Heaven alone knows when Mr Simpson will come
to trial. I'm sure the defence lawyers are busy going over the transcript of
the hearing looking for some possible legal impropriety of the judge or license
of the prosecution, then I'll expect there'll be a move for a change of venue.
This has become almost routine in any town or county where the crime has been
committed too much neighbourly prejudice etc, but it's almost routinely denied
since television has made us all neighbours.

Now I'm about to tread delicate ground, but I believe I ought to quote you from
a column by a famous American woman journalist because I believe her view of
the long televised interview with the Prince of Wales, her view is I think
common to many more Americans than you might think. Briefly then, Ellen Goodman
of the Boston Globe wrote a piece deploring this age of confession of private
backsliding by public characters who are above all meant to symbolise dignity
and restraint, she calls this trend "emotional nudism". By contrast, she looked
at the lifetime behaviour of Jacqueline Kennedy, her unique characteristic, she
wrote, in an age of compulsive confessors is that she kept her peace and
cultivated a zone of privacy around a most public life, she neither confirmed
nor denied nor explained. And for this, concludes Miss Goodman, she was
considered an American Royal.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP