1988 televised debates and Thatcher in 1979 - 7 October 1988

I don’t remember a time when so many people fake a loud yawn or wring a hand or
otherwise express screaming boredom at the prospect of a presidential election.

By people I’m talking about the people you run into every day – the grocer, the
newsagent, the pharmacist, the cab driver. Our man Joe, a hefty man who picks
up the garbage – “How about it, Joe?” you shout at him as he bangs and clatters
the bins. He freezes for a moment. “How’s that?” he says. “The election.” He
shakes his head vigorously like a dog coming out for a swim. “Let me out of
here”, he bawls and he goes clattering off under the trees to his truck.

Of course we all know people, friends, acquaintances, who like to pick up a
quick reputation for knowingness by deploring all candidates from the start,
but this time there must be millions of people, normally responsible citizens
who frankly feel indifferent or allergic to both candidates.

Somebody put it glibly but shrewdly the other day by saying that the choice
between Bush and Dukakis was between a man who can’t express his thoughts and a
man who can’t express his feelings.

These separate disabilities came out early on in the race and the campaign
teams took care of it, or rather that essential or core or nucleus of a
campaign team which is not made up of politicians but of advertising men, hired
from firms that have an impressive record of marketing corn flakes or perfumes.

I can’t remember how long ago – goodness, it must have been in the '50s – when
I, who had spent most of my adult life reporting politics amongst other things
first heard of a candidate who had hired a couple of public relations men and
through them advertising copy writers to craft, as they now say, the
candidate’s message. That ought to mean his political beliefs in a punchy way,
in brief radio commercials. I was simply shocked.

The candidate was a Californian running for the Senate. His name was Richard
Milhous Nixon. The two men who crafted the snappy, cunning messages, nasty
little half-truths about the Nixon opponent, turned up as national characters
of some disrepute later during the Watergate hearings.

The advertising-PR crew is now in such command that whenever either Mr Bush or
Mr Dukakis appears at a police station or a navy base or outside a shut-down
steel mill or by an ocean beach you may be sure that there was nothing
spontaneous about it. It had been elaborately arranged to show, in a quick
melodramatic take, the candidates devotion to putting down crime, to building
extra aircraft carriers, to exhibiting the victims of one of the industries –
very few – that are suffering from high unemployment, to bemoaning pollution.

The two most ludicrous – and also the most memorable images, I’m afraid – we
shall carry with us for some time were first Mr Dukakis, an unrecognisable
midget in full battle gear riding a tank; this shows he’s for a strong defence.
And Mr Bush appearing out of a fluttering blizzard of little flags visiting of
all absurdities a flag factory. His statesman-like comment was that “the flag
factories are booming and so is America”.

Visits to any group of Americans, any individual Americans, are not made on any
impulse the way Lyndon Johnson driving in a motorcade into a city would break
away from the secret service and get lost, pressing the flesh in a surging
crowd. Well, once I remember in Pittsburgh getting lost for ever, it seemed and
then suddenly appearing at the bedroom window of a mean house drinking coffee
with an old immigrant couple.

Today this would be scandalous behaviour, a departure from the
painfully-constructed script which dictates every move, every smile, every
sentence of the roaming candidate. It’s become part of the same scripted
routine, too, that candidates don’t ever pick up a question and say “Well let’s
go into this. The easy answer is so and so, but it’s more complicated than
that. Let me try and straighten a few things out.”

Presumably it’s been proved in a thousand surveys that that approach to an
audience about to be sold a package of corn flakes is fatal to their
attentiveness. They’re going to wander off or switch off, so judgements,
opinions on the profoundest issues of our time, Star Wars or child care for the
50-odd percent of young families with two working parents, the conquests of the
drug cartels, the bulging prisons, the collapse of elementary education, the
deficit – neither candidate has told us even in a snappy one-liner how to
reduce the deficit – all these great and pressing issues are flipply summed up
in two short sentences and a thirty-second commercial.

Mr Bush and Mr Dukakis are each spending $30million, half their campaign
budget, on these 15 or 30-second commercials. No more unexpected, spontaneous
visits to ordinary people here and there. These are now devised as photo
opportunities. No more thoughtful analyses, for heaven's sakes, the candidate’s
final position on matters that have engaged and baffled some of the best minds
of this generation, they’re packaged into a six-word slogan, a sound bite.

So between the photo opportunity and the sound bite the whole electioneering
process has been reduced or degraded or glorified into a national advertising
campaign.

The other night there was an interview with the two principal craftsmen of this
election – the man on each side who is the producer of his man’s TV
commercials. One was said to be in the advertising world, a whizz of a motor
car salesman; the other has had an equally distinguished career in getting
millions to switch from this cola drink to that. These two anonymous, unsung
men are, more than any of the campaign staffs, the king-makers of our time.

I remember being called over to England by my editor in 1955 to cover, for a
change, a British election. I was prejudiced in favour of the British system if
only because as a long-suffering camp follower of American candidates over many
thousands of miles I was cheered and relieved at the prospect of paying close
attention for only three weeks instead of two years.

It was indeed a strenuous but stimulating experience. I roamed to London to
Wales to Glasgow and had many stops in between and enjoyed following Mr Eden
through a Lancashire mill town and hearing him bawl through a crackling
microphone at marvelling street audiences who couldn’t understand more than a
syllable or two of his strange accent. I guess they took him on trust. He won.

And strangely, the most vivid memory was revelling in the rural pleasure of
tagging Mr Attlee and his wife bumping through country lanes in their Mini car
and stopping now in a dismal suburb, now in a small market place, now outside a
village pub, and the old man – come to think of it not so old at the time – but
looking more like a village bank manager than a major, a veteran of Gallipoli,
standing up before a hundred people, sometimes no more than a score, and making
quieting little off-the-cuff pep talks to a rustle of hand claps or small cries
of “Good old Clem” or “That’s the stuff”.

No cameras, no television crews on this country safari and only two or three
reporters. One time he lost his scarf, put the brakes on, find it, a small
cheer, on our way again. You never knew whether the next town would have a
thousand people on hand or a dozen, no matter. Plato was right – democracy is a
charming system of variety and disorder.

Of course there were big rallies, a thundering performance of Nye Bevan I
remember at Reading and a speech – the day of judgement was at hand – from
Bertrand Russell in a Glasgow cinema which the next night would be showing a
Mickey Spillane horror film. But I did come to the general conclusion that no
candidate I listened to, none of the big guns certainly, had a script or a
teleprompter or a soft drink salesman telling him what to think.

I was back again for another election 24 years later. It was the spring of
1979, the entry into the kingdom of Mrs Thatcher. It was a shock and a
disillusion. There had been, as the song says, “some changes made”. The British
commentators called them "American-style". It was all too true. Whereas Mr
Attlee had lost his scarf and he and his wife fumbled around under the car seat
to find it without benefit of an accompanying photographer, Mrs Thatcher
cuddled a calf for a pack of television cameramen.

I had the nasty suspicion, later confirmed, that the main speeches of the two
principals – Mr Callaghan was the other – had been at least vetted, tested for
wholesomeness and snap, crackle, pop. Pretty soon I heard that Britain, too,
was trusting the expression of its democratic philosophy to PR men and later
on, perhaps then, party campaigns were conducted at the command or on the
advice of highly-paid advertising agencies.

I wrote, at the end of that British campaign, “Soon the polls in Britain, as
here, show the contenders to be running too close for the comfort of either
side. The PR men now step in and report that one issue is boring the people
while another is inflaming them, so the runners concentrate on the combustible
material. They fuel it with an indignation that is less and less truly felt.
The recipes for Utopia become more and more slapdash and in the end, in the
final days, the Labourites who were warning us of a coming orgy of capitalist
greed and a free-for-all and the Conservatives were frightening us with the
nightmare of a slave state hell-bent for Moscow.”

Well we have a month to go and we certainly can expect nothing better here. The
closing statements of Senator Benson and Senator Quayle in their well-scripted
debate on Wednesday were soaring balloons of language, windy, signifying
nothing.

Former President Jimmy Carter spoke up the other day. This had been, he said,
the worst campaign he could remember – thoughtless and vituperative. It’s a
fair comment.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP