Political vacations - 25 August 1995

I don't know how it is with your president or prime minister or whatever you
call your chief executive – how about furore – but in this country whenever the
president follows the Congress by taking a summer holiday away from all his
cares and woe, he's no sooner arrived in the remote paradise – indeed, he
hasn't even arrived – before the secret service has set-up a telephone network,
plugged him into the internet, reconnoitred the surrounding countryside for
aggrieved radicals, psychopaths, and other nuts, made living arrangements for
the White House press corps, which even 30 years ago consisted of about a dozen
reporters and is now closer to 100, and in general thrown an electronic cordon
round a large part of the state he's in.

The other day, Mrs Clinton, who has taken to writing a newspaper column, had a
piece recounting the shock and the burden to be born of taking a holiday when
you're a member of the president's family. This is an emotion few incoming
presidents and their families anticipate, though they all come to resent it in
different ways.

I remember President Eisenhower saying that the realisation he would never
again enjoy any real privacy while he was president came to him the morning
after his 1953 inauguration – the shock must have been unforgettable because I
recall he specified the date: "I woke in the morning of the 21st of January and
went to the bathroom alone with a newspaper. When I came out, there sitting on
a chair right outside the door was a secret service agent. I knew they stayed
close at all times, but this was too much. However, you have to get used to
it." And once the president is made visibly secure in his compound and free to
look out on the ocean or the lake or the mountains or wherever he's chosen,
he's never sure of being there tomorrow or the day after.

For the past fortnight, we've had quick television shots in the evening of the
president hunting – as Americans say, while everybody else says shooting –
playing golf, paddling the rapids of the Yellowstone River. He's been up in the
Rockies in Wyoming, listening to a forest ranger spout a guided tour bit about
Yellowstone National Park or the history of the magnificent range known as the
Grand Teton named by French explorers and to be translated only in print not on
a family radio programme.

But this past Wednesday, suddenly we saw him in a chapel in Virginia, at an
army base across the Potomac River, back in Washington, there he was holding
the hands of one of the daughters of Assistant Secretary of State Richard
Frasure, one of the three American diplomats who were killed on their way to
offer a new peace plan for the Balkans when their car plunged into a ravine
near Sarajevo. Of course, the president was condoling with the three families,
he's very good at this by the way, gentle, natural having something true and
pointed to say.

Then he flew the 2000 miles back to his vacation home in the Rockies and before
another nine holes or a bang or two at the wildlife spent a couple of hours
looking over the new peace plan, was briefed about what was happening or not
happening to the arrested Mr Wu the Chinese American civil rights activist
accused by the Chinese of being a spy, and I have no doubt at all, spending
some hours tapping every American, and maybe allied source, on the Middle East
to seek some solution to the puzzle of Saddam Hussein and his warlike
intentions if any. He along with China's nuclear testing comes under the
foreign policy heading of 'sinister possibilities', which we're not going into
this time.

So we're with the president now finishing off, what from the evidence of the
pictures, looks like an ideal carefree holiday doing everything you like to do
with your wife and daughter and some things you do only with your buddies like
the golf. But even when his holiday is not interrupted by alarms, excursions
and accidents by flood and field, he has to remember even in his lightest
moments that he is the president, a man whose most casual, most jesting remarks
are certain to be quoted across the country, especially if they contain the
tiniest seed of controversy or indeed of personal opinion.

Remember poor old President Ford? Why is it we used to refer to poor old
President Ford? He was comparatively young and required no condescension from
us but we use the term sympathetically as to one who had not of his own free
will stepped into larger shoes, in this case, those of Richard M Nixon. Mr Ford
indeed did a valiant and successful job of healing the deep wound of Watergate.
Poor President Ford once spent an August holiday in the Rockies also, but
somehow to the south in Colorado. He was a very active sportsman and he liked,
as he said one day to a couple of friends, he liked to fill the days and keep
on the hop. In a fatal aside he said, eating and drinking are a waste of time.
Whoops, the short sharp sentence was in the papers the next morning and the
morning after that, the president of the good food guide and some other food
society or magazine set up a communal howl charging that the president had
dealt a mortal blow to the quote, "food industry" unquote of the United States.
It turned out to be not quite mortal. Every American who had access to a dollar
bill or a food stamp went on eating and some drinking. Worse however was to
follow.

Mrs Ford, a graceful and gracious lady at all times, agreed to hold a short
press conference on a quiet morning sitting there with a handful of women
reporters looking at the towering snowy peaks and just chatting, no mischief
taken or intended. One bright interviewer thought up a question that has surely
troubled millions of mothers who never made the White House: "Tell me Mrs Ford,
how would you feel if your daughter came to you and said, Mother I'm having an
affair?" I ought to throw in for anyone under 40 that such a question to the
wife of any public man 40 or 50 years ago, would have not only been an outrage,
it's impossible to imagine anyone bringing it up. Furthermore, daughters if
they were indulging in hanky panky kept it very much on the side and sub rosa
between the sheets.

In my time, young people however gamy did not live openly with someone to whom
they were not married. However, this question was being put with only a soupçon
of guile by a reporter in 1975. And by 1975, the wife of the president of the
United States was able and free to say, in fact did say: "Well I wouldn't be
surprised, I think she's perfectly normal." Of course this frankly offhand
answer was reported everywhere the next day. A Catholic bishop confessed to
being stunned, the head of a Protestant denomination cried aloud: "I am aghast,
aghast," and across the country back there in Boston, heart and soul and also
capital of Irish Catholic politicians, a Republican poll moaned, "Bang goes the
Massachusetts vote." It's true that the following year, Mr Ford lost heavily in
that state to the Democrat, but then Massachusetts nearly always does go for
the Democrat.

And how about George Herbert Walker Bush? Now you'd say, there's a man, a
pretty smooth character, a politician sophisticated enough not to speak out of
turn even on holiday. Well anyone who remembers it can never forget the day
when – and I think it was before one or two reporters – he jokingly recalled
the previous evening's dinner, he was served it seems, Mrs Bush served him all
the time, broccoli. He let fly from the heart a sentence, which may have lost
him some Republican votes but surely gaining him just as many Democrats and
independents. I know a man who said, once the dread sentence was reported: "I
never before thought of voting for George Bush." This was the memorable
sentence: "Damn it I'm president of the United States I don't like broccoli."
Oh dear! Of course the next morning, a howl from the incorporated broccoli
growers or whatever of America some wag or perhaps an indignant local of the
broccoli labourers of America despatched to the White House a truckload of
broccoli. Mrs Bush sent it along to, I'm told various hospitals.

I don't remember that Franklin Roosevelt in his 13 years in the White House
ever said anything out of turn, anything mean or savage. He said he meant on
the Shavian principle: never be rude or cruel except on purpose. But then one
vast difference, Roosevelt and his predecessors were not trailed everywhere by
reporters. A president's holiday was as private as any other citizens. For Mr
Roosevelt fishing off the Florida Quays, the White House would send out a
message saying: "The President was fishing yesterday with Mr Vincent Astor, one
of the Astors with a yacht to match and caught two red snappers".

I don't know when the nosy parker syndrome took over, when it became compulsory
for the press corps to follow him everywhere, in Washington, abroad, at home,
on holiday. Even when Roosevelt was down in Georgia at the poliomyelitis
clinic, Hot Springs (Warm Springs?) he stayed at, even the day he died, there
were with him only a portrait painter and his old mistress – that thunderbolt
word was never heard at the time – and his ever having had a mistress was never
known outside the family and a few intimates until he was dead 10 years or
more. Impossible to conceive of today.

I don't know that we're better off for any of this sleazy knowledge that we are
now privy too. I'd like to live long enough to see a president who outside the
White House and the daily grind of office does what he pleases without the
media and if one of them intrudes and asks what he did, what he thinks, who he
was, with replies: "None of your damn business".

Note: Robert Frasure was President Clinton's special envoy to the former
Yugoslavia, not Assistant Secretary of State, who was Richard Holbrooke.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP