Pat Buchanan and divisions with the Republican Party - 23 February 1996

About a month ago I was in Washington, mainly to see old friends, the ones, the
very few, I should say, who are, as my old golf pro puts it, above ground and
mobile. It was before the first of the presidential primaries, but there were I
think, then nine Republican hopefuls already crunching around the small
snowbound state of New Hampshire, which as I mentioned a week or two ago, is
wildly unrepresentative in population, economy, politics, of the country as a
whole, but is immensely important as a trial election because...because the
country's come to believe that it is important.

I was spending an evening with my oldest American friend just as the early
polls were coming in telling us what was going to happen in the Iowa caucus and
the New Hampshire primary, and there was then no question that Senator Dole,
the party's leader in the Senate, would go roaring ahead in all the primaries,
on to his coronation at the convention in San Diego in California, and on to
November to meet, guess who.

That's one guess that, saving death, destruction or an act of God, is bound to
be true. There's not a Democrat alive who even thinks of challenging the
incumbent president and anybody who thought of it has surely changed his mind,
since Mr Clinton went off around the country, campaigning, travelling,
speechifying, showing himself to be more informed, more inspiring and
manufacturing more impressive indignation than anyone campaigning for
president.

He has trouble, as you may have noticed, being president, but way back there a
month ago, the future what we call scenario, had been written and approved. The
previous day I had lunch with one of the most influential of the Washington
pundits and he said it crisply: "In November it will be Dole versus Clinton and
Dole will win." So, next evening, I put to my old friend a question, which I do
believe he must have thought so airy and irrelevant that by now he has probably
forgotten it. I said, about these polls and the chances we're all discussing of
Dole and the multi-millionaire Forbes and the conservative Southerner Senator
Gramm, I don't understand why we haven't seen a bigger straw vote for Pat
Buchanan?

Pat Buchanan, a volatile, quick-witted, bitingly sarcastic, passionate
Irishman, a Reagan acolyte and speechwriter with a gift of the gab and of
swingeing sentences, which he passed on – the sentences, not the gift – to
Ronald Reagan. He proudly swears – he swore it also four years ago – that he's
the only real dynamic conservative in the Republican party. I think his
fundamental appeal is that he says a lot of things, airs a lot of prejudices,
that are hiding inside people's minds, which they don't care to confess to, and
he says them swiftly and bluntly.

He is passionately against the prevailing devotion, in both parties, to free
trade, abominates the North American Free Trade Treaty, would slap a blanket 10
per cent tariff on everything that comes out of Japan. As a Catholic he regards
abortion, under any circumstances, as murder, is absolutely against homosexual
rights. He wants to close the borders to immigrants for a while, bring the
troops home from Bosnia, leave the United Nations and he talks, shouts, all the
time about this as a Christian country. He thus runs foul of all but the most
extreme, you might say the most hysterical, conservative Americans.

Mr William Buckley, the scribe 30 years ago of the conservative revolution, is
an old friend of Mr Buchanan, but he wrote that to examine Pat Buchanan's
writings and speeches can lead to no other conclusion than that he's also
anti-Semitic. The passing flashes of all these prejudices in a thunderstorm of
a speech at the Republican convention four years ago, was enough to fracture
the party, throw the old guard into despair and the fringe extremists into
ecstasy. There's no doubt, I think, that Pat Buchanan delivered a severe wound
to George Bush and powerfully affected his loss of the presidency. Need I say,
the Republicans, whose mascot is an elephant, do not forget. Yet I was
surprised at Buchanan's low showing, almost no showing at all, in the early
polls, in spite of his extremist, populist views on immigrants, homosexuals,
feminists.

What I had in mind was this. That he was the only candidate who said then, and
still says out loud on every occasion, what I think is the central anxiety of
most ordinary middle class Americans. It's the fear of losing their job and
this goes through all society, from part-time carpenters to presidents of
corporations. It's a feeling quite apart from the dreadful feeling of being
unemployed and it's come about slowly and spread through, well we'd better say
income groups, all classes, because we've been reading about it every day and
seeing it every night for certainly two or three years.

It's expressed most crudely and most frighteningly by the news that some big
corporation has just laid off 30,000 employees from all ranks, in the cause of
the new great mission known as downsizing – making corporations leaner and
meaner and, they claim, more productive. At the same time, sometimes as a
footnote, sometimes as a separate parallel story, is the news that the chief
executive officer and a couple of vice-presidents of the grand old firm have
just received bonuses for services rendered of say $3,000,000 apiece. As Mr
Bogart said, "I kid you not".

To bring up this rude contradiction in, shall we say comfortable company, is an
error of taste, like mentioning the word cancer in a Victorian drawing room.
But it's true. In a fairly wide acquaintanceship with people in all sorts of
jobs from the top to the bottom – I'm not claiming to be a missionary, only a
reporter all my life and you do run into everybody. I asked a young woman
secretary I've known a long time, if she's happy in her job and she says, well,
so far. So far, you say, but you've been there six years. Yes, she says, but
that's no guarantee of a seventh year.

A fish-loader down on Fulton Street thought he was there for life. He's not. A
machinist in a Connecticut factory, 44, wife, two children, been with no other
firm. Got the pink slip a month ago. Round my corner is a bounding, genial
character, every right to be. Senior vice-president of a famous bank. Until a
month ago. His bank merged with another and the other senior vice-president,
the board decided, would be more suitable as the senior vice-president of the
new conglomerate.

This is a new kind of jitters. The anxiety of people of all classes, in early
middle age, sometimes well along in middle age. Pat Buchanan is the only
candidate who thinks of them and talks to them, pounding away at the loss of,
by now I suppose, a quarter of a million jobs. The disappearance of what used
to be known as a steady job and the hurtful accompanying news that the fat cats
have just had the big bonus.

Buchanan bemoans in blazing rhetoric, the plight of American workers earning
$4.50 an hour, competing with Mexican workers earning 25 cents an hour. He goes
on very persuasively about how many of the clothes, the shoes, the dolls, the
cars we buy were manufactured with virtual slave labour in Asia or Mexico. He
echoes the powerful chant of Ross Perot four years ago, remember? You hear a
great sucking sound coming up from the Rio Grande. My friends, it's American
workers' jobs being sucked away into Mexico.

What Buchanan stands for delights some people and terrifies more, including the
central and side branches of the Republican party. But what his victory in New
Hampshire made blindingly clear was that the two opponents who have come to
matter, Senator Dole and the former Governor of Tennessee, Lamar Alexander,
talk in abstractions about moving America forward again, representing the
people and not Washington, whatever that means. Senator Dole is a puzzle, He's
the most successful legislator in the Congress, 28 years in the Senate, a man
of vast experience, a canny leader who knows better than any American alive
what it takes to reconcile opponents, disputed policies and put together the
best compromise possible. Yet his speeches sound like a man mumbling his way
through a telephone directory. In the age of television it obviously doesn't
do.

So a month ago the conventional wisdom was that Senator Dole was the runaway
Republican candidate and might beat Clinton. The wisdom now says the Republican
party is for the moment badly hurt by the early triumph of Buchanan but that
he's too extreme for the whole party and will fade in the later primaries, will
never make it to San Diego.

The same wise men however have started wondering whether Dole or Alexander is
to be the one to rescue the heart and soul of the party. While the two men
fight each other in a gentlemanly way. Fencing dolefully with wooden swords,
Pat Buchanan sweeps from state to state, as the resurrected Robin Hood, crying,
I quote: "You watch all the knights and barons riding into the castle, pulling
up the drawbridge, real fast, but all the peasant are coming with pitchforks
too".

You'd suppose there'd be champagne and happy toasts in the White House over all
this. For so many years it was the Republicans who looked on from the outside,
delighted to see the Democrats fighting like, as Abraham Lincoln put it, like
cats on the midnight tiles, killing each other. But Lincoln added, beware,
they're not killing each other, they're making more cats.

The White House is of course, so far, happy over the Republican divisions but I
hope there are old heads with long memories who can see that the terror of
Buchanan may only serve to mobilise the mass of Republican voters around one
man, who can represent the large establishment Mr Buchanan delights to mock. I
don't know who that man might be. I do know that already all the Republicans
except the extreme right would sell their souls if it could be General Colin
Powell, who could have had the crown for saying so, but turned it down, once.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP