American troops in Haiti - 23 September 1994

Last Tuesday something happened in New York City that for most of the past 50
years has been a very grand annual event when the 22 miles of highway between
midtown New York and Kennedy Airport are scanned by police helicopters and
patrolled by more radio cars than on any other day of the year, also a day when
not too many years ago, five or six hundred correspondents from around the
world came in here to celebrate the day and to report it, the opening day of a
new session of the General Assembly of the United Nations, the body in which
every member nation is represented.

This year the assembly will draw more heads of state and prime ministers than
ever in its history, which sounds impressive, but it's not surprising since at
its founding 49 years ago it had 50 member nations. Today, it has 184 sovereign
states some of them no bigger than the Isle of Wight, many of them with an
economy so poor that the United Nations embassy here can afford at best a hotel
room, office and a secretary.

That's probably the most vivid reflection of an historical process that when
the United Nations was founded few of us dreamed of, namely an end to the idea,
to the fact of empire, a system of ruling the world or a great part of it that
lasted an astonishingly short time. Look at a map of 1876 and you see that
seven-eighths of the Dark Continent blank, sustaining presumably its own life,
its own peoples but in 1876 only a dribble of white men had ever seen any of
the huge interior. Only 36 years later, 1912, the whole continent, every mile
of it except two independent pockets had been chopped up and parcelled out
between the British, French, Belgians, Germans, Portuguese, Italians and
Spanish. Go another 36 years and they've all almost all retreated and left the
colonised millions to run themselves.

At the time, we assumed that the splendid alternative to imperial rule would be
self-rule in the form of democracy. Well today, of the 184 sovereign nations in
the UN, there maybe 20-odd, 30 at most you could call democratic, most are run
by dictators benign or absolute. Among the original 50 UN members was Haiti, a
small Caribbean island that fought for and won its independence from France in
1804 and ever since has alternated between various tyrants to the number I
believe of more than 80. We never guessed way back there at San Francisco in
1945 that the day would come when the New York Times would carry the news of
the annual General Assembly opening in half a column on an inner page, because
it had to keep six pages open for eight correspondents to file separate reports
from Haiti.

What was so special about Haiti, why had President Clinton prepared and finally
mounted an invasion – at the last minute defined as a peacekeeping force – to
restore democracy, he says, "the whole adventure has been given a name, not
Overkill or Tropical Storm, simply Operation Uphold Democracy". The first point
to make about President Clinton's avowed aim is that he keeps talking about
restoring democracy to a country that's never had it, upholding also suggests
propping up a structure that's wobbling, but in 190 years as an independent
republic, Haiti has been independent only of France and has lurched from one
tyrant to another.

The president's one hold on the truth to justify his slogan – and it's a very
fragile hold, like a Titanic survivor clutching at a floating deck, quite – is
that Father Aristide is the first president democratically elected, he was
promptly overthrown in a bloody coup, fled into exile and the latest of the
tyrants, General Cédras, returned to the traditional procedure of ruling by
intimidation, brutality, murder and torture. Mr Clinton said as much only a
week ago, but then he yielded to the begging voice of former President Carter
who had met General Cédras four years ago when he, Mr Carter, was down there
supervising the election.

Mr Carter, you may recall, begged the Clinton administration earlier in the
year to be allowed to go to North Korea, talk to the old leader and persuade
him to stop the process, which can and is meant to lead to nuclear weapons.
Well, the North Koreans said at the time they would soon start reporting their
nuclear installations and the disposal of their spent fuel. Mr Carter was
applauded on all sides, except on the side of the White House.

Ex-presidents – like ex-presidents of athletic and golf and tennis associations
– are expected to stay out of sight and let the new man conduct the next
championship. Mr Carter, however, has in the past decade been invited to go and
be a neutral observer of elections in countries that are, like Haiti, only
barely acquainted with elections. Mr Carter's apparent success in Korea
evidently prompted him, while President Clinton was denouncing General Cédras
as a bloody tyrant, to call the White House frequently and say, in effect, I
know the man, let me go and talk to him and maybe we can arrange a peaceful
outcome.

Well, as you all know, the president gave in and without much hope of a Carter
outcome sent the former president with the former top military man in the
United States along with the present chairman of the Senate Armed Services
Committee. And you've heard how at the end of 20 hours of talk with General
Cédras and his aides, President Clinton said, "hold, enough, get out of there
before nightfall". How Mr Carter begged for another hour or so and how he then
announced by nightfall that he had come to an honourable agreement with General
Cédras who had agreed to step down from the presidency by 15 October to allow
elections, much handshaking all round and almost simultaneously hand-wringing
in Congress and the White House by people who shared President Clinton's view
of Cédras as a tyrant.

There came a 24-hour pause when no senator, no congressman dare say he was
sorry about the agreement, which would save the lives of young Americans and
young Haitians. Mr Carter was widely touted as inevitable candidate if not a
shoe-in for the next Nobel Peace Prize; and it came out that Mr Carter himself
after his efforts in North Korea was a little miffed that he hadn't already got
it. Well, Mr Carter's hour of glory was brief.

There was the dreadful evening of Tuesday, when we saw what Mr Clinton had
meant by a brutal national police force, the Haitian police bashing and
murdering protesters. Aristide fans being dragged off into alleys and beaten up
and American soldiers standing by impotent to punish the very demons they'd
come to protect the people from. The American soldiers had no rules of
engagement except not to fire unless fired upon.

By Wednesday, the House had passed a supporting resolution and so did the
Senate, but the debate in the Senate was humdinger of protest now against the
terms of what I should guess most senators believe to be an unworkable
agreement, if not unworkable, many declared, then simply outrageous because it
gives the great job of restoring stability to the very man who had stabilised
the chaos by brutal repression, because it naively trusted the Haitian
parliament to grant general amnesty to all the murderous cronies of the
generals because it does not require General Cédras and his men to leave the
country. Suppose, asked a senator in Wednesday debate, suppose Mr Aristide
arrives stays safe in his country that elections go forward, General Cédras
runs and is elected what then, must we standby the man, a man denounced by the
president of the United States as a tyrant of Hitlerian dimensions, the man we
spent two years arranging to overthrow and throw out.

The Senate resolution, while approving the peaceful invasion and yearning for
an early day when the United Nations 17 other nations take over, declares that
American troops must come home as soon as possible, whatever that means. What
they're all saying and said it out loud last week before Mr Carter's coup was
that an invasion would be a mistake. Two thirds of the American people thought
so too. Now they pray that the peacekeeping will remain kept, but are already
glum about the terms of the Carter agreement, they keep remembering the
disastrous failed humane mission of Somalia, they wonder if anything like a
democracy can be imposed on a nation, which has running water for only 30% of
its people, 75% unemployed in which a million or two live literally on garbage
dumps, a nation in which there is one doctor for every 10,000 humans.

I sense a feeling, too, which cannot be measured by a poll because it would
entail confessing that Mr Clinton had done what so many had blamed him for not
doing. In other words, the best answer to why did the president go in there is
I think he could no longer take the general charge that he rattled a sword in
Bosnia, saw Somalia returned to his old chaos had been brutally lampooned for a
years blustering over Haiti and decided that if he bumbled and retreated there,
he would loose all credence among his own people as a world leader. As Haiti
goes between now and the first Tuesday in November, so indeed may go the
congressional elections and the popular prestige of President Clinton.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP