The White House - 26 May 1995

Does anyone in the class remember the old phrase, American know-how?

The principle word-man or lexicographer of American political speech, Mr
William Sapphire, doesn't mention it, though he does record such well worn
catchphrases as the American system, the American way of life, and of course
the most persistent, if dim, vision of the good life to come, the American
dream. But I haven't heard American know-how – which was once on everybody's
lips especially the lips of the Europeans – for at least I'd say 40 years. No I
take it back. One unforgettable recollection of it, all the more memorable
because the phrase had vanished from ordinary conversation.

About 15 years ago, 17 to be exact, the big shots who run the United States
Tennis Championships moved the so called National Tennis Centre from a bosky
little corner of Long Island called Forest Hills, to some parklike acres on
Flushing Meadows, and planted the courts bang on the tarmac of LaGuardia
Airport, which indeed dominates Flushing Meadows. Alright I jest, but not as
outrageously as you might think. The centre court on which all the crucial
championship matches are played, does often give a visitor the impression that
it was deliberately placed as close to the LaGuardia runways as possible. The
noise can be fearsome, of revving and roaring planes, so much so that one year,
the opponents of Jimmy Conner's complained bitterly that they couldn't hear the
grunt he delivers a split second before banging the ball. It became vital they
should hear it because one man lost the Wimbledon Championship by hitting the
grunt instead of the ball.

Anyway, there was another odd feature of the centre court, which once completed
baffled everybody, most of all the players competing in the late afternoon. A
great flat monolith, a screen of blazing electric lights had been installed
along the west side of the centre court, so that as the sun went down the great
rectangular shadow of the monolith not yet lit fell across part of the court –
it shifted of course as the sun declined. Well, the first summer that the
championships were played at Flushing Meadows, all incoming foreigners were
asked what they thought of the new centre and its strikingly original features.
A new man and forthcoming champion, the engaging Czech Ivan Lendl, who
disguises a nice taste in irony, as well as poetry, behind a poker face. He
looked at the slanting shadow on the centre court, stuck his forefingers into
his ears against the uprush of a departing 707 and said: "Well I suppose it's
what you'd call American know-how." I loved the crack at the time, but was
surprised he was old enough to use it or remember it. Its heyday was in the
five, ten years or so after the Second World War when Europe, ravished and
bankrupt, had begun to pick itself up and see a glimmer of prosperity on the
horizon thanks to the enormous investment of the Marshall plan. Because of the
widespread destruction of aerial bombing of, you could say, the British
industrial landscape, and the supporting fact that British – and for that
matter French – methods of manufacture, technology, labour management
relations, had fallen behind, there arrived here so-called 'productivity teams'
from Europe, to learn American know-how.

I will dwell no more on that proud phrase, which was banded about during the
1950s, the decade old Americans now recall with tearful longing when under the
benign and peaceable Eisenhower, the United States was more prosperous, more
content, more ingenious and more admired than anybody. That long lost phrase
American know-how slid out of circulation in direct proportion to the rising
expertise of the Italians' shoes, cars, clothing and Germans' camera lenses,
the cheap car and the Japanese in everything, I'm afraid it would only be used
mockingly by foreigners today and here it is heard no more.

If you ask Americans when they emerged as the industrial or crafty whiz kids of
the world, some of them will go back to the 18th century Franklin's stove his
lightening rod, his invention of bifocal glasses and certainly recite all the
American marvels of the 19th century from the cotton gin to the electric bulb
and the typewriter. But there is also a whole literature of complaint and
lamentation among visitors to America all through the 19th century going right
up to – on my bookshelves – the Baedeker Guide to America of 1906, complaints
about the primitive ordeal of travelling in America: the hard beds, the muddy
rutted roads, the rudimentary inns, the universal fried food and cascades of
public spitting.

When I came here – and, throughout I should say, the 1930s certainly – the
cuspidor was a regular adornment if not a necessity of hotel lounges, and
shining brass cuspidors lined the corridors of Congress like plant pots in a
conservatory. I suppose the one institution of American life that today would
be rightly cited as combining 18th century elegance with 20th century
convenience is the White House. The White House changes its interior especially
the presidential living quarters with every new tenant. There was a time at the
end of the reign of Theodore Roosevelt, the outdoor adventurer and slaughterer
of wildlife on several continents, there was a time when visitors taller than
midgets complained that they had to duck their way into the ceremonial rooms to
avoid being slammed down by the jaws of grizzly bears and skewered by the horns
of antelopes or wildebeests. Few Presidents have transformed the place so
radically, in conformity with an eccentric personal hobby, but they're allowed
to do so. President Truman had the gall in the face of much public protest to
install a balcony on the south-east portico; he wanted to be able to sit there
on summer evenings looking out on the countryside just as he'd done back in
Missouri.

Personal taste, received at a stroke, a transcendent touch, and a general seal
of approval when Mrs John F. Kennedy moved in and did something that no
predecessor had attempted, namely to do over completely the official rooms: the
east room, the blue room, the diplomatic reception room. She begged and got
from friends and institutions splendid true examples of 18th century colonial
and federal furniture, she acquired French 18th century wallpapers and produced
an interior scene of such ravishing elegance that none of the successors has
dared –I think I hope – to improve on her. But this elegance and expertise are
fairly new in the history of what was originally called the President's Palace.
Its cornerstone was laid in 1792 and the work was meant to be completed – I
mean the first tenant could expect liveable house by the time the nation had
invented itself and worked out a form of government, which had happened –
within 5 years but it was not to be.

Eight years later when the second president came along from Philadelphia to
install himself and his wife into the new capital, they moved in a creaking
soiled carriage along an avenue with no paving, into a house with no drainage
and no water system. One structural wall was half built, only six rooms were
habitable. The East Room was a shell of stonework, the grounds were littered
with shacks, the living quarters of the diligent workmen who'd been at this job
as long as they could remember. When the Adams's arrived, they were taking
their coffee – more likely their rum break – sitting and drinking around the
grounds. It's a dreadful story of a thoroughly inhabitable place even well
beyond 1814 when the British enemy marched into Washington and performed the
service of burning down the Palace. Once its walls had been smoke stained, it
was wholly repainted in white and eventually, but not till this century, did a
President Teddy Roosevelt put the White House on his notepaper and so it's been
called ever since.

One of the boasts of succeeding presidents is that the White House is not some
regal palace remote from the people that its inhabitants reign or rule over,
but the people's palace, which is being temporarily dwelt in by the lucky
winner of the last election. Every day visitors, ordinary visitors to
Washington, line up and pass through the outer gate and nowadays of course,
pass through also an inner detector ray, undertaken on a regular tour, until
last week, throughout all the anxiety and hazards of wars and presidential
assassinations – of which there have been four and five close calls – the White
House has stood there in full view of strollers and people lowering the windows
of their cars to get a clearer look.

The atrocious bombing of that federal building in Oklahoma City stirred an old
outcry, a demand from the secret service to close off Pennsylvania Avenue to
all traffic along the whole length of the White House and its surrounding
lawns. President Clinton had gone into this often and now reluctantly decided
it had to be done, almost as a nudging reminder that he was right. You'll have
heard that a man with a strong claim to being a lunatic climbed over a fence at
night-time and was immediately brought down.

Of course people are saddened, mainly at the thought that it had to be done,
that the precautions taken in the name of security become more and more
constraining on the President and his movements. But Mr Clinton evidently feels
like President Johnson, who after the assassination of President Kennedy broke
away one day from the secret service in the Main Street of Austin Texas, and
visited, as they say everybody in sight. You have to stay close to the people
he said, you have to press the flesh so you do. So Pennsylvania Avenue has
become a mall, a walkway, very pleasant and every day the people line up for
the tour – in any given year over a million of them – let us hope they will not
soon be any good cause to stop them.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP