Casablanca - 11 December 1992

I don't know what it means, but I've noticed that in the past few years much
less is being made of some of the old American festivals. I was thinking of
Labour Day here, the first Monday in September, which marks – on the calendar
anyway, if not in the weather – the end of summer and the return to work.

Labour Day started by some New York Irish up in the late 1880s to celebrate
what a century ago they called the labouring poor. It caught on throughout the
rest of the country and for all the early and most of the middle years of this
century, Labour Day was a big ceremonial affair in all the big cities, always a
long parade of all the union locals winding up in the city central square and
the big speech from the most important labour leader you could get, bands, drum
majorettes strutting and twirling and in many cities – especially famous cities
on the rivers – fireworks at night and the general happy feeling that right had
been done by the American working classes.

Well, two things have happened. One is that fewer and fewer Americans, whatever
their working lives, are willing to define themselves as working class. The
last survey I saw, over 85% of Americans called themselves middle-class – an
obvious impossibility in any society that has two recognisably substantial ends
and a middle. The other thing more blatantly obvious down the past 20 years or
so is the decline of the national unions, a turn of history I for one would
have thought impossible if anyone had predicted it before or during the great
organising campaigns of the Second World War. Today, only one American in five
belongs to a union.

But Thanksgiving, the first, the cardinal American festival commemorating the
first successful harvest of the original Massachusetts colony, Thanksgiving
retains all its pristine colour and hold on the people. It's the great family
reunion, more so for more Americans than the Christian Christmas. The original
celebratory foods, the novelties the Indians introduced to the colonists are
served from one end of Alaska to the Florida Keys – the turkeys, the corn
pudding, the cranberry sauce, the pumpkin pie. Thanksgiving came and went this
year in the shock of an anniversary so unexpected, so unproclaimed, so bizarre
that it's only now a week or two later that I realise it was a unique
anniversary and one well worth talking about.

A 50th anniversary not many people are alive to celebrate. The 50th anniversary
of anything in their personal memory including their own wedding and here in
New York, the immigrant haven for most of the past century too many of the 50th
anniversary recollections were grievous ones of family and friends slaughtered
in the Holocaust. But this 50th anniversary was of a film, a motion picture and
showings of it exploded on Thanksgiving night across the country like the 4
July firework displays. This was not an act of studio hype, not a promotion
racket for the company that made it. Warner Bros were dead long ago, but during
the past past or four years film scholars busy about their separate
specialities have found themselves bumping into each other and coming on
surveys and memoirs about this one film.

And this year, it was discovered that this film remains the most popular film
to most Americans over the past 50 years that three generations have seen it
more often than any other film and mean to see it over and over again that no
other film in history has registered more of its dialogue on the minds of movie
goers and that all questions of merit aside, the film represents more than any
other an American character or a duality in the American character that most
Americans would like to believe is their true self, tough on the outside,
compassionate within.

The film was shown first in New York on Thanksgiving night 1942 and the timing
of its release as we shall see gave the Warner brothers cause to bow down and
be doubly thankful to the lord. And the picture, Casablanca. It was filmed in
just over two months through a hideous southern California heatwave in the
summer of 1942 when air conditioning was not an amenity of American life. When
it was all done with, nobody connected with it was very sorry, there was no
studio party. The very opening scene of the movie an anxious scramble of
European refugees and a gaggle of accents was one of the last things to be
shot. The last day of all was what they call a cleaning up day, odd close-ups
of the two of the films three stars Ingrid Bergman and Paul Henreid in a street
scene that would be spliced into an early scene in the movie. Bogart was gone
for good off on his boat, he had struck no sort of chord with Miss Bergman nor
she with him, but they were pros and they played their parts.

As for Paul Henreid, the noble resistance leader, he had a habit of bad
mouthing his co-stars, he thought Bogart a mediocre actor and implied as much
with generally haughty behaviour. Poor Ingrid Bergman more than anybody the
victim of a script that had eight different endings written for it never knew
until the last days of shooting, which ending was for keeps and therefore,
which man she was meant to love. The director, the veteran Hungarian Michael
Curtiz who in 16 years in America had never got on easy speaking terms with
English, howled impossible oaths at the bit players and fawned indiscriminately
all over the stars in four languages. At the end, some thought they had a good
film, some an indifferent one, but good or bad, special or routine; nobody had
the sense of having produced an immortal. It started the day after the Japanese
bombed Peal Harbor, a very big point for the making of this movie, If it had
been made while the United States was still officially neutral, the sting of
the plot would have been plucked, the Nazis would have been less vicious,
Bogart might have remained a man who sticks his neck out for nobody, for the
American studios were still selling their films in Germany right through 1941.

But on that Monday morning 8 December 1941, there had dropped on to the desk of
a script reader at Warner Bros the manuscript of a play never performed and up
for grabs by any studio that would buy it. It was the work of a young school
teacher who'd spent the summer of 1940 in Austria, two memories stayed with him
the behaviour of the Nazis in occupied Vienna and the smoky nightclub run by an
American exile who had a black man for his piano player. Well the script was
read by a hack reader who earned $1.12 cents an hour and he reported it to have
the makings of an excellent melodrama, tense, tense mood, timely background.
Casablanca in French Morocco where European refugees fought and bargained for
exit visas to Portugal and America, sophisticated hokum a natural for Bogart or
Cagney or Raft and perhaps Mary Astor.

Well, it was bought outright, to the school teacher's subsequent pain for
$20,000 by Hal Wallis the studio's shrewdest producer. After weeks of shooting,
Mr Wallis sent a memo instructing everybody that the movies title would be
changed, from now on it would not be Everybody Comes to Rick's, but for no
reason at all Casablanca. A very simple story about an expatriate American with
a dubious past who runs a nightclub in Casablanca under the tolerant eye of a
cynical French soldier, a captain, this is Vichy France, its a hotbed of
intrigue, anxiety and barely repressed panic among refugees of all sorts of
Hitler's Europe who are all desperately seeking exit visas to America.

A famous Resistance hero appears and shortly thereafter an SS major in the hunt
for him, the American could help him. The major is determined to trap him. And
the question, which sets the tension of the whole movie, is whether or not
beneath the scar tissue of the Americans cynicism there is a whole man and an
honourable one. Like all first-rate films apart from aesthetic considerations,
Casablanca is a spring of slowly coiling intention, it is about evil and the
risks in a bad time and place of resisting or overcoming it, and who shall
overcome.

Well the film appeared when Hitler had throughout a decade demonstrated in
Europe the success of violence, what sort of hero could hope to triumph over a
Hitler acting out plots more monstrous than any the Warner brothers had
contrived for their gangsters? No longer Leslie Howard or Ronald Coleman, not
any of the suave white knights nor the simply naive giants of the prairie, the
Gary Coopers and John Waynes. What was needed and what suddenly appeared as
perfect for the time was a tough guy a cynic a subtle as Goebbels, but on our
side. It would have shocked Bogart probably into stardom at almost anytime
since the start of the Second War. The movie was meant to come out in the
spring of 1943, but on 8 November 1942, we woke up to banner headlines
"Americans invade French North Africa at Casablanca". The Warner brothers knelt
and gave thanks.

The film was rushed into New York for Thanksgiving night coinciding with the
first big military movement of the Americans in the European African Theatre,
the film practically signified that America was now officially at war with
Hitler on the home ground. There were 75 bit players in Casablanca and when the
great scene was over in which the refugees in the cafe drown out the Nazis
singing The Watch on the Rhine the cameraman noticed that half of the cast was
in tears, they were all actual refugees, mostly Jewish with dreadful family
records of slaughter in the concentration camps, they were not Americans from
central casting faking accents.

I don't think its fanciful to think that the reality of that joyous moment
passed over to the audiences and was responsible for the most extraordinary
scene I was part of in a vast Philadelphia theatre, when Major Strassa was
defeated and the Marseillaise flooded the soundtrack, the whole audience rose
and cheered through its tears.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP