George H W Bush vs Michael Dukakis - 4 November 1988

Well, it’s all over, or nearly so, to the vast relief of everybody. That is not
a happy thing to say at the end of a presidential campaign, it usually rouses
the best, and the worst, instincts of the voters but also galvanises their
beliefs about what government is and ought to do.

This time there is little evidence that the voters have felt much passion about
the enormous issues that face the country. It’s been recorded in scores of
polls and surveys that the prevailing popular emotion, if there can be such a
thing, is anger. Or disgust, with the way both candidates have let themselves
be imprisoned by advertising men, who dictate what the two men ought to feel
and allow these mostly chiding infantile feelings to be dramatised, crudefied
in 15 or 30-second television commercials.

What Mr Bush has successfully done more than Governor Dukakis is to pick on
some political position of his opponent, simplify it to the point of absurdity
and then slam the point home in a half-truth, an evasion a downright lie. They
have both done it but Mr Bush's men have been more glib, conscienceless and
effective.

I will give you just one or two examples and then we move on to what I believe
are the real reasons for what appears this weekend to be an inevitably Bush
victory. It’s a fact that, for some time, Mr Dukakis as governor of
Massachusetts has run a prison furlough system. It’s been highly successful and
it's only one of the measures that has helped Massachusetts to boast the lowest
crime rate of an industrial state.

And, to have the annual conference of the 50 governors choose Mr Dukakis as the
most effective governor in the country, now this, you might say, is a pretty
powerful credential for any man starting the presidential campaign. Yet I doubt
that one voter in ten knows about it.

What every voter who watches television must know by now is the name and the
face in a police photograph of one Willy Horton, a convicted murderer in
Massachusetts who on a weekend furlough, raped a woman and stabbed her
boyfriend. The case of Willy Horton is a gruesome exception, to an otherwise
successful experiment, but the whole country knows about it because the
producers of the Bush TV commercials have plastered the Horton face all over
our screens with brief brutal sentences warning the people that, in
Massachusetts, rapists and murderers go free.

In one shot, they are moving through a revolving door, on their way out to the
streets and a crime spree. In another, Mr Bush says that the governor's last
words to a prisoner going off on furlough is "Have a nice weekend".This scary
message has been slammed at us without hesitation and without apology or
reservation.

It has, in the chill lingo of television producers, worked. For if there is one
social emotion that unites most city dwellers and suburbanites, from New York
to Los Angeles, it is the nagging fear of random crime on the streets by day,
and stealthy crime on the empty streets by night.

Mr Dukakis’s team has not, to its credit, come up with anything so callous or
devious. It has, equally, simplified issues but not at the expense of Mr Bush,
rather as a way of suggesting that the Republican positions on crime, drugs,
abortion are not solutions.

In one commercial, Mr Dukakis gave a properstrously high percentage of people
who live exclusively on welfare. On drugs, Mr Dukakis again, does to dramatise
the success of his Boston experience, he just keeps raging at Mr Bush for
having done nothing to enforce economic sanctions against General Noriega, the
dictator of Panama who is, without doubt, one of the main suppliers of illegal
drugs to the United States.

Failed economic sanctions is not so rousing a campaign slogan, as Mr Bush’s
all-out war to smash the drug lords. On other matters, Mr Dukakis has hedged
his broadcast messages according to which states they are being played in. In
Maryland, which has a gun control law, Mr Dukakis has a short, sharp message
supporting gun control in principal but in Texas – one of the four or five big
electoral prizes – a state which has as many weekend sportsmen as any state in
the nation, the Dukakis message conveys that there is nothing un-American about
deer hunting with guns.

Even when Mr Dukakis’s commercials are positive, revealing to us a manly side
of the governor we had not known about, they frequently misfire. We had one
memorable, faintly ludicrous, shot of the governor, a small figure almost
unrecognisable in full military gear, peeping out a huge lumbering tank.

This was meant to show that Mr Dukakis too, is strong on defence, but the Bush
team snapped it up, used the same picture, with its own menacing voiceover
line, "Now he wants to be commander and chief, can America take the risk?"

In all the campaign speeches they have, so-called debates, Mr Bush, his wimp
image long obliterated, has come over as downright, pungent and unfair. Mr
Dukakis has been reasonable, complaisant and lacklustre. And because of the
power of television to overwhelm rational argument, and replace it with
memorable emotion, I am afraid the debates will be remembered for single
moments of passion, or embarrassment.

I should guess that Mr Dukakis lost legions of votes in the moment that he
answered one ghastly question put to him in the second and final debate with Mr
Bush. He was asked what he would do by way of forgoing the death penalty if
tomorrow night his wife, Kitty, were raped and murdered.

I assumed he would at once rise with anger, and say something like, "I refuse
to answer such an appalling tasteless question. Ask me about why I am again the
death penalty, as public policy but I will not speculate on what my private
feelings might be in the agony of the ordeal you have so kindly proposed." No,
he stood there like a mechanical doll with his head on springs, smiling
inexplicably, and went on to talk about drugs. And appropriate penalties.

In the final weekend the Dukakis team, the managers, regional advisors,
television and radio producers, are asking each other what went wrong by which
they mean, what different line of commercials might have worked – should the
governor have matched Bush's slanders with equally vivid slanders?

They are talking about technique; there are even Dukakis campaign advisors who
whine that the governor is unknown to the people. Unknown? He has been up and
down the country and on television for over 20 months.

The truth is, he is known and he comes across now, as he did in the beginning
as a fair, decent, thoughtful man. With all the inspirational gift of a golf
club treasurer. But mainly, a man caught between his real beliefs and his
private knowledge that those beliefs, the old strong liberal convictions of the
Democratic party, will not go over in a nation that is more solidly
conservative than at any time, since the 1920.

This split between what he would like to say and dare now is, I believe, at the
route of his ordeal. There is nothing peculiar or personal about this split, it
affected three of the four previous Democratic candidates, George McGovern,
Walter Mondale and, yes, Jimmy Carter. They were, for good or ill, the chosen
democratic leaders at a time when the country was slowly losing its faith, in
the Roosevelt liberal revolution, in the tax-and-spend policies of the New Deal
and Truman’s Fair Deal.

The Reagan revolution turned the country round, as forcibly as Franklin
Roosevelt turned it round after the complacent years of the Coolidge
prosperity. Throughout the 1930s it was the Republican party that fought the
idea of social security, that fought the right of trades unions to bargain
collectively, that fought every social programme of the New Deal.

By the mid-40s they had given up their attack. The Republicans said, "Of course
we are all for these fine things, but we would manage them better". They had
become the me-too party. Today, the Democrats have no energising policy of
little threats; they are now the me-too party.

So Mr Dukakis has to say, of course, I am for a strong defence and low tax
rates, but I manage them more competently. And when he is accused by Mr Bush of
being a liberal, instead of saying "Of course I am a liberal in the great
civilising Western tradition of 200 years, in the mould of Wilson and both
Theodore and Franklin Roosevelt, and Truman," he spent two months ducking the
word, and then, embarrassingly, confessed as if a liberal were a secret
drinker.

It was not Ronald Reagan alone who turned the country round, it was starting
way back when Richard Nixon broke the Democrats firm grip on the south. Carter
saved a state or two but in 1980, the whole south 97 electoral votes went for
Reagan, and again in 1984. The old solid south is now the Republican solid
south. It’s an immense hurdle for any Democrat to leap on his way to 270 votes.

There are two other things which I take to be the decisive factors in
determining the outcome. They are not deep secrets filched from political
proposals they are there, they have been there for all to see, for two months.
I carry them around with me on two slips of paper, one is the latest table on
income taxes, jobs, revenue, put out by the bureau of labour statistics.

The other is a late survey, by the national journal of statistics, of voter
registration in five of the biggest states, which reveals that in New York,
Texas, Pennsylvania and less surely in California and Illinois, the
registration of Democrats has slumped drastically since 1984, when, you recall,
Mr Mondale captured only one state and the district of Columbia.

As for the seemingly dry-as-dust tables of the bureau of labour statistics,
they show that Reaganomics did work in one powerful way – never mind the
deficit, which to most people is a vague abstraction – lowering tax rates did
bring in millions of new jobs, and therefore millions of new tax payers and
produced $250billion, more revenue, since 1983. And, that unemployment is lower
than in any country of western Europe. That more adults are at work, in
proportion to the total population, than at any time in 200 years. And, that
this administration has created 18 million more jobs, more than Europe and
Japan combined.

In short, in a brutal short sentence, the test in any general election is how
many voters are quietly saying, "I am all right, Jack". I suspect there are
many. Many more millions than the Democrats care to count.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP