The lucky George Bush - 15 November 1991

At this time of the year I always make a resolution, it always fails, to give
to a library a few hundred books and dump in the dustbin outside my kitchen
door, such useless relics that clutter up my rooms and my life as old music,
what we used to call gramophone records, and files and cassettes of these
talks, recorded while they were being put over to London. I came on one
yesterday that for reference purposes had scribbled on it a title. It said,
Invincible Bush. Dear, dear me, I thought, happy days for el presidente, when
he had an outrageous score in the approval rating polls of 84%. That must have
been a year perhaps, or say February. I looked at the date on the cassette. It
was broadcast on 6 September 1991, just over two months ago. I couldn't believe
it. The general theme was the unfailing luck of George Bush. Let's just go over
what I had in mind.

Every time the news burst out with some domestic shame or scandal – crime,
drugs, crooked banks, dim reports on the state of education, the economy,
whatever – a foreign crisis would sound like a thunderclap and before you could
say battle stations, George Bush was on the bridge and taking charge. For
instance, last January, when the new Congress assembled and the Democrats were
just about to wage, they said, an impressive fighting campaign for the 1992
presidential election, up pops the monster Saddam Hussein and President Bush
turned into Field Marshal Bush, as thousands, including the uncomfortable
Democrats, cheered.

Then in the spring, the BCCI, Bank of Credit and Commerce International went
bust, and on the principle that the man in the White House is responsible for
anything that happens on his watch, the Democrats sharpened their little
hatchets and looked around for a nice juicy fat-cat Republican culprit. Well
maybe off in the shadows somewhere there could have lurked a Republican sinner,
but suddenly out there in the glaring daylight, the one man who was
conspicuously suspected of a close BCCI connection and was called to testify
before a congressional committee, was a Democrat and not just a Democrat but
practically the elder statesman of the party. So the Democrats buried or hid
their hatchets.

Midsummer, and by now there were three or four Democrats who'd declared
themselves in the running for 1992. So the city, a whole city of Bridgeport,
Connecticut went bankrupt and the mayor of Chicago mused that perhaps
bankruptcy or the protective way-station of Chapter Eleven, would be a wise way
for all the cities to go. Unemployment was edging up, it was soaring in some
places. For a while the rest of the country might be cheering the happy thaw of
the Cold War, there were 30, more, 40-odd towns suddenly in depression. These
were towns that for 40 years or more, in some places for a hundred years, had
lived by the thriving army camp nearby, the navy yard, the marine base. They
were all being closed down by act of Congress.

Meanwhile, the recession, which was said to be drooping under the summer sun,
was getting, if anything, a little more vigorous, more widespread. Surely now
was the time for one of the Democrats' presidential hopefuls to stride and
thunder across the land with a new theme that was being suggested to them.
George Bush spends all his time and energies watching out for East Germans and
Czechs and the European prime ministers while America cries, help. The cities
grow more dangerous by night, one in five American children lives, by the
government's own standard, below the poverty line. The time, in mid-August, did
seem ripe for the skinning and roasting of George Bush.

So then what happened? Monday the 19th, the coup, and for a month or more
nothing else seemed to matter, and in all the eruptions and revolutions that
have flowed from its failure, Bush has been there and even his meanest critics
cannot bring themselves to mumble a protest. He has been very good.

There's probably not been a time since the Second War, so extended a stretch of
time, when it was essential or when it was a blessing to have an American
president whose best strength was in foreign policy. We can only wince at who
it might have been – Governor Dukakis, the nice Gerald Ford, Nixon would have
been decisive and bold but would he, after the liberation of Kuwait, for
example, have had the wise restraint of George Bush and called the war off
because it was a United Nations war and the allied forces had done all that the
United Nations Security Council sanctioned them to do.

By now I should say there's rumbling, chronic criticism, especially from some
Democrats, but mostly from the Republican right wing and conservatives, that
George blew it, that we should have gone on to Baghdad, arrested or executed
Saddam Hussein. There's much heavy irony in written commentaries and cartoons.
But President Bush knew exactly what he was doing. Too bad, Saddam is still
there. But the whole war was the first war sanctioned and ordered by all the
members of the Security Council, Including the then Soviet Union. It was a
vital precedent and the American respect for it, for staying with the UN's
brief, was a big point with Mr Bush and Mr Baker, when some of his Pentagon
advisers wanted to go buccaneering through Iraq, to the subsequent outrage no
doubt of all the Arab nations.

Well so now, a month or less after the great failed coup, it was at the
beginning of September that again they took a poll on the popular feeling about
George Bush. Lo, 78% say he's doing fine, 10 weeks ago, and now, the latest
I've seen, he's down to 47%. What has happened from 78% approval to 47% in 10
weeks? Answer – there's been no big foreign crisis to obliterate the rest of
the news and our anxieties.

As a matter of fact there have been and remain several, there are so many
foreign upheavals, any one of which, two or three yeas ago, would have absorbed
much of Washington's concern. The end, we hope, of the Cambodian slaughter, a
great moment. The civil war in Yugoslavia, again it's been put up to the United
Nations to mount a peacekeeping force and if it worked, it would be a splendid
turn, as the victory in the desert. Mutiny of a province inside Mr Yeltsin's
Russia. Most of all, the prospect of a hard winter at best, famine at worst,
for several of the breakaway Soviet republics, not to mention the huge starving
populations of Africa.

I can't remember a time this century when the world's leading power, today the
only superpower, was more in need of the knowledge and guidance of a president
with a foreign policy gift that alternates between decisiveness and restraint.
So all right, we give him full marks and the medal of honour for foreign
policy. Why has he dropped 31 points in 10 weeks?

Because finally, the Democrats' early grumbles that he's good abroad and
doesn't care about the homeland, has now been elaborated into an effective
demagogic campaign theme. Cartoons of the president's bags slapped with labels
of foreign destinations, not a briefcase marked with Washington DC or Los
Angeles, California, much thumping sarcasm in Congress. The Democrats'
candidates are already working themselves up into apoplectic storms on behalf
now of the middle class. Their pet used to be the working class, they've now
discovered the middle class and they're making Bush out to be not simply
indifferent to crime, drugs, homelessness, unemployment, but too bored to care
about the strains on the middle class.

There is already, I'm afraid, a campaign in the making which is going to be
very sleazy, cheap and obvious, vicious, but effective. Of course the president
cares, but he dare not say the secret truth, that like Churchill, like Nixon,
he really does revel in foreign affairs because he has a gift for them and he
doesn't know any better than the Democrats, how to solve or cure or repair the
great social damage of poverty, crime, ill-education, disabling health costs,
all the rest.

It comes, I think, to a contradiction between what we say government is for and
what we expect from it, a contradiction brilliantly illuminated in a new book
by a Harvard professor of government, Harvey Mansfield. The contradiction is
between our enthusiasm for choosing a president, a Republican, who says
government should be limited to some public duties, and our habit of voting for
a Congress – and always in the past 50 years, the Democrats have controlled
Congress – that promises government will be a slot machine, churning out
endless private goodies, entitlements, welfare, benefits, subsidies, bonuses,
food stamps, allowances, medicines, paid leaves and all the other admirable and
now, necessary things which cost billions and billions of dollars we haven't
got. Who dare cut down on the services or throttle the economy by raising big
new taxes to pay for them? Neither American party, certainly.

In the meantime, the argument over the failings of George Bush is being
simplified effectively into a loud protest about his reluctance to recognise
the depth of the recession. It's true that the stamina of the recession fooled
him, So the Democrats' liberal cry, now being taken up by the middle class, is
that the economy goes on slumping and it's all Bush's fault. Or, as the most
popular of the late-night hosts put it, the other evening, how could George see
a coup in the Soviet Union in August and not see a recession at home?

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP