Clinton's medical reforms - 11 November 1994

Well, for once the conventional wiseacres were right, if a prophet can be said
to be right, who predicts that Manchester United will win the Cup Final by 2-0
and then they win by 10-0. I'd have guessed last Monday that timidity was the
last thing you could accuse the pollsters of. I thought myself that the
Republicans were pretty sure to take over control of the Senate, just. They
ended up with 53 to 47. But to become the majority of the 435 members of the
House, that did not seem to me to be in the cards, for two reasons. Two years
ago 96% of the incumbents of both parties were re-elected, a pretty dazzling
reflection of the power of a congressman to bag for his constituents a new dam,
a school bond issue, a bigger subsidy for the farmers and do it in two years.

In Tuesday's unbelievable result, every Republican incumbent was returned to
office and not a single Democrat. The odds on that result would have been from
a cagey bookmaker about a thou-, no, no, let's say 434-1. An allied reason was
that for the past 62 years since Roosevelt came roaring in from the pit of the
Depression, with his radical reforms of an essentially conservative system,
chief of which was massive borrowing and massive spending on public works,
since then, the people have tended to elect a liberal congressman, who'd bring
home the bacon and, for the presidency, they'd vote for the man who seemed to
express the wave, the feeling of the times.

This has been such a dependable reflex that the Democrats have had majorities,
mostly very large ones, in House, for 58 of these 62 years and I didn't spot on
the horizon any Eisenhower or Goldwater or Reagan who was going to change that.
Don't forget in all the obituary notices of Mr Clinton's presidency, that Mr
Reagan in his eight years in the White House had four Houses packed with
Democratic majorities. In each of these the Democrats had majorities
respectively of 52, 103, 71 and 81.

The Republicans on Tuesday performed the remarkable but not miraculous feat.
They needed 40 seats to take over, they wound up with 229 to 204, a 15-seat
majority. You see that's a rather modest enemy, compared with the boys in the
back room that Reagan had to face. How did Reagan manage to conquer against
majorities in Congress three to seven times those that Clinton is going to have
to fight or seduce? Reagan was a great seducer and in spite of his easy-going
working habits, in spite of a rather hazy knowledge of his homework, in his
first 100 days he had a personal meeting with every one of the 435 members of
the Congress. Thereafter, he did, as Lyndon Johnson, the master, had done
before him, he telephoned and flattered and nudged and begged, kept notes on
the personal misfortunes of opponents, called them with prompt and touching
sympathy. This was the secret, I believe of the three really commanding
politicians of my time – Roosevelt, Johnson and Reagan.

The essence of the talent is first to sense what people might be prepared to
swallow and then to persuade them to swallow it. The talent is called
leadership and it springs from temperament, you know that, the 94-year-old Mr
Justice Holmes said about Roosevelt, after the new president had broken all
custom and instead of summoning the judge to the White House, went to call on
him. After a half hour's talk, after Roosevelt had gone, Holmes turned to an
old friend and said simply, second-rate intellect, first-rate temperament. The
same may be said of Lyndon Johnson and, with a possible down-grading of
intellect, of Reagan also – the gift of leadership, I don't think there's any
formula you can learn to acquire it. As Bob Hope once said, either you got it
or you ain't got it, I got it.

It seems that William Jefferson Clinton doesn't have it. The extent of his lack
of it was the surprise to me anyway. There was no question when he first came
bobbing and bounding over our horizon in 1992 that he had some of the
attributes of a successful and popular leader. As intelligent as any president
before him, he does his homework and he's able at all times, and without
prompting or nervous aides, to expatiate on any policy, any crisis, any bill
that's on either the front burner or the back one. He has courage and he has
charm, he's incomparably articulate, sometimes rising to the peak of eloquence,
so what happened?

What happened was something I feared after his first month in office. Here's a
crude, but I think valid, contrast. Reagan campaigns, first thing he'll do, he
says, is cut taxes and build up American defences. He comes in, he woos and
eventually wins his opponents, he cuts taxes drastically and builds up the
country's defences. Clinton campaigns around the country and says the first,
the big thing, is to take apart the system of medical care and bring in a new
national healthcare system. So he arrives and what is the first item on the
plate? He'd like to see homosexuals admitted openly into the armed forces. Up
from the Pentagon and down from the congressmen on Capitol Hill comes the
incredulous cry, holy smoke, is that the most pressing item of business?

Now whether it was an admirable thing to do or not is not the point. Harry
Truman had a similar ambition, but he did not take it up at once with the
Congress. He'd have fuelled a blazing debate that might have crackled on for
months. He quietly talked to interested parties, he consulted the chiefs of
staff, he went out and looked at a couple of army camps, he said nothing. One
day suddenly, without fuss or the sound of trumpets, he announced by executive
order, as commander in chief he can do that, as Clinton could, he announced
that from then on, the armed forces of the United States, all of them, would be
integrated. No more black regiments. The fighting forces had been segregated
all through the Second World War. There was grumbling of course, a round of
curses on former Captain Truman by old-timers, but it was done.

So, how about the big deal, the one overwhelming reform that had to take place,
the national health system? Well Mr Clinton's bill, Mr and Mrs Clinton's bill,
represents the biggest single failure of his administration so far. Because he
kept ignoring the negative signs in Congress, it died by inches and over 18
months and so the failure seemed worse than it was.

Let us admit at once that Mrs Clinton had spent the better part of two years
studying healthcare systems at home and abroad, The two that appealed most for
copying or adapting to America were the German and the Canadian systems.
Nobody, by the time the Clintons published the text of their bill, nobody knew
more about running a very complicated healthcare system than Mrs Clinton. So
mightily and so plainly complicated with regional alliances of services,
enclosing or supporting a system of health management organisations, that
everybody but the Clintons could see it was bound to breed two new, enormous
bureaucracies and where was the money coming from for them?

The main complaint about the present system is that the paperwork is five times
as weighty and three times as expensive as Canada's. The Clintons' great
campaigning cry was, 35 million Americans have no health insurance – the shame
of it. What was never said was that 220 million Americans do have insurance and
are pretty happy with it. With it they get prompt attention and access to all
the technology and as for two voting blocks whose support was anticipated, you
might think would be all for extending total treatment to everybody, they
turned out to be the most antagonistic to change. Namely the very poor and the
old. Over 65, poor or comfortable or rich as Croesus, they get to the doctor,
venture their suspicions, same day or tomorrow, they have a CAT scan, a
magnetic resonance imager, a photo emission scan, PSA, a Doppler test, all the
gleaming and marvellous modern technology at, of course, a hideous price, maybe
just to make the diagnosis it would cost five, eight, 10 thousand dollars. Not
to worry. The doctors don't. They get a whacking cheque from the government.

So the United States pays pre capita more than three times for the medical care
of its citizens than any other industrial democracy. And the Clinton's bill
never discussed with Congress, but presented as an accomplished fact, was 1,372
pages long. Any bill of 1,372 pages has not thought itself through as a
workable act of policy. It was dead on arrival and all the subsequent efforts
by various groups and alliances to revive it and inject some life into it,
failed. The failure, which I think the voters came to see, if not to define
clearly, was the astonishing failure of a professional politician to get any
sort of bill through. It was a failure that demonstrated Mr Clinton's woeful
inability to persuade Congress to do what he now proclaims as his duty, to
compromise effectively.

So the root of the matter, of the whole election is the shattering of
confidence in Mr Clinton as president. He ran himself ragged and hoarse for
three weeks, campaigning for candidates who seemed in trouble. All but three of
them lost and many said his appearance harmed them. Disappointment in hopes
unfulfilled was extended to his party and the pounding Republican message that,
if it was true that politicians are tired or corrupt and that the label that
stigmatises them is liberal, then the Republicans succeeded in breaking several
Democratic state machines. To the great indignation of Mr Dan Rostenkowski, who
is under many indictments for embezzlement and fraud and was once the most
powerful man in Washington, chairman of the committee that oversees all money
bills, he lost his ancient seat in Chicago. The old rascals are certainly going
out. The new rascals are about to take over in happy droves.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP