Robert Maxwell and Fred MacMurray - 8 November 1991

The offspring of Czech Jews who died at Auschwitz, a new life in Britain, a
Labour seat in Parliament, a man who implausibly teased a fortune from
scientific publications, a titan in the old style. It's not often that the New
York Times pays a memorial tribute to a tycoon, but last Thursday, these were
some of the words that came from a sympathetic editorial.

Of course the circumstances of Mr Maxwell's death were so originally eerie, so
much in keeping with the almost Hollywood myth that sooner of later envelops
wealthy tycoons, that the death was the lead story on our nightly television
news, as it must have been around the earth. I happened that evening to be in
the company of a group of 60 or 70 doctors and hearing the complications in
determining whether or not a person had drowned, did save me from the lurid and
sinister speculations that some tabloids and supermarket give-aways were bound
to advance.

My own reflections on the sudden, sad death of Mr Maxwell have nothing to do
with pathology but with economics. The day after he died, the New York Times
had five pieces, three on the management and fate of a financial empire, a
confident listing of Mr Maxwell's huge assets and his huge debts, On following
pages, by chance, there were two accounts of one giant American corporation and
one giant bank which are both in dire trouble and two famous American tycoons
who are in dire trouble. But, in the paper also and at night on the tube, there
persisted joyful, seductive ads, commercials for these desperate banks and
corporations, all telling you what gorgeous new bonuses and goodies they have
in store for you, at practically no cost, just subscribe, just take out a card.
Later you read that one of our famous tycoons owes $1.2 billion but is getting
a new bank loan to float a $2 billion corporation.

These bewildering paradoxes threw me back to the only lecture in economics I
ever attended. It meant nothing at the time but it begins to make sense now. It
was 62 years ago in Cambridge, England, and it was given by the eminent John
Maynard Keynes. All I remember was his saying, if you owe the Bank of England
£100 and you leave the country, they will catch you and put you in jail. If you
owe the Bank of England £1 million, they will put you on the board.

Talking of time and mortality, we can be sure once a month, more or less, of
picking up the morning paper and reading a long, predictable tribute to some
famous man or woman, to somebody who was generally admitted to be supreme at a
single trade, writer, artist, musician. I suppose actors and actresses get more
universal attention because they are supreme in what is the most popular and
envied art, so there were no surprises in the processional columns devoted to
Laurence Olivier or Peggy Ashcroft.

They were at the peak of their profession and so far as I've read, nobody
discovered when they were gone, gifts, qualities, that had not been justly
celebrated during their prime. But also, from time to time, a lesser actor dies
and there will be no surprises in his obituaries either because we took the
measure of him long ago, he became identified with one sort of drama or comedy
or character. He has been classified and filed away without a second thought.
Sometimes we're wrong and when we are, it's time to say so.

Fred MacMurray died last Monday in Los Angeles and in no time we were reading
ample tributes that struck at once a similar note. Quote: the personable,
unassuming actor who starred in some of the best film comedies of the 1930s and
'40s and was later the protagonist in popular Walt Disney fantasies and in a
long-running television situation comedy. Literally true, from the first fling
with Carole Lombard in the 1935 Hands Across the Table, throughout the next
20-odd years he was among the most engaging, easygoing leading men. He was
himself a type that probably never would or could have been a stage actor but
he was made for the movies, that's to say, not an actor acting to a camera, but
a human being happening to be photographed, unselfconscious, seemingly unaware
of the camera.

By the way, in one of the last interviews he gave on television here, Laurence
Olivier was asked if there was any one actor, actress, who stood out as the
supreme film actor and he said quite quickly, oh, no competition, Gary Cooper.
I think that same unawareness, a gift to behave rather than act, belonged to
Fred MacMurray too, but to say that is only to analyse what everybody noted and
praised in him. My point in bringing him up here is that in his 80-odd films he
created one unforgettable male character that raised him, in only four films,
into the top rank of quintessentially movie actors. That we look back on him
now and forget or overlook this is probably nobody's fault but his own because
it's true that most of his career was given over to light comedy, farce,
playful fantasy, routine Westerns.

He was, in life, a very easy-going type: I take my movie parts as they come,
I'm lazy in spurts, I am, I admit no great screen lover, sometimes scenes
include people who just say hi, to indicate they're in love, I play those
scenes very well. Such a type is not likely to press agents and producers to
pick for him variations on a human type I think he played with genius, better
than anybody in the movies, to take the type I have in mind to its extreme. Am
I saying that MacMurray could have played Raskolnikov in Dostoyevsky's Crime
and Punishment? He would have been very fine.

But the type I'm thinking about, the four matchless performances of his career
were of, I was going to say, a recognisable American type. That's wrong. Say
rather, a marvellously American representation of a fascinating, if
regrettable, human male. An agreeable, suspiciously affable, off-hand fraud, a
reliable insurance salesman caught up with a sleazy blonde and suddenly way out
of his depth, in Murder, He Says. A businessman, philanderer, available at
weekends to be, in a slightly shamefaced way, pimp of sorts – that was The
Apartment. A nice cop turned crooked with the help of a woman, Pushover. And in
the Caine Mutiny, the unforgettable navy lieutenant, the backer-up of his
mutinous buddy who jibs when his own career is at risk.

It's interesting, I think, that of these one should have been written by
Dymytryk, the son of recent Ukrainian immigrants and the best two, The
Apartment and the incomparable Double Indemnity were both written and directed
by Billy Wilder, a Viennese refugee from Hitler, whose mother and family died
in concentration camps. Perhaps it takes a European, early acquainted with
grief, to see the dark side of the country-club comic.

Anyway I'm sure in the next months or so you'll have an opportunity to see one
or other of these, most of all I hope the rather heartbreaking performance of
the insurance salesman in Double Indemnity, a plainly decent, dependable young
man, tripped by one false step, a character tended and nursed throughout the
movie with great art by Edward G Robinson.

During the week I brought up this side, this gift for playing heels with one or
two American friends who remember the MacMurray movies reasonably well. I don't
think they knew what I was talking about and I recall now, the only two critics
who immediately recognised a supreme film actor in MacMurray were both
Englishmen. The day the film came out in London, in 1944, James Agate wrote in
his diary, this is a most magnificent murder story with the moral that a man
and woman who put their heads together to murder her husband begin to loathe
each other before the body is cold. MacMurray is surprisingly magical and
touching, Barbara Stanwyck completely convincing, as the common, bloody-minded
hussy.

The morning that the MacMurray obituary appeared at deserved length in the New
York Times, I took out the usual film dictionaries, companions, encyclopaedias
and what I read was what I'd expected. Gifted, off-hand, amiable light
comedian, what MacMurray himself called smiley MacMurray, my decent Rotarian
type. The humdrum foreseen pieces recall to me the one critic who spotted first
this pervious character and put his finger with eloquent skill on the way it
was played. The critic is David Thompson from his biographical dictionary. At
he best, he says, what MacMurray is playing is a romantic lead built on
quicksands, the hero, compelled to betray and the ingredients of the MacMurray
man are paradoxical but consistent. Brittle cheerfulness, an anxious smile that
subsides into slyness, the semblance of the masculine carriage that turns out
insubstantial and shifty. A rare character, who lets the tawdry con man grin
through the all-American wholesomeness with a rare conjuror's swiftness.

It's a pleasure to pay what I believe is the right kind of tribute to an artist
who has had many tributes but most of them for the wrong things. In life,
MacMurray was much like his comedy self, without the phoniness. More than
acting, he liked to fish, paint, cook and play golf. For 37 years he was
happily married to a former nun.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP