A history of Father Christmas - 27 December 1996

Among all the sights and sounds that make Christmas time recognisable in any
city or small town in the Western world, I suppose no symbol or institution
means more to children than the scarlet figure of Santa Claus. Indeed it's a
terrifying thought that in every life there comes a point when his very
existence is in question.

I was going down in our elevator – lift – the other morning, and a neighbour, a
pretty, dark-eyed young mother we know, got in and said: "Is there anything you
can do to quicken it, get it over with, so the boys and we can get some sleep?
They're so excited they're fit to be tied".

I wondered if they knew the truth. "Not quite," she said. "But I guess this is
the last year. They do want to know how he can drop down the chimney stack of
this fifteen-storey building, deliver presents on every floor, fall through a
roaring fire or two and get back to Donna and Blitzen without even singeing his
beard."

Santa Claus – the alias Father Christmas is unknown in this country – Santa
Claus is I suppose, so taken for granted that very few people wonder where he
came from. There are legends and clichés that get repeated every Christmas: how
Prince Albert, the ever-loving and forever mourned consort of Queen Victoria
introduced the Christmas tree from Germany and the Yule log, and maybe the old
man himself.

During the First World War, I remember the German origin of these cheerful
sights and customs was very much played down. We were taught they were all
invented by Charles Dickens, an inventive cockney if ever there was one and a
genius without a drop of German blood in his veins.

Well whether we're hazy or dogmatic about the origin of Christmas habits and
customs, we have no cause anymore to stay ignorant.

On the very eve of Christmas, of Christmas Eve, an old American died who was
the world's foremost authority on the roots and traditions of Christmas. He had
for a simple, scholarly, Republican, the improbable name of Earl Count, which
sounds like a jazz band leader. But Professor Earl Count he was: famous
anthropologist, anatomist, neurologist, biologist and Episcopal minister, and a
linguist accomplished in ten languages.

His compact but definitive work on Christmas tells you in its title what you're
in for: Four Thousand Years of Christmas.

We discover that the Germans were just as much Johnny-come-latelies as we are
in the matter of Christmas customs, which began in Babylon, with wealthy men
initiating two of our customs: they exchanged presents with other rulers to
demonstrate their peaceful intentions and they imagined that evil spirits could
be placated by specially decorated evergreens, the fir tree, in particular.

Professor Count puts the origin of Christmas back to the end of the Roman
Empire, after the dreadful heresy of Christianity began to overtake the old
gods and godheads. Their main annual festivals celebrated the solstices until,
he says, eventually the early Fathers of the Church took the merriment, the
greenery, the lights and the gifts from Saturn and gave them to the babe of
Bethlehem.

Enter in the 5th century AD Nicholas, Bishop of Myra, Asia Minor, patron saint
of sailors, renowned for many odd legends through about twelve centuries when
he suddenly – I mean throughout say a hundred years – shows up in Holland,
which established 6th December as his feast day, and it was on that day that
the Dutch combined merrymaking and the exchanging of presents.

The Dutch took this, many other customs and names, across the Atlantic to New
Amsterdam. And who came along and took and renamed New Amsterdam? Why the
English of course, calling the town New York and holding an annual merry
festival complete with fir trees and presents and music on the feast of the
Dutchman's Sinterklaas, which the English turned into Santa Claus. The Oxford
Dictionary still marks the phrase as "of American origin".

For quite a time, 6th December was the merry day, not the 25th, for, as the
Yorkshireman William Bradford who kept a diary of the Mayflower voyage
remarked: "What day so ever our Lord was born, certainly it was not 25th
December." Santa Claus was by then the festival's patron saint and merriest of
hosts.

And so now there he is, everywhere at once. Outside department stores, inside
shops, lunch counters, on the telly, the most magical of childhood fantasies.

And, in this city anyway, many of them are graduates of a school for Santa
Clauses up the Hudson where portly, old men apply themselves and graduate from
such courses as: greeting the child, problems of denial, father substitute or
father rival? One class in personal cleanliness in the role of Santa Claus,
nowadays more than delicately stresses the role of sobriety, after a run of
years some time ago when too many Santa Clauses at twilight, were taking a swig
from a flask and voicing WC Fields' complaint: "Somebody has been putting
pineapple juice in my pineapple juice".

Anyway the selection of Santa Clauses is well watched and I can't remember a
scandal of any sort that's been attached to them until this year. Not Santa
Claus really but a charming and lovable surrogate: an old nun. She stood
between the outer and the inner doors of department stores, an architectural
feature as necessary in these winters as in summer cottages – an outer door and
an inside screen door bans all flying objects.

The old nun did not solicit money though many kind folks dispensed it anyway.
Shoppers would appear on their way out with their bulging shopping bags and ask
if she'd be kind enough to hold the bag while they ducked outside and hailed a
cab or caught up with a wandering child. She was willingness personified.

This went on for I think a couple of weeks until the store guards remarked on
the speed with which some articles vanished from the counters. Quite simply the
nun was the fence for a well organised band of busy kleptomaniacs. The daily
news headline ran, "Nun in a Bad Habit." She lost her habit and as I talk, is I
think, pondering behind bars the memory of her ingenious caper.

Talking of Christmas articles that have been too smartly gone from the
counters, we have this year the rare case of a manufacturer who way
underestimated the likely popularity of their product. Remember a year or two
ago the mania for the Cabbage Patch doll? Its popularity pales before the mania
that has overtaken the country over the toy doll called the Tickle Me Elmo.

Not being any longer much interested in teddy bears and such to put on my
pillow, I first heard about Elmo when I saw an ad in the newspaper offering to
sell a Tickle Me Elmo for two hundred and fifty dollars. Two hundred and fifty
dollars! What is it made of? Some plastic material. Sells, was advertised to
sell originally in the shops for, I don't know, six, eight ninety-five.

Well even less unlikely is the true story, just in, of a couple with two small
children and an old car, which they were eager to trade in for a new one.
Plainly their old car was not in very bad shape, but their case was desperate
in a way that you'd never guess. The salesman looked over the expiring model,
did a little arithmetic, and came up with a handsome offer – you need to know
that he too was a father with, this Christmas, a soon-to-be satisfied toddler.
The salesman said: "Well I can give you two thousand seven hundred dollars on
your old car, or"...They jumped at the offer. "How about," they said, "a Tickle
Me Elmo?" Done and done, two thousand seven hundred dollars.

I've not heard any late word from the manufacturer but I can see their
factories working through graveyard shifts and mobilising mobs of downsized
employees to get out millions more Tickle Me Elmos, by which time Tickle Me
Elmos will be available in a saturated market for a dollar a throw.

I think the best Christmas story is one about reindeer. There was a brief
television interview the other day – the first ever, they claimed of a people,
a tribe – maybe a tribe but certainly a community remote from their fellow
humans – in northern Siberia. They live with and by the reindeer and what can
be made out of him: food, shelter, clothes, the lot. They are, or were, a long
isolated part of the Soviet Union and this week they wanted to learn from the
visiting Westerner the news of the outer world. They were told that the Soviet
Union had collapsed. They asked, "What was the Soviet Union?"

Now it's time to wish you all the traditional greeting, but according to whose
tradition? New Yorkers have abandoned the old forms and now say what they say
before all the Jewish festivals: happy holidays.

I hope you had a Merry Christmas and I wish you now a Happy New Year. And oh
yes, to any small child who's beginning to share the doubt of that famous
little American girl who wrote a questioning letter to the New York Sun exactly
one hundred years ago, the answer, triumphantly enlarged into the paper's
Christmas Day editorial is the same: "Yes, Virginia, There is a Santa Claus".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP