Proposition 227, immigration and English - 7 August 1998

One day this week, California started a breathtaking experiment. It's not
unusual in a State 800 miles long with many geographies from deserts to
snow-capped mountains, with a population 10 times that of New Zealand, or, if
you prefer, two-thirds that of Great Britain.

California was swiped from Mexico. And although it didn't become a state for
over 200 years after the settlement of New England, it has been, in this
century, notable for bold initiatives in popular government, not least in
deciding burning issues by referendum, or by what's sometimes called a
proposition. The practice is, indeed, 100 years old this year.

When Californians go to the polls, they don't just vote for people. Always
attached to the ballot, after a long list of national and state and county
offices, there are usually two or three long paragraphs proposing reforms that
are usually bold and brassy and have aroused popular enthusiasm and
indignation. We're talking about Proposition 227. And please forgive the
necessary background to, I promise you, a lovely story.

Thirty years ago, California started something which was meant to meet the most
elementary educational need of the children of the legions of immigrants who
came, first, stealing across, and then swarming across, the Mexican border.

The great majority of the newcomers spoke one language, namely Spanish. So, 30
years ago, California invented a new way of educating them. It sounded sensible
and practical, if not inspired. Let the incoming Spanish-speaking children be
taught the elements – reading, writing, arithmetic, geography, so on – in their
own language for two years, while taking English lessons on the side.

At the end of two years, they would now learn everything that followed in the
English language. It's called bilingual education. And, on paper, it sounds
absolutely right, and it has worked well, but in only a very small minority in
the states where it's used. In California, it has been, on the whole, a
disaster.

On paper the idea makes several happy assumptions – that the Spanish teacher
speaks good, decent Spanish. And that the sideline teachers, training the
Hispanic children in English, are proficient in English. These basic
assumptions turned out to be wildly wrong. Not only were very many Spanish
teachers only halfway literate in Spanish, but the ones who then taught English
were worse in English. They produced hoards of children crippled in both
languages.

So the voters decided last June that bilingual teaching must end. And last
Monday, throughout California, suddenly all the young Hispanic were to be
taught, first and only, in English. And this massive turnabout happened
everywhere, except in one or two counties who filed suit with the courts to
have Proposition 227 declared unconstitutional. And the road to that reversal
is, of course, the very long and rocky road through courts of appeal, through
California Supreme Court – every state, remember, has one of its own – and
finally on to the Supreme Court of the United States.

I take up this dramatic piece of news with the Hispanic taxi drivers I run
into, which is not difficult in New York which no longer has life-time taxi
drivers. They, the Taxi Commission, call taxi driving, rather pompously I
think, an "entry profession".

And certainly very many young new immigrants starting in as taxi drivers and
when they've made enough money move onwards and, they hope, upwards to
something else. So it's been for the past, oh, 20-odd years.

First every other cab driver after the Second War was a Puerto Rican. They more
or less vanished and have been succeeded, not in this order, by waves of
Colombians, Russians, Ukrainians, Israelis, Haitians – French-speaking,
Barbadians, and always masses of youngsters from a Central or Southern American
country. Which explains why, worse than at any time in my New York life, you
run into more taxi drivers who have the loosest possible hold on elementary
English.

A month or more ago, I took a cab at my door, repeated twice an address, 111
East 55. I asked him to avoid the traffic that crowds round the Metropolitan
Museum. "Please", I said, "Go over to Park!" I meant of course Park Avenue. But
when I looked up from my paper, he was turning right into the park.

I let out a strangulated cry and said it loud and clear, "Park Avenue! Park
Avenue!" About five minutes later, an idea occurred to me. I thought I'd make
it as simple as possible. "Is this" I pronounced, "your first job? Your first
job?"

I couldn't have spoken a more baffling sentence. His honest dark face crinkled
in something very like panic. He couldn't possibly repeat the words because I
might just as well have spoken to him in Pharsi or Sanskrit.

I had a second idea. Maybe that phrase of the Taxi Commission wasn't so pompous
after all. Maybe it wasn't an example of the American well-known preference for
Latin words over Anglo-Saxon. "Su taxi", I said, "es el profesion d'entrada?"

He whipped round and his eyes flashed. "Si, si, si!" he said. An entry
profession. In talking to Hispanic immigrants you'd better know not so much
what the English expression is as what is the literal English translation of
the Spanish.

I mentioned this instructive little episode to a sociologist and he wrote me
back a note. Deadpan, believe me, it said, "All immigrants have their own
specific communication problems in inter-personal relationships".

Thanks a lot. That ludicrous sentence did at least strike a chord. Reminded me
irresistibly of a story, a true story, told to me by one of the parties of the
first part. My long-gone, beloved friend, the celebrated screenwriter and
director Nunnally Johnson, the drollest human being I ever met. A gentle and
indestructible southerner. He was known in Hollywood as Robert Benchley with a
Georgia accent.

Well, the other party was none other than Sam Goldwyn, a Polish lad who escaped
from a pogrom in Warsaw at the age of 11, made his way alone to England, found
some relatives and worked as a blacksmith's helper till, at 13, he crossed to
America, alone, worked as a glove maker.

By the time he was in his 40s, he was just about Hollywood's most famous, most
exacting and wealthiest movie producer. He was famous also throughout the
English-speaking world for his way, in a thick Polish accent, his way with the
English language. He said anyone who went to a psychiatrist should have his
head examined. To some invitation he didn't welcome, "Include me out!" And "a
verbal agreement isn't worth the paper it's written on".

Came the day, when Sam Goldwyn made a picture with Nunnally Johnson as the
director. It was, I gather, a sort of Raffles, gentleman crook effort, and the
opening scene was very like the opening scene of the Irving Berlin-
Astaire-Rogers Top Hat. A gentlemen's club in London in the 1930s, lavished –
by Mr Goldwyn and the writers – with all the gorgeous American preconceptions
about an Englishman's club held by people who've never been in one.

Opening shot, the drawing room. Many members, all very old, all in dinner
jackets, one or two with monocles. All silently reading The Times. A waiter
enters and drops a teaspoon. The place bounds into life. One outraged member
cries, "Who's causing this frightful din?" End of scene. The punch line was
Nunnally's own.

Mr Goldwyn didn't see the rushes and was so satisfied with Mr Johnson's
direction and the editing that he first saw the whole picture when it was over,
in what they call rough-cut, before the final polished edit. He stopped the
projection. "What", he shouted, "means with this word din. Frightful din,
what's it mean?"

The assembled writers, director, cameraman, didn't know which way to look. Din
meant din. What was the matter with old Sam? Well old Sam had picked English up
when he got here. Never went to school in America and suddenly, to their
bafflement, didn't know the meaning of a simple English word.

Seems the phrase "frightful din" was repeated several times in the dialogue, so
Goldwyn walked out saying "shoot it over". And when things had cooled down,
Nunnally Johnson went to Mr G and said, "Sam, it's going to cost an arm and a
leg, you know, an arm and a leg, to reshoot this. All the extras have been paid
off. One of the stars is on another picture." But Mr Goldwyn insisted. And
another cast of club members assembled, a stand-in for the missing star, it was
done.

While it was being sliced in as the new opening scene, Mr Goldwyn, one
afternoon, bought an evening paper and saw a headline, "Pasadena neighbours
protest dog's din". Somebody was suing the people next door to muffle a
perpetually barking dog. But there was that word again!

When he reached his studio, Mr Goldwyn stopped at the switchboard and asked the
first operator, "What's this mean to you?" She said, "Why, Mr. Goldwyn, the dog
next door was making such a din!" "A what?" "A din, Mr Goldwyn". "You know the
word? This is OK?" "Mr. Goldwyn", said the girl, "everybody knows what the word
'din' means!"

Back in his office, Mr Goldwyn telephoned Nunnally Johnson. "Nunnally!" he
said, "Put it back! Stop the shooting! Put 'din' back!" At huge cost, they did.

"You know", said Nunnally, "by the time he called me I decided he was right.
Din! Din! Din! It gets sillier the more you say it!"

"You knew, didn't you," I said, wiping my eyes, "that Goldwyn, as a boy, spent
two years in England?"

"I knew that", said Nunnally, sadly. "I think that explains the accent!"

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP