Airport terrorist attack fears - 8 February 1991

I am flying west again, to California, but with an overnight stop at Dallas to
talk to some students, the airlines have warned us of longer, more bothersome
security checks and advised us to be at the airport as much as an hour earlier
than usual. So, I am there, 90 minutes before the flight is due to leave and it
takes me about three minutes at the check-in counter and 15 seconds to go
through the metal detector. A record. Why? Because, to anyone who flies at that
time of the day, nine in the morning, the airport looked as I imagine it looks,
at three in the morning, a great empty chasm – so few people flying and no
lingering friends and families, they are forbidden now, to greet people at the
gates. So, they have got the message and apparently are not showing up, in
large numbers.

The only conspicuous innovation having to do with security, is obvious the
moment you get out of your cab. There is no more, sidewalk baggage checking in.
That's to say, I forget now I am not sure it's a normal procedure in Europe,
it's not in Britain I think, but if you are flying anywhere within the United
States, you normally get your bags deposited right there, on the sidewalk –
English pavement – and a porter, so dressed, anyway, looks at your ticket and
puts the necessary tags, the destination tags, on your luggage and he sees that
they are trundled inside, and sent off to the loading platform.

For, some no doubt good and thoughtful reason I can't quite figure out, this
security procedure is enforceable at airports, for the duration. A very small
price to pay for whatever safety they have in mind. At Dallas the university
officials, two young ladies were, who were going to meet me, were down at the
baggage claim area and looked like two forlorn creatures stranded in the
dessert. Dallas airport, is I believe, I am sure, physically the largest
airport in the world, and even in the thick of the tourist season with people
flying in all directions, it has the air of a vast modern construction, a
giant, gymnasium or cathedral say, a cathedral with wall-to-wall practically
knee-to-knee carpeting so, that hundreds of people stalking around, looked like
the strolling midgets in a Canaletto painting, and make no more noise than a
convention of kittens. But, this time, the airport looked to me to be at most,
a quarter full and it was in the Dallas news that I read about the heavy slump
in airplane travel, most of all in tourist travel just about everywhere.

In Europe, in the Middle East of course, and even here one reads in every paper
and magazine about the secret hysteria that seems to have overtaken hoards of
travelling Americans. Including I notice, a movie star famous or notorious for
his portrayal of a muscular machine-gunning hero, the new stereotype of the
gung-ho martial American at his worst. Before I left New York, I took this up
with one fairly celebrated show biz star, normally a droll and sensible woman,
who I should have guessed would not be put off her stride, or her travels, by
ten Saddam Hussein's but she was cancelling a trip here, a trip there, because
– I was made to feel like a cretin – because of terrorism, stupid.

Well, I suggested that if she took the plane every day for the next year, to
almost anywhere on earth expect maybe Bagdad or Tel Aviv, the chances of her
being terrorised would work out at one in several hundred thousand, maybe a
million, whereas anyone who, at any time of the day, walks across Madison
Avenue takes his life in his hands. Yes, yes, she knew that – no avail. Saddam
Hussein 'thou hast conquered'. After Dallas, I flew on to southern California
to Orange County which is south of Los Angeles. And if I tell you that the
airport is named the John Wayne Airport and when you drive out of it you are
soon in MacArthur Boulevard. You will gather that you are not in Democratic
country. You can win for sure, anytime you cared to bet, that nowhere in
prosperous Orange County is there an Adlai Stevenson equestrian statue. Or
even, I should guess a building named, after Franklin Roosevelt.

However the, erm, the university, erm, secular university – I mean it's not a
Baptist or a Catholic university – is certainly not recruited from the
Republican legions who infest Orange County. It's part of the state university
system. We all know about the University of California at Berkley and UCLA –
University of California at Los Angeles. Well, they are pretty crowded both in
numbers and for building space and the university I was visiting is UCI –
University of California at Irvine, a community came up like a giant mushroom
in the past 30 years. This campus is only 25 years old, they have 16,000
students and because they own about 400 acres across open land, the great marsh
on which I was told, eager bird watching students huddle before the dawn, they
are required to double their registration to 32,000 by 2000 AD.

This and much more about a splendidly equipped university, I learned before I
was privileged to talk to an audience of about 1,200. I do not mean, to sound
coy in saying privileged. For there were 10 other events going on that evening
– concerts, performances in other auditoriums. stadiums. concert halls with
which the campus appeared to abound, including a university basketball game, a
science lecture, a performance by the university, symphony orchestra. By the
way, how many universities can you name, that have their own student-recruited
symphony orchestra. During a busy 36 hours I did not bring up the war. I was
waiting for the students and or the faculty to do that. I discovered later they
stayed mum out of nothing but courtesy, they did not want to throw out the
sidelong suggestion that the subject of my talk ought to have been on the war,
or at worst, the strain of it on the domestic front. But finally, after the
lecture, so called, was over, and there was an informal get-together, I did
bring up the war.

I had seen, of course, polls which show even on the college campuses a very big
majority in support of the war. I say carefully in support not in favour. I
wish the poll takers would be pedantically careful in the way they frame the
questions about the war. I suspect there has never been a war in which popular
support is so shadowed by misgivings and opposition so embarrassed by
qualifications. It seems so, anyway among the students I noticed on the way to
the reception. On the notice board a sheet of paper announcing in crayon a
meeting a protest meeting against the war. At the other end of the board, was
another notice, a pro war meeting. I was told that these antagonists have not
so far visibly or physically antagonised each other. Once recently, indeed,
they met together and argued, rising I was told to strong differences of
opinion but stopping well short of mayhem. Or the sort of howls of malice and
hatred that disfigured many such campus confrontations during the bedlam that
accompanied the Vietnam war.

Well, for one thing, remember it's a volunteer army – nobody has been drafted,
yet. For another, the opponents, the protestors, do not have the main rationale
they used during Vietnam: the belief or the illusion, that the north Vietnamese
were Third World democrats fighting to oust a Western power, as they had asked
of the French. And a powerful impetus to the Vietnam protestors, had been
given, by both general MacArthur and former president Eisenhower, both of whom
had urged first President Kennedy and then Johnson, not to get involved in a
land war in Asia. But, even to the most downright peacenik, Saddam Hussein is
not as he is, by the way, to more and more Arabs, a hero, saving the Arab world
from the detested, the invading, Western superpower; he is condemned right left
and centre for his annexation of Kuwait. He is watched and feared for his
remembered use of chemical weapons against his own Kurds. He made a glaring
psychological error, when he paraded those obviously maimed or beaten-up
prisoners of war, and at the moment the protestors do not seem to have made
clear to themselves an effective alternative to enforcing the United Nations
resolution. Approved by 28 nations, which for the first time in 45 years, and
finally, sanctioned the use of force, in an international dispute. Something
the United Nations was created to do.

Three weeks ago, at the beginning of the war, most protestors condemned the,
erm, allied coalition for not having stayed with the imposition of United
Nations sanctions. But since that time much disheartening proof has come out,
about leaks in the embargo system amounting to a regular flow of goods and
material from Jordan, Iran and Syria to go no further. However, unlike any
previous war this one is seen in every home, being waged producing vast
devastation, and the deaths of harmless people, television penetrates what was
always the remote disasters of war. And it alone will ensure, I believe that
the anti-war protestors will come into their their passionate heyday if the
land war goes on for long and the casualties mount into the thousands, the tens
of thousands, a fear that haunts the White House, the Pentagon, the high
demand, and makes the support for the war, large, but fragile.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP