US troops enter Bosnia - 15 December 1995

After nearly three weeks of delicious weather in San Francisco, we're back here
to piercing cold Manhattan, which in the old innocent days of nothing but
newspapers to show us the city's life, used to print photographs of children
tossing snowballs at each other in Central Park. But these days and nights with
television as unavoidable as wallpaper, they illustrate the weather with
perishing shots of arctic landscapes in Minnesota, tractors wobbling in
whirling winds, and in the New York evening news, heartbreaking pictures of
half frozen street people and the police deciding to skip their daily chore of
prodding the homeless out of Grand Central Station.

But now there's another even grimmer staple of the nightly weather news:
pictures of the first American soldiers arriving in Bosnia in driving snow
bundled up the eyebrows, just as if many of them must think they are back home
in Iowa, Nebraska, Montana or anywhere across the prairie and the roaring
winds. Pictures that quietly reinforce the warning, which the president
mentioned in his speech to the nation two weeks ago, that while the troops were
not to expect or look for an enemy, one sure enemy during their mission would
be the Bosnian winter.

The other hazard that has had the military planners awake at night for many
moons is the invisible land mine. They've conservatively calculated that over
the whole terrain the Nato troops will have to patrol, there could be closer to
three million mines than two. This is a hazard of war that has been there since
the end of the First World War, though it's rarely brought up.

I remember reading – and saying to myself, fancy that! – a passage in General
Eisenhower's memoir of the Second War in which he was discussing with his
opposite chieftain, the Russian Marshal Zhukov, the various techniques of
attacking through mine fields. Eisenhower went on about the ingenious technical
devices, mostly invented by the British, and I suppose, casually threw in that
if the order for attack was urgent and the pathway narrow, it was the allied
custom to let packs of dogs go first.

"A new marshal, Marshal Zhukov gave me," wrote the general "a matter of fact
statement, quote: 'When we come to a mine field, our infantry attacks exactly
as if the mine field were not there. The losses we get from personnel mines we
consider only equal to those we would have suffered from machine guns and
artillery if the Germans had chosen to defend that field.'" Eisenhower's only
comment: "I had a vivid picture of what would happen to any American or British
commander and an even more vivid picture of what the men in our divisions would
have said about the matter if the allies had followed this normal Russian
practice".

Do you remember the television series that John Hawkesworth – the brainwave
behind Upstairs Downstairs – the series he made out of a little red book by the
late Major A.B. Hartley entitled, Danger UXB, a phrase, which after the autumn
of 1940, Britons in and near London, came to know and to dread. Way back in the
First War, the Germans had used delayed action bombs. In the Second War they
improved on then.

In 1940 the bomb detachment squad, usually small detachments of the Royal
Engineers, at first dealt with unexploded bombs. They could neutralise by
unscrewing the locking ring and sliding out the fuse. Then the Nazis invented a
bomb on which the very act of defusing, triggered a spring designator and
eventually a bomb especially designed to dispose of the man who was clever
enough to learn the trick of disarming it. It was a murderous speciality. The
life expectancy of a bomb disposal officer was 10 weeks. The military
historians have not paid excessive attention to the men who had to defuse these
bombs, but when the war was over Churchill made up for this omission by
writing. Some very few survived the ordeal of their training, others ran 20
even 30 courses before they met their fate. In writing about our hard times, we
are apt to overuse the word 'grim'. It should have been reserved for the UXB
disposal squads.

This preoccupation with land mine disasters is, I ought to say, not at the
forefront of any minds I've read, except in the Pentagon. In the House and the
Senate I heard lots of threats and warnings about the risks of being a soldier
or, as every single speaker put it, putting our men in harm's way – usually
spoken angrily by congressman absolutely against the president's decision to
send 20,000 American men and women into Bosnia.

In the last week or two, people have written to me to ask about a puzzle, which
is implicit in two seemingly contradictory facts: one, that the president has
the constitutional authority, he says, to recruit and deploy troops, but
Congress has the sole constitutional right to declare a war.

On Wednesday, all through the day and into the night, both houses were going on
at it with seriousness and intelligence, much eloquence and, I'm happy to say,
by comparison with some other legislative bodies I can think off, it had the
sight and sound of a true debate: much eloquence, some passion but no berating
of opponents, no applause, no boos, no mocking laughter. The puzzle, the bit
about the president's constitutional authority, well the questioners are quite
right it is a puzzle. The Constitution says plainly that the president shall be
commander in chief of the army and navy of the United States and of the
militias of the several states, which don't exist anymore. That's as far as the
Constitution goes in sanctioning any act of a president to mobilise troops for
action anywhere. On the other hand, the Constitution is very specific about the
powers of Congress that affect the military. The Congress shall have the power
to declare war, to raise and support armies, to provide and maintain a navy, to
make rules for the government and regulation of the land, the naval forces.

No doubt in the meetings at the White House recently in which congressional
leaders were briefed, no doubt some hot young congressman read out these
particular powers of the Congress, to which the president could truthfully
reply that he is not pre-empting the Congress's right to declare a war, he's
raising something the Constitution never thought of: a peacekeeping force. What
I'm sure he didn't say, but what everybody knows, is that the Congress's right
as the sole body that can declare war, has been so flagrantly flouted in the –
past wait for it – 54 years that the last time the Congress declared war was on
the 11th of December 1941 against Italy. Since then, every president, no matter
which party, has raised troops, sent them into action – defensive peacekeeping
of course. The last big defensive act was done by half a million Americans
defending the rulers of Kuwait and putting them back on the throne and quite
sensibly protecting the Middle Eastern oil wells.

The declaration of war clause was written in an age when nations tossed
ultimatums at each other and then declared war and then ordered the attack at
dawn. Somehow, and nobody has ever satisfactorily explained to me, the
president, all the presidents for 50 years have been able to duck the
Constitution and raise a force to send overseas, and bypass the Congress with
the assertion, unproved, that he had a constitutional right unspecified to
raise armies provided he doesn't swipe Congress's right to declare war.

So on Wednesday, from morn to midnight both houses debated and voted on several
resolutions. One, easily defeated in the Senate, condemned and opposed sending
any troops to Bosnia, another in the House tried to uphold its right not to pay
for the troops, defeated. In the end, both Houses passed very wobbly
resolutions backing the mission.

The Senate on the cagey initiative of Senator Dole, the leading Republican
candidate for president, insisted on putting in a phrase committing the
president to equalise the opposing forces in Bosnia, by training and rearming
the Bosnian Muslims, a condition which many in both houses and throughout the
country, felt was fatal to the preservation of America's new charity, a
condition not allowed in the peace treaty and one likely to fire the Serbs with
the contention that the treaty has been violated and the war could start up
again.

But now the treaty is signed, the troops of 29 nations are on their way and the
president has told his men and women that they're not soldiers, they're not
policeman, they're not nation builders they are running interference between
two warring sides. They are a cooling-off force but must be ready to respond to
an attack with all the fire power that they command. In other words, among the
Americans, there are going to be some very edgy troops, off on a precarious
mission, which could crown or shatter Mr Clinton's presidency.

The last picture I saw of the embarking troops sounded a very bizarre, very
1995 note. A good looking young woman in combat uniform was hoisting her pack
on her shoulder and waving as she climbed aboard the plane. How did she feel
about it? The standard fatuous question of all television interviewers facing
usually, the mother of a dead baby. "Well," she said. "It's our job but it's a
little tough I just got married and I hate to leave my daughter".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP