Bush's 1989 speech at the United Nations - 29 September 1989

It used to be that when the President of the United States came to New York for
a dinner, a speech, you read about it next morning in the paper.

Nowadays there are, I should guess, countless thousands of New Yorkers and
suburban New Yorkers who are warned, in print or on the box, of his coming next
morning and make a point that day of avoiding at all costs midtown New York on
the east side.

Last Monday, I was coming in from Long Island on a bus which normally does the
100-mile trip in a little over two hours. It enters the city through the Queens
Tunnel that goes under the East River, emerges to drive up Third Avenue and
deposits passengers at six spaced stops before ending the run at 79th Street.

On Monday we were on time through the Queens Tunnel but when we emerged we saw
ahead of us a wall of trucks and cars, and looking downtown and uptown, jammed
traffic as far as the eye could see. Since it was one of those brilliant,
bone-dry days of early fall, you could see clearly about three or four miles.

We sat there with the engine throbbing and chugging and, 25 minutes later, we
had moved half a block and turned on to Third Avenue. Ahead was what gloomy cab
drivers are always promising as New York's Doomsday gridlock.

At that point the driver said, "I'm sorry but we're going to have to ask all of
you to get out at 42nd Street. Because of the traffic, we can't go any further
uptown. We apologise, we have never done this before".

"What's going on here?" asked a middle-aged lady holding on to a suitcase and a
bundle. A lean old man said simply, "the president". "Oh my God", she said.

The president had come to the United Nations. A quick overnight trip, the same
thing – Mr Reagan's trip last year – cost the city something like, it was
calculated, $2 million for the extra battalions of police, radio police cars at
100-yard intervals along the 20-mile run to the airport, cost of delayed
deliveries to trucking companies, work hours lost during the shutting down of
office blocks within a mile or more of the United Nations and of the Park
Avenue Hotel, where the president's large delegation was housed.

Security is the name of the expensive game. And there is surely no sign that it
is ever going to be relaxed. Of course you all heard what President Bush had to
say in his first speech as president to the General Assembly.

His main theme was chemical warfare and he said it was time "to rid the earth
of this scourge", just as he said a month ago, "It was time to rid this country
of this scourge" – that scourge being the invasion of drugs.

The military and some conservative supporters had advised the president not to
propose now, or in the near future, a treaty banning poison gas. But while he
turned them down, he satisfied the less dogmatic of them by proposing that both
the United States and the Soviet Union should agree to cut their arsenals of
chemical weapons and then move on to a treaty that would ban all poison gas.

While ordinary people like us on the outside may think it's a simple pledge to
take, the whole chemical weapons issue – while not as complex as the nuclear
weapons issue – is complicated enough. One nasty complication, which does not
come out much in the speeches of the superpower leaders, is actually the main
anxiety that lies at the back of their minds, which is not the chemical
arsenals of the Soviet Union and the United States, but of many other
countries, including dictatorial regimes in the Middle East which are well
supplied by manufacturers in the west.

In the same way, we've become so joyful over the warming relations between M.
Gorbachev and Mr Bush, so relieved to think that the Cold War is ending or
ended, and, therefore, so comforted by the vanishing prospect of a big war that
we – and "we" means also our leaders when they talk about arms control in
public – we forget, or like to forget, that eight or nine countries now have
what is technically called a nuclear capability, which means if they don't have
the weapons out there on show, or within guarded compounds, they could assemble
them almost any time.

However, intelligence precautions being what they are among the great or the
big powers, we're not likely to know soon how many small countries have the
scientists and, like Hamlet, have the means, and will, and strength to do it.

I'm thinking of the countries in or around the Middle East which remember what
Israel did to Iraq's nuclear reactor. This memory is quietly cherished by
American policymakers and it explains, I think, why, through all the changes
and audacities in Israeli policy, the United States will go on seeing Israel as
its chief defensive ally in that part of the world.

From time to time, American experts on television panel talk shows remind us of
the sleeping menace of nuclear weapons in the hands of nations that were not in
the nuclear club 25 or even 10 years ago.

But it is not a theme that presidents and general secretaries like to harp on,
since it could plant in us a mood of gloom where now there is steady rejoicing,
a mood that contributes to the health of the world's economies, the reassurance
that has sprung up from the greatly-improved relations between America and the
Soviet Union. A change started, we shouldn't forget, by Mr Reagan.

This reassurance must be at the core of Mr Bush's extraordinary popularity. The
first thing that visitors to this country still ask is "How is President Bush
doing?" And this was not a question difficult to answer during his honeymoon.

A presidential honeymoon, since Franklin Roosevelt took his cue from Napoleon's
calendar, has been 100 days, when criticism is suspended, goodwill is
vouchsafed. "Give the man time!" is the generous slogan. But after that people
tend to say, "So what has he done?" And inevitably, "What has he done for me?"

Well, the most marked characteristic of Mr Bush's presidency so far is cheerful
caution, prudence. The general trust in him has been reinforced by his
extraordinary demeanour, his day-to-day image, if you like. I say
"extraordinary" because it's something vivid and attractive that we never
expected.

Throughout his campaign, he had to fight a lot of derision about the image he
presented of an upper-crust, eastern prep school, Yale, country club secretary
which, for two generations or more, has always been said to be fatal to
presidential ambitions in the rough-and-tumble of national politics, a nation
in which, 30 years ago, money and political influence moved away from Wall
Street and the eastern establishment, to the south-west, to Barry Goldwater and
Reagan, and the new, prospering western establishment.

The character that Mr Bush played out, or seemed to represent during the early
part of his campaign, was confidently ridiculed by his presidential opponents.
He was a wimp. He tried to smother this image by decking himself out in leather
jackets and driving trucks and wallowing in the good earth of Midwestern
farmers and saying, "Hi fella!"

His advisors, his television advisors in particular, warned him that enough of
this was enough. They decided he must overcome this risible character by doing
what Franklin Roosevelt did even more in his early days, afflicted by the image
of a Harvard country squire condescending to be nice to us. Be bold! Be mean!
Be downright!

I should say at once that the comparison with Roosevelt is wobbly. Roosevelt
had, under the lordly manner, a will of steel and the stubbornness of a bull.
We didn't know this until he got in the White House at a perilous time when one
American family in three or four had nothing coming in.

Prudence was never a Roosevelt gift – the pit of the Depression called for
extraordinary, dramatic, improvised policies. And Roosevelt, to the delight and
astonishment of the country, responded, even his first day, saying he might
have to take hold and do things beyond what was allowed by the Constitution.

A frightened Congress applauded him to the echo and gave him emergency powers
that he revelled in and such as no president has had since. Mr Bush, on the
other hand, had to fake boldness and meanness, at the expense of poor Governor
Dukakis. Remember him?

And he thus revealed a streak which, for the time being, blanketed the wimp in
him and, indeed, got him elected. But then, once in the White House, it was too
late to turn him out. He took the risk – one of the few risks he has taken – of
reverting to his natural type, of being himself again.

Reagan's jodhpurs and bucking broncos were replaced by slacks and a blue
blazer. He moved easily about his Maine town, at small rallies and outdoor
picnics, Naval Academy graduations, whatever. And was, once again, the
easy-going preppy we used to know, always cheerful, friendly, offhand.

The country likes it because this natural manner translates into policy as not
alarming us, not threatening us with evil empires or an imminent decline in
military strength. He faces the country's chronic problems, drugs, housing,
day-care, Poland, Nato, with a crinkled forehead and genuine concern.

He listens well to all sides and tells us he's doing his best. He is canny,
cagey. He's not going out on a limb. And this character seems to suit the
country. Even his critics say that he, like Gilbert's House of Lords,
"throughout the war did nothing in particular and did it very well".

Whatever the explanation, today President Bush, with 69% all for him, is more
popular at this stage of his presidency, than Reagan 53%, Nixon 60%, Carter 59%
or Ford... dear me, 39%.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP