Racial tensions in New York - 14 May 1993

Last Wednesday, a friend of mine looking suddenly at his watch at the end of an
early lunch said, "My God, it's 1.30, I better get back to my office before 2
o'clock". "And stay there," I said, "till 9." "That's right," he said.

The point is that from 2pm to 9 ,we'd been warned by the police that mid- and
downtown traffic in Manhattan on the East Side would be tied up in what we now
routinely describe as gridlock. I had no cause for panic because I was going
uptown, I was going home. And I live in a part of a town, which to fashionable
people is way uptown beyond the pale, in fact at the very pale itself.

In the 90s, during the scary nights of the 1960s, the howl of a siren can just
as well have signified a Harlem riot as an emergency patient being hurtled off
to the hospital two blocks north of me. Certainly during the tumultuous year of
1968, our street, 96th Street between Madison and 5th was locally known as the
Barricade, the rampart between the uptown white world and the black and Spanish
world beyond.

1968 was the heyday of the more free-wheeling black activists and their bawling
hippy allies. And even taking the dog for a night-time walk, I mean two blocks
to Park Avenue, could be a hazardous undertaking, a warning I thought
ridiculous until I ran into a covey of wandering young blacks who were quite
unmoved by the brave little barks of my poodle. It was a race for our apartment
house and it we made it just as the doorman stood ready to slam the front door
behind us.

Well, it would be unwise, a very foolish boast to say that times have changed
in the sense of declaring that no such thing could happen again, it might
happen tomorrow night. The day after the shattering riots in Los Angeles a year
ago, the working population of New York feared a general rampage of poor blacks
with a grievance and rowdies of any colour battening on that grievance, so much
so that by the shank of the afternoon, taxi drivers in midtown were switching
on their off-duty signs refusing all fares and beating it home, but today we
don't feel quite the same apprehension.

There have been in the past year, ugly riots between fairly well defined mobs.
One atrocious brutal attack on city Jews after one of them had accidentally run
over a black boy. We never noted which ethnic group usually of fairly recently
immigrants will feel oppressed and breakout into a noisy or a bloody expression
of it, but I believed that in the past few years we've seen a great deal of the
sheer physical and economic waste that even a small riot can cause. And more
important, there is a great variety of comparative newcomers who think and act
as separate embattled groups. We don't have, as we once had, a single victim –
the Irish, say – that we can beat up on and one that genteel people can rebuff
with absolute confidence that the victim wasn't going to talk back let alone
pull a knife, so today we we go our ways, we try not to insult anyone and we
stay wary.

We can no longer chant that proud sentence. I must surely have recited to you
in a very early talk, a sentence from a charming essay about New York written
by the late E B White, oh my, 40 years ago. The great thing about New York, he
wrote, is not the battle of the racists but the truce they observe no more, not
really much more dependable than the truces in Bosnia.

Well, along the way you may have wondered what my luncheon friend was running
away from? My friend was not running from any threat of a riot, he was running
from the president of the United States. That's right; President Clinton came
to New York on Wednesday to make a speech to the New York City fathers and a
posse of business leaders. Now it doesn't matter who the president is, a sudden
day-long visit from him costs the city at least a quarter of a million dollars
in diverted and therefore jammed traffic, beefed-up security, police cars along
his 20-mile route from the airport to his hotel, the auditorium, the luncheon
club or whatever and back to the airport.

The puzzling item here maybe the cost of traffic jams that's one of those nasty
bills that can never be figured on, but comes in later. Namely, the late
deliveries of merchandise, the alarmingly extra cost of petrol for all the
diverted cars, trucks and vans. Of course that's something which if you don't
have an exact record you can be fairly imaginative about.

I once not so long ago, asked the mayor, the then mayor of New York why he
didn't do for New York what they'd done in Rome. What was that? All commercial
traffic, that's to say all deliveries between sunset and dawn. He thought for a
while and said, "Well, it wouldn't be a bad first step toward bankrupting the
city." How so? First, you'd have a ruinous bill from the unions, their drivers
and delivery men would automatically go on double time, maybe golden time on
Saturday and Sunday nights, we'd have to double night-time police protection,
pretty soon you'd have deafening squawks from the thousands of firms that have
always done their trucking by day think what it would mean to their whole
employment rota and their payroll, the re-jigging across the continent of the
teamster's long-distance schedules, not to mention new night-time staffs for
the shops, the stores and the warehouses at the receiving end and think of all
the uproar from all the wives and families who couldn't sleep at night, the
thousands of lawsuits emotional distress and so on. "My friend, it's a
beautiful pipe dream. By the way, I didn't hear about this in Rome, when did
they do it?" "Oh, about 65, 70 BC," I said. The Mayor sighed, "Yeah," he said,
"in those days you did get an awful lot done with non-union labour."

Well, it's certainly a wonderful example of the difference between an ideal and
the reality of expressing it in government.

Well, what was so special about the president's coming here? It was part of a
campaign, he announced a week or more ago in response to two general criticisms
that have lately been epidemic that either he's taken on too many themes/
policies he hasn't had time to work out in detail or that he's dithered and
dallied on Bosnia so as to give aid and comfort to possible enemies.

Certainly, it's been said by some foreign affairs experts, given great comfort
to tyrants everywhere who might be tempted to bite off a country, a province, a
tribe they've long lusted after. In the fairly secure knowledge that it's not
commander in chief Bush in the White House, but a man who works himself into
exhaustion, which he does, figuring and debating every proposed move in Bosnia
from total invasion to nothing at all and then spends the next week or two
calculating all the conceivable outcomes. The president speaking to the press
last week sensibly parried these two charges, in general terms, he admitted
that his administration was out of focus. What does that mean? I don't know,
it's a current buzzword and like all buzzwords it fills in a blank while you're
trying to work out what you mean.

By the way, have you noticed that no politician today distinguishes between a
suggestion, a proposal, a policy; everything is an agenda, whether or not it's
on the agenda. We don't get down to making peace; we hope to proceed with the
peacemaking process. In the Kennedy administration, they never formed a
committee, they appointed task forces and they decided nothing, they described
their wrangles, discussions, arguments – however fine, however crude – as the
decision-making process.

I do believe that the Vietnam War was lost in a swamp of jargon, which buried
some huge simple and un-faceable facts such as that we were losing. The main
function of this political and especially military jargon is not to prettify
the language but to prettify unpleasant or ugly truths. Thus in the war of
Desert Storm, it was possible every morning to catch a mention in print or on
the telly perhaps from the briefing room in Riyadh of something called
"collateral damage". When I first heard this, I felt no emotion at all probably
the misfortune of aiming at Saddam Hussein's headquarters and hitting the end
of a schoolhouse, it doesn't mean that at all. "Collateral damage" means
blowing women and children apart.

So and back to the harmless but still fuzzy explanation of President Clinton's
administration and what he means to do about it, he's going to focus it. I
think this means either that he's going to set aside for the time being the
blueprints of policies that are still rather bleary and sharpen his eyes and
intelligence on, for instance, the prime promise of his campaign reducing the
deficit or, he hints, maybe for sometime he'll have two policies to expound
reducing the deficit and the result of Mrs Clinton's hard labour in working out
a national health plan.

Having said so much, the president gave us his "Gee folks I'm sorry" little boy
smile, his frank admission followed. He has been out of touch with the country
or as he put it, "It's been too long since I've been out there" – that means
the United States – and recalls if I may say so a point I made in the first
talk I did after Mr Clinton moved into the White House, namely the danger in
acquiring the habits of life in the White House and becoming a monarch isolated
from the people by an attentive and fawning court. Mr Clinton must be aware of
this and to that extent, his impulse to start travelling the country is a good
impulse, just so long as he's not actually giving in to a routine and exercise
of performance he loves and is good at, which is renewing the experience of
campaigning for the presidency, to be bold and eloquent and earn everywhere you
go vast and thundering applause. Campaigning is great and rousing fun, it is
not governing and what Mr Clinton has to begin is to govern.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP