President Bush and the 1990 national budget - 19 October 1990

All the western countries, all the democracies, certainly also all the
dictatorships of the right, have in the past year come to agree on something
that during the past 70 years has been hotly disputed around the globe. Namely
that Communism is a failure as a system of government.

Among the world's leaders, apart from Mr Castro, I suppose only Mr Gorbachev
cannot say so out loud. If only to avoid a massive revolt of the bureaucracies
in the Soviet countries, Mr Gorbachev has still to go on pretending and,
perhaps, meaning that what failed was the form of Communism they'd been
practising. Too doctrinaire, too rigid, too unwilling to mix in what was good
about a market system.

We know that at least two of the European countries have come right out and
abolished the party and the name. Surely it's something for any politician, any
clergyman, any one of us, to confess suddenly that the principles you've
believed in since childhood, and on which you've tried to conduct your life,
are false.

Imagine a whole nation doing this, and then finding itself wondering how you go
about inventing a whole new system which will affect the way of life, the ways
of work, of everybody from the president of the republic to the corner grocer.

Even to sense the bewilderment that millions of Soviet citizens must be
feeling, you have to imagine that from next Monday on, your parliament, if you
live under a parliamentary system, your parliament will be abolished. No more
House of Commons, House of Lords. All the parliamentary seats throughout the
country wiped out. In their place, what?

Very few of us, very few, I think, of the people hearing this talk live in a
country which invented an entirely new system. Americans do, but they too,
today, have to imagine the similar bewilderment of the men from the thirteen
colonies who 200 years ago met in Philadelphia, after seven years of a form of
self-government, a federation that had been a disastrous failure.

They sat down to invent a nation, and they did so. After many weeks of
reviewing and debating the going systems, and they came up in the end with a
republic and a written constitution which prescribes in detail, to this day,
the powers and performance of every branch of government and then enumerates
the liberties of the people that must be preserved.

Now, for the first time, in my time, serious voices are being raised in the
Congress, in the serious press, saying that the system – the system, anyway, as
it applies to the balance of powers between President and Congress, is
unworkable. Now this is truly new.

Also, we hear from time to time from quite serious students of government
regretting the creakiness of the federal system and wishing we had a
parliamentary system. The former Senator Fulbright, for one, used to yearn for
a parliamentary system.

But it was more wishing than seriously proposing abolishing the Constitution
and starting all over. Nobody's suggesting that now, but what is new is the
number of members of the Senate and the House who are saying that that part of
the Constitution that prescribes the rules, the methods of running the country
financially – I mean who can impose taxes and raise armies, and who can veto
the Congress's plans, the president, that's who – that all this should be
changed.

Why now? Because this year has seen, in an acute form, a damaging repeat
performance of a chronic annual farce. The business of getting the president,
the Senate and the House to agree on a national budget.

I talked – was it a week ago? – about the tiresome, dependable absurdity of the
Congress squabbling and arguing for months on end about who shall pay for what
and who shall take a cut? Debating through the nights up to and beyond 1
October which is the day when an old budget dies and the new one comes into
being. So, as I said, they failed twice. Two different deadlines and the
president, with furious reluctance, had to sign two emergency bills to pay the
wages of all the government's employees. And now a third deadline is coming up.

During this grotesque, unending conflict, many men and women in the House and
the Senate must have dreamed, in the few hours they had free, of that scene in
the House of Commons every year, when the prime minister's budget director, as
he'd be called here – the Chancellor of the Exchequer – presents the
administration's – in effect the prime minister's – budget.

And the papers next morning say "2p on beer, 2% on value added, 3p on tobacco".
How sublimely simple! Of course there'll be a debate but it won't, will it, go
on for three, four months, at the end of which time the House has torn the
Prime Minister's budget apart, written its own, sent it to the House of Lords.

They don't like it, start all over again, new House bill, PM won't accept it
and the government shuts down for lack of money to run all its departments,
from the foreign office to the man who polishes up the knocker on the big front
door of 10 Downing Street.

The big, crude difference is that in a parliamentary country, a party comes
into power, presents its programme, including the budget, puts it into law,
maybe after a nasty, short debate and says, in effect, "If you don't like it,
win the next election and you have a go!"

In this country, the Constitution dictates that not the president, not the
Senate, but all bills for raising revenue shall originate in the House of
Representatives, but the Senate may propose or concur with amendments, as with
other bills. Nothing about the President.

So no budget that's going to be enacted can be passed without the approval of
the House. It is, in the beginning and usually in the end, responsible for all
money bills, whether for a petrol tax or a tariff, income tax, payment for old
people in hospitals, or the money for sending 145,000 American troops to the
Persian Gulf.

In practice, the president, in the spring, works out his budget, what he would
like and unfortunately the press, the media around the world go into flaming
headlines, "Reagan will double defence budget". "Bush refuses to soak the
rich".

But these are only what he wants. And because the majority of the voters put
him in the White House, presumably he represents what they want. So, it's true
– no other single person has his powers of persuasion. And, again, the
Constitution was terrified of giving too much power to either the president or
the Congress. The president can veto a budget he doesn't like. But he'd better
not be too cavalier about using it, especially Mr Bush, who faces a Democratic
majority in the Senate and a huge Democratic majority in the House. And his
veto can be overridden by a two-thirds majority vote in both Houses.

Now, this year, there's another large snag that hampers the House, or rather
tempts it to act not primarily in the national interest. This is an election
year. Not of course presidential, but one third of the Senate's 100 seats are
up for election and all 435 seats in the House.

Now, a member of the House, a congressman or woman, is elected for only two
years and, by the time he's elected in November, the budget for the following
year is already in place.

So the only budget he has anything to say about is the one that's in force in
the year he's running for reelection. Therefore it's the only time he has a
chance of proving to the folks back home that he's done something for them –
not for the country at large.

The constituency of a congressman is not, like that of a senator, the whole
state, it is a small, dense, very local constituency. And, for him, the
immortal line, "What have you done for me lately?" doesn't mean did you vote
for the F-28 bomber or aid to Eastern Europe.

It means, how about that subsidy you promised for our sugar beet crop? Or, that
new bridge over the river, or, in all the towns close by army camps, why did
you let the secretary of defence close it down and put 2,000 of your civilian
constituents out of work? Fine congressman you are!! I'll remember you, come
November!

Well, to draw the stark moral, a congressman in election year is under brutal
pressure not to save money but to spend it. And in a year, this year, when the
country is finally alarmed about the deficit and furious at the way the House
and the Senate and the president go on swearing to cut 50 billions and seem
totally impotent to do so.

So, the big hassle in the House has been over, "Let's cut the spending all
across the board but not in my district!" That really is the impulse that
stalls the engine of government today. Why did the framers of the Constitution
give such decisive power to the House in all money matters in what, in every
form of government, is at the heart of it, the budget?

Well, the men of Philadelphia were driven by one fear more than another. After
their recent experience with an all-powerful king whose troops had acted as an
occupying army in American trouble spots, they were determined, first, not to
have a chief executive, whether he was a king, a president, a prime minister
who could command the money to raise armies. Or, who could lay and collect
taxes, duties, imports and excises, provide for the common defence and general
welfare of the United States. And if that sounds like a quotation, it is. Those
are the powers specified in the Constitution as belonging exclusively to the
House.

You could say that the most powerful man in either the House or the Senate is
whoever happens to be chairman of the House appropriations committee. He,
alone, can accept or reject a money bill, or freeze it in his committee.

The chairman of the House appropriations committee about 15, 20 years ago was a
man from Arkansas named Wilbur Mills. And one year, he decided to run for the
presidency.

His candidacy didn't last long but shortly after he'd announced, a friend
called him up and moaned over the telephone, "Wilbur, Wilbur! Why do you want
to give up all that power just to be President of the United States?"

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP