Operation Eagle Claw - 25 April 1980

Since time began, every general has known that if a daring military adventure
succeeds, it's brilliant, and if it fails, it’s an outrage. President Carter is
going to have to live for some time with this bitter knowledge.

Three times in his melancholy broadcast apology, he said that the
responsibility was his alone. I made the decision to attempt it, I made the
decision to cancel it. At what must have been the bleakest moment of his
presidency, he heard in the middle of Thursday night, that through equipment
failure, the adventure had misfired.

And then, having cancelled it, hearing the worst news – that two aeroplanes,
turning back to base, had collided on the ground with the loss of eight men.

The first word of this fiasco, conceived, he assured us, as a humanitarian
mission, not directed at Iran or the Iranian people, must have alarmed him as
soon as it sickened him. And he was up at dawn and requesting time from all the
television and radio networks, in order to get on the air at seven in the
morning eastern time, six Chicago time, and 4am in California to get his
account of it to a sleepy people before they had time to hear, as Europe heard,
of the unexplained horror itself. In this accident of the time zones, he had,
at least, a smidgen of luck.

We must first ask ourselves what the president didn’t tell us – why he
conceived the plan, and why he decided to do it just at this difficult time
when the allies, rousing themselves to back his plan for economic sanctions
against Iran, were suddenly alarmed at the possibility of an immense upheaval
in the Middle East, and the chance of a Soviet-American war if the president
were to attempt any military move at all.

Now, in spite of the rumours that sifted out of a secret meeting in the White
House the, I think mischievous and exaggerated reports, of a dire split between
the president and his advisors about the wisdom of flexing a military muscle,
the president is not, and was not, uninformed about the charges of his
political opponents and the fears of the European allies.

Everybody in Washington knew what they amounted to – that Mr Carter was so
depressed by the slump in his national popularity, so provoked by the jibes at
his backing and filling on what to do about the hostages, that he was ready to
prove his machismo by a military action against Iran. Or that he is a man so
confused by a babble of competing advisors, that he doesn’t really know which
way to turn.

Or that he was so obsessed with winning the presidential campaign that he has
given little thought to the strong possibility of paralysing reprisals, such as
shutting off all oil to the west, which might follow on an American mining of
the Gulf. Or that he has only a dim understanding of European history and is
untouched by German analogies with 1914 and is deaf to the distant rumble of
the guns of August.

I still believe, that most of these fears and inferences to be quite wrong.
Every morning, shortly after six, he receives the overnight cables, which
include not only the latest word from Tehran and Saudi Arabia and Afghanistan,
and London and Tokyo and what the Chase national bank is doing to its prime
interest rate, but also digests of the foreign press, including what the editor
of Die Zeit has been writing and what the deputy editor of Le Monde.

Well, for now, and maybe for some time to come, we can only guess at what was
on his mind, when he gave the signal for the rescue operation to begin.

Two things occur to me. One is the recollection of President Kennedy’s
initiative in 1961 to sanction and mount an invasion of Cuba at the Bay of
Pigs. The adventure was a total disaster. But the public response to it
contradicts the maxim with which I began this talk – namely that a successful
act is daring as a triumph, and a failed one is remembered, as an outrage.

President Kennedy, too, openly admitted that the responsibility was his alone.
The result – his standing in the polls went soaring. The second thought is one
with which Mr Carter must have been thoroughly familiar. The evidence of a
reliable national poll, which showed that 55% of the American people were in
favour of a military action against Iran, and never mind a humanitarian mission
not directed at Iran or the Iranian people.

Now, whether one or both of these considerations were on his mind, he decided
to take the gamble. It’s bad for him that it failed. It could be worse for him
in a nation which prides itself on its technological know-how, and on its air
force's scrupulous respect for flying by the book, that it was doomed, because,
of equipment failure, and then, because of human error, in manoeuvring two
lonely planes in the desert.

I am talking in the aftershock of the misadventure, and while the Soviet
response could have been written beforehand, there is no telling just yet, what
the considered response will be of the three or four factions in Iran that seem
to be jostling for power.

What we can do is to speculate about the effect that this disaster is likely to
have on the presidential campaign in general, and on the Carter presidency in
particular. I see no sign at the moment that the president is going to reap the
peculiar gain in prestige that came so surprisingly to President Kennedy after
his abortive defiance of Fidel Castro.

For one thing, President Kennedy was in his first six months in the White
House, President Carter is there in an election year. If you can indulge your
patience for a while, let me take you back to last Wednesday morning, a day
that must seem to the president like an age away.

Imagine him getting up on that morning, taking his early breakfast, listening –
as is his wont – to a little Mozart, with which to rinse out his mind. It’s
natural to infer that he leapt with a whoop on the good news from Pennsylvania,
which showed him a dead heat with Senator Kennedy, for the precious hall of
delegates which that fourth most populous state has to offer. The promised
thrashing from Senator Kennedy had not taken place.

The good news for the rest of us – imagine, only a day or two ago – was that
the president could now relax in the knowledge that he was about two-thirds of
the way towards a certain nomination by his party, that Senator Kennedy, in
order to challenge him, was going to have to win 70% or more of the delegates
available in the remaining primaries. And that these are to be held in a
country – mostly south and west – which for Senator Kennedy is unfriendly
country.

So, we innocently assumed, the president could forget his campaigning
obsession, and attend to the perils of his foreign policy, here and now.

There was, however, and now there is more than ever, another threat to his
reelection which begins to wax as the omen of Senator Kennedy begins to wane.
And this threat is the name and presence of the white-thatched owlish little
liberal Republican from Illinois, Representative John Anderson.

After the last few Republican primaries, it became painfully clear to Mr
Anderson that he had no hope of battling Governor Reagan, or anybody else, for
the Republican nomination. His appeal has been to Democrats disillusioned with
Carter, to students inflamed by a new McGovern – a liberal ideologue to
independents who are thinking of voting for nobody, and to moderate Republicans
who see in Reagan a right-wing leader on a white charger with a sword in one
hand, and a nuclear bomb in the other.

These disenchanted ones make up a considerable body of the voters. The
independents alone claim to be just less than one-third of all the eligible
voters. And if they all saw in Mr Anderson the answer to a maiden's prayer, he
might, indeed, stop both Carter and Reagan in their tracks. But under which
party banner? He has decided under none.

I stress this because I keep reading in European papers, and hearing, I regret
to say, on the BBC, that Mr Anderson is going to run as a third party
candidate. He is not, the history of third party crusades in presidential
politics is a record of broken ideals.

A third party candidate, even one so popular and powerful as Theodore
Roosevelt, emerged not as a realistic choice for president, but as a spoiler
who managed to take enough votes away from his old party's regular nominee, to
throw the election to the opposition, which was what Roosevelt managed to do
for Woodrow Wilson.

So Mr Anderson is not, like a Follet or Henry Wallace, starting a progressive
party, or an American party, or a conservative party. He will run as an
independent. It’s very late for him to get on the ballot in some states, and
too late in others. And as a maverick outside a registered party, he is not
eligible for federal campaign funds. He will have to hope for a legion of
admirers ready to put down the maximum allowed contribution of $1,000.

He’s considered all this, and he appears to have yielded to the tempting
prospect of taking so many votes from Reagan and Carter, that neither of them
would have a majority of electoral votes to win. The tally of popular votes,
that is the totals of all the people who vote, is not in question.

It's possible – it happened with Wilson and Truman – that they got less than a
majority of the popular vote, but each of them got the majorities in states
that had, all together, a majority of electoral votes. So they went into the
White House, as what are known as minority presidents. But suppose that Mr
Anderson succeeded – and the Iranian rescue disaster quickens the possibility –
succeeded in leaving neither Carter nor Reagan, or whoever the Democratic and
Republican nominees are to be, with enough electoral votes, to establish a
clear majority. What happens then?

Under the Constitution, the election would then be decided in a vote of the
House of Representatives. This has happened once. In 1824 there were four
runners, none of them got anything like a majority of the electoral votes, and
the house voted to choose John Quincy Adams, who, in the election, had won
actually less than one-third of the electoral votes.

Mr Anderson had better start hoping that there will be one or two other
attractive men to run on other tickets, or like him, to run on no party ticket
at all. A day or two ago, I would have confidently said that Mr Anderson’s
candidacy was doomed at the start. After the disaster in the Iranian desert, I,
and a lot of other sceptics, are not so sure.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP