Day care and recreation - 5 August 1988

About five years ago a new newspaper appeared on the newsstands of our eastern
cities. It was yet another attempt in the wake of very many failures to create
a national American newspaper.

It was conspicuous from the start because its masthead – USA Today – was in
white blocked letters against a blue background and all its photographs were in
colour. All previous attempts have failed because of the obvious and
insuperable problem of distributing the same paper to the towns and cities of a
continent 3,000 miles wide and diagonally 3,800 across.

Of course for several years now the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal
have published, printed, separate eastern and western editions and they make
the most of the three-hour time differential and the word processor to get
their daily material from coast to coast, but the aim of USA Today was to be on
the stands every morning in every city in the entire country.

Nobody knowledgeable about the newspaper business, nobody I ever talk to, gave
it much of a chance. A man I know who’s been on the board of a newspaper chain
for many years thought that two years would see it in it grave. That’s because
this old man, like the rest of us, thought of a newspaper wiring or flying its
text from a central place where it was printed. We reckoned without the
invention of satellites.

All the new paper’s material, including news reports on one page from every
state in the Union, is assembled at a plant in Virginia. When the forms are set
up they are flashed to a satellite and the same paper appears early in the
morning in slot machines in a thousand streets from Alaska to Florida and
everywhere in between. It started with a run, I think, of about 200,000. Today
it has over five million readers and rising.

It has performed several small revolutions in the general idea of what should
go into a newspaper including, in the bottom corner of each of its four
sections – news, life, sports and money – statistical reports in the shape of a
graph, more often a pie cut up into sections, of just about every aspect of
American life and I must say that for me these little boxes help along what
ought to be one of the main duties of a foreign correspondent, namely
shattering or at least shaking our preconceptions.

I gave an example of this shock treatment some time ago when the little box on
the front page of the sports section divided the pie into percentage sections
of the sports that most interested Americans. The question the sample body had
to answer was very simple – "Which sport do you watch, play or read about?"

A day or two after this survey appeared I tested out several friends who are
not about to trade their regular newspaper for one that prints photographs –
ugh! – in colour. As you might expect, they gave a high percentage to the sport
that interested them. Some golfers I know who also take a lively interest in
one or two other sports agreed that baseball would be number one, basketball
possible two, football next and then golf. The truth was jolting.

Football at the top, then basketball, then baseball, then on through boxing,
wrestling, horse-racing, harness racing and down and down 'til we find about 7%
of the population ever plays or reads or watches on the telly, tennis. Below
tennis, at about 6%, was golf.

I found it almost criminal to believe and my golfing friends refused to believe
that 94% of the American population doesn’t play, doesn’t watch, doesn’t read
about, golf and has never heard of Sandy Lyle or Curtis Strange or Jack
Nicklaus, an appalling fact of life that I’m sure Lyle, Strange and Nicklaus
also refuse to believe.

The same with a study I recall about America’s spare-time recreation which
showed Americans paying to go to symphony concerts more often than they pay to
go to baseball games and so on, but there was a recent one which makes us
drastically revise our notions about the average American family and much else
in American life.

It revealed that only one family in ten in this country matches what a hundred
movies and a thousand television commercials tell us is the all-American
standard. Only one family in ten is a white family with a father who goes to
work and a mother caring for two children at home.

Combine this revelation with another – that over 50% of married couples with
young children have both husband and wife away at work – and you begin to see
why the most pressing daily issue of life in America to most of the young
middle-aged is day care for children.

The most astonishing thing about – let me put it this way – I don’t believe
there’s a political candidate in American running for national or state office
or the presidency who wouldn’t tell you today that of course in his campaigning
he’s talked about day care. So they have, just as they’ve talked about crime,
drugs, aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, farm subsidies, AIDS, money for defence
and so on.

Only the Reverend Jesse Jackson could fairly claim to have curdled the blood of
his audiences by hammering away at the need for small children to be cared for
by day, though he was always, or mostly, talking about fatherless, black or
Hispanic children. Yet only in the past week or two – actually since the
Democratic convention – have Mr Bush and Mr Dukakis started to bring up day
care as a vital issue because of late surveys suddenly showing that for a
majority of the young middle-aged voters – and they amount to something like a
third of the people most likely to vote – the problem of day care overrides
every other issue, foreign or domestic.

Day care. It sounds so grey, so abstract, so undramatic, unless – like the
Reverend Jesse Jackson – you appear in a slum tenement and point to a couple of
listless children in a corner wondering when Mum will be home. I think that the
sudden emergence of this issue into the ken of the presidential candidate
throws off, for the time being, their standing in the polls.

As I speak, and remember this is before the Republican convention, in the most
reliable national poll Mr Dukakis is 17 percentage points ahead of Mr Bush.
This has led to soul-searching and image polishing among Mr Bush’s campaign
team. They are the first people to confide to you, almost as a CIA secret, that
at this time of a presidential year no one of the two candidates has ever been
so far behind. The Democrats, as you can imagine, are cock-a-hoop about the
figures and a note of jaunty confidence is noticeable in Mr Dukakis.

I had lunch the other day with a Republican, a conservative intellectual, and
when I asked him off-handedly what he thought was going to happen he said, “I
think Dukakis is going to win”, but we are at the beginning of August.
Traditionally, it’s awful to realise the campaign has not begun. It used to be
that conventions happened in June, the Republicans first then the Democrats,
then the candidates went fishing until Labor Day. The first week in September
and they were off on the stump.

These days, these years, they start campaigning – about a dozen of them – two
years before the election and after 38 primaries have separated the two men
from the mice and after six months or so of merciless campaigning they pick
their men, go to the conventions and then start up again.

Two weeks from now, the Republicans will have left New Orleans and surely Mr
Bush and Mr Dukakis will get lost for two weeks. Then in September, in theory,
the campaign begins. Two months, with never a day’s pause. Don’t you think that
with all that exposure, night and day, between now and November weird and
unpredictable things are going too happen to the polls?

I still have the feeling that unless there’s a Wall Street crash or some other
similar disaster the Democrats are going to have a very rough time trying to
make the country fearful of its almost unprecedented prosperity. Recently Mr
Dukakis has faced the lowest unemployment rate in 17 years, the very low
inflation rate, the painful – for him – fact that more Americans are at work
than ever in proportion to the adult population and the best he can say is,
“It’s a fool’s paradise. It’s a house of cards,” he says “waiting to collapse”.

“What are you going to do,” he begs “next spring if things go bad?” At the
moment I can only say I have never heard of an election year, not in the 1880s,
in 1900 or 1908, 1920, '24, '28 or the 1950s when a prosperous America voted
out the party in power and yet some of the best, the most experienced old polls
in the Republican party are cutting through the issues and worrying about the
personality.

These days that means the television image of their man. As one top man on the
Bush team put it, “The big question is can our wimp beat their shrimp.”

Well back to that new, the first successful, national newspaper. One of its
innovations which many of the old established papers have started to copy,
though in a small way, is the whole back page devoted, in colour, to the
weather. Four-day forecasts and highs and lows in 110 cities, the top half of
the page dominated by a coloured map of the United States. It’s coloured
according to the temperatures of every region, from white, zero Fahrenheit, to
scarlet in the 90s and purple in the 100s.

For the past month it has been more often than not what I’m looking at today, a
vast squashed blob of scarlet with great smears in the south-west and the
mid-west of purple. The entire continent in the 90s and the 100s, except for a
tiny sliver of yellow along the coastline at San Francisco, a delicious high in
the 70s.

“What,” said my young Republican friend, a whipsnapper just turned 60, “what
did you do before air-conditioning?” I said, "We sweated and grumbled." We
didn’t think it was an outrage. It was like nappies to a baby. It was life.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP