Independence Day celebrations, 1986 - 4 July 1986

For me, it used to be an automatic annual chore pretending to be a duty, like
writing to your old aunt on her birthday. I mean the annual letter, done on or
close to the fourth, Independence Day.

I haven’t looked back to any of the ones I did in the '40s or '50s, I am a
well-known none keeper of files, but I can recall very easily the sort of thing
I talked about, not, I ought to say, not done mechanically or wearily.

July 4 was the most rousting, the cheeriest, of American festivals, and well on
into the 1950s and '60s the ways in which it was celebrated were predictable.
Or as we said, traditional, forgetting then that especially in a nation always
bringing in fugitives from other nations and many cultures, tradition is never
the same for long.

Before the first lot of Germans came in in the 1830s – the Lutheran merchants
and in exile scholars and liberals from the 1848 revolution – before them, I
don’t suppose the fourth was celebrated with wiener roasts for the hotdog was a
German contribution to America. But the clam bake by the seashore had been an
institution in New England since the English discovered clam beds and down in
New Orleans, Creole chicken gumbo was a standard party dish since first the
Spanish then the French had combined their cooking, and, mixing in the fish of
the Gulf, had produced a native cuisine which is still unique and indigenous to
Louisiana.

July the fourth was a time when anybody who could get away from the sweltering
cities did so, to the beach, to the mountains, to a lake, everybody went rural
for a day or two. And the fourth, since the United States had been a continent
of small towns and vast landscapes, the fourth was a particularly rural
occasion, small-town picnic vans, march-past of the veterans of the
Revolutionary War, the war of 1812. When I was first here, at the head of the
survivors of the '14-'18 war, there still were a few tottering veterans of the
civil war, then in their 90s, or approaching them.

Then there’d be a bawling patriotic speech – the man had to bawl to ride over
the fussing gossips, the frisking children, not to mention the men ambling
around, as they said, visiting, and of course there were lots of flags. The
speeches seem to have gone with the wind or turned into television
spectaculars, the flags are out on poles in front gardens or hanging from
bedroom windows and, since Ronald Reagan came in as you may have noticed, there
has been more flag-waving than ever.

And this year, the 100th year since France bequeathed to America the Statue of
Liberty, the fourth has turned into a combination jamboree, national circus and
trade fair.

The celebration of the famous statue, it was decided – and this, at least, was
predictable in the Reagan era – was not going to be a public celebration in the
sense of being paid for by the tax payer, it was turned over to what we have
come to call the private sector which, in this performance anyway, is about as
private as a world’s fair.

The best thing about it is the passage of the tall ships from many nations
which the whole country could see on television. For the rest, as you have
heard, there were cannonades of gunfire, cascades of fireworks, a parade of
women who claim to look like Miss Liberty, which is a formidable claim. Two
hundred Elvis Presley lookalikes – why? – and a lovingly frantic acquisition of
a couple of billion dollars in sales, to the untaxed tax payer, of miniatures
of the Statue of Liberty in the form of medals, ice cream cones, paperweights,
goose liver, earrings, pizzas, styrofoam and her image, printed on T-shirts,
balloons, footballs, menus, bank notes, and on and on.

Before I recoil, as millions of Americans are recoiling, from what one magazine
calls the most revolting display of glitz in this country’s history, I have to
remind myself that as a boy I saw, without emotion because it was there and
therefore normal, the likeness of the royal family on cushions, chocolate
boxes, tea caddies, the lot.

I do recall though, without much pleasure, my first visit to Athens, when I
went by night treading reverently up the steps of the Parthenon and finding, at
the foot of the steps, scores of tatty little stalls whose owners were shouting
out their wares like bookies before the great race. Their wares were even
tattier reproductions of the Parthenon in tin, plastic, wood, cardboard, nylon,
in hats, caps, shirts, skirts, bottles.

Well, I will shake off this old fogeysm and say that since the invention of
advertising the pervading of national symbols as a marketing device was bound
to happen. And, come to think of it, in all the cities of Christendom, there
must be millions of young people – maybe several generations by now – who,
confronted every December with blazing electronic trees, and bursting
department stores, must have only the haziest notion of what Christmas is meant
to be about.

The time is coming when the word will require a little historical footnote,
like the word "cynic", to explain that it originally referred to a peculiar
cult. Well, as they say in this town, this too will pass.

At the peak of this commercial hullabaloo a federal district judge – as such he
is among the second ranking judges of the land – announced that he was stepping
out of this spectacular and so, inevitably were 150 foreigners who were about
to acquire citizenship under his auspices.

You must have heard that on the great day, at Ellis Island, for so long the
gateway for the poor and oppressed, the chief justice of the United States,
Justice Burger, presided over a ceremony televised across the land, at which he
administered the oath of citizenship to thousands of the foreign-born, in
scores of big cities.

Now, Judge Gerhard Gesell of Washington DC said he would refuse to gather his
flock for this ceremony, he would conduct his own initiation ceremony, in his
own court because he had noticed the Ellis Island ceremony would be enclosed on
television by commercials. Judge Gazelle said it was in poor taste and he would
have none of it. He was followed by a federal judge in St Louis who felt the
same way, and then, last weekend, the federal judges of one whole city, or big
country, backed out for the same reason. And which city would you suppose would
that be? Proper Boston? Historic Philadelphia? No, sprawling, glitzy Los
Angeles, that's who, checked out of televising the national ceremony, which was
thereupon accepted, by cultured San Francisco.

Amid the soaring, trumpeting newspaper editorials about freedom and the huddled
masses struggling to be free, there was one that hit a more thoughtful note,
for the consumption of the Polish- American potato farmers and wine growers, at
our eastern end of Long Island. Not many people would see it because it was in
the lowly local paper, the Long Island Traveler-Mattituck Watchman.

Into a few paragraphs it tucked in these sensible thoughts, "July the fourth is
not the anniversary of American independence, it is the anniversary of
America’s declaration of independence. Our observance is for the celebration of
a hope, for the ambitions of colonial Americans, were not absolutely pure. They
were alloyed with much that was selfish, unjust, ignoble and worldly. But the
spiritual element persisted. It was the English who wrested from their
governing classes the essentials of freedom and from whom all the peoples now
aspiring to independence derive practical criteria and spiritual encouragement.
The fourth of July is a good day upon which to declare ourselves independent of
the invisible but powerful tyrannies of suspicion and fear, superstition and
prejudice, race, hatred and class bigotry. But, our patriotism is noblest when
it refuses to boast of the excellence of our institutions and achievements, and
turns to a serious enquiry into the ways and means of remedying defects in
American life."

Well, when the big show is all over and no later than next week, the
immigration service, and many big cities across the land, will have ample
opportunity to inquire into the ways and means of remedying, a raging problem
of American life that arises from the very idea, and the policy of regarding
America as a sanctuary for the poor and oppressed, and the masses, struggling
to be free.

What the Statue of Liberty celebrates is the millions who poured into this
country, first from northern and then from central and eastern Europe, into New
York, nine millions of them between 1900 and 1910. Last year, only 5% of the
immigrants came from Europe, 95% did not come into New York or Boston, they
came into Los Angeles from Vietnam, Korea, the Philippines, Cambodia. And they
came into the border towns of Texas, Arizona, Nevada, California, from Mexico
mostly. And they came into Miami, from Haiti and Colombia, and the Dominican
Republic.

Four millions, three million, nations of one sort or another came here in the
1970s, the 1980s expect six million more. By the year 2000 Anglos will be a
minority in California. The 50%-plus will be Asians and Mexicans and other
Hispanics.

In Florida there are so many tight-swarming compounds of Hispanics that already
a second generation speaks no English and the state is considering an amendment
to its own constitution to require all state business to be done in English.
And there is a powerful move in Congress from members of both parties, who
represent Florida and Texas, and California especially, to draft an amendment
to the federal, the American Constitution, to declare what is in many places no
longer taken for granted – that English is the first language of this nation.

A New York Times man in Los Angeles, which is where, I think, the Statue of
Liberty ought to be relocated, put the gist of the problem in a couple of
sentences, "As it celebrates the 100th birthday of the statue that stands as a
beacon of welcome to the oppressed, the nation is immersed in a great debate
over just how welcoming to be. The debate reflects a central contradiction of
America, a land that at once welcomes the downtrodden, if only because
sometimes their labour is needed, but often recoils from the cultural baggage
they bring with them."

This reporter, a man named Robert Reinhold, had just finished an enormous,
exhaustive survey of the state of immigration throughout the United States. And
at the end of his piece, he consoled himself on a philosophical note by
recalling the lament in 1847, one year before the United States collared, or
annexed, California. The lament of the last Mexican governor of California who
said, "We find ourselves suddenly threatened by hoards of Yankee immigrants
whose progress we cannot arrest."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP