Margaret Thatcher and travelling during Thanksgiving - 23 November 1990

On the eve of Thanksgiving, a very rare thing happened. On the front page of
the country's leading newspapers, certainly in the three papers that since
they're distributed from coast to coast, can claim to be national newspapers,
on their front pages, there was a news story, I ought to stress, a political
news story, datelined London.

So, is that odd, rare? Very. There was a time, when I first came here, and it
must have been true for many years before 1932, but let's say from the 1920s,
through the Second World War and perhaps through the 1950s, most days of the
week there'd be a London despatch on the American front pages, simply because
Britain was one of the two or three great powers.

Probably, to most influential Americans in politics, in finance, the one
country that you had to stay in touch with. A political decision in London
could affect not only the United States but sometimes the far corners of the
earth. Before the Second World War, remember, a quarter of that earth was
painted red on our maps. It marked the awesome extent of the still composed,
stable British empire.

And just as now, all the world listens to a serious political decision by
President Bush or Mr Gorbachev, so in the 1930s, any new move by Mr Anthony
Eden would be on our front pages next morning.

Now, in any given week, you can be sure, if there are foreign stories on the
front pages, they'll almost certainly be from Moscow, Bonn, possibly Paris,
possibly Tokyo. But last Wednesday, first column, front page, the Wall Street
Journal, "How Britain's Thatcher got in serious trouble with her own party".

United Europe is the big issue. The New York Times, "Thatcher unable to
eliminate foe. Run off is set next week". Flanking the despatch, which runs on
and on, on an inside page are two photographs, one of Mrs Thatcher, the other
of Mr Heseltine. The Wall Street Journal has almost a page devoted to the
history of her administration.

This rare event, a story about British politics, explored at great and
knowledgeable length, after a front page lead, is more than anything a tribute
to Mrs Thatcher as one of the few first-rate European political leaders to
emerge since the Second War, never mind how you feel about her or her policies.

The earliest and best of Ronald Reagan's biographers wrote about him, "he has
changed once for all, the nature of the political discourse". And, in the same
way, whether you worship or detest Mr Reagan, there's no question that his
political philosophy and his doggedness in carrying it out, reversed 50 years
of America's automatic dependence, in all serious matters of public need,
public service, dependence on the federal government.

That sentence of the Reagan biographer is even truer, I think, of Mrs Thatcher
because the United States never had so extreme a choice as that between a
Conservative and a socialist government. She too, changed the nature of the
political discourse.

The whole story, by the way, of Mrs Thatcher's relations and/or conflict with
the European Community, the price of full membership in the European Monetary
System, her troubles with the poll tax, have all been gone over and thoroughly
reported here and, of course, without editorial fawnings or sniffings.

The only editorial note that creeps into the Wall Street Journal story is one
that Mr Bush and the United States department of agriculture would no doubt
echo. It says the demise of Mrs Thatcher would deprive the United States of a
staunch ally in fighting European farm subsidies, a debate that is jeopardising
international trade negotiations on an array of goods and services.

On the other hand, we're also getting a rousing earful of Mr Kinnock's
resounding declaration that the government is deeply divided and seriously
disabled. And also much probing of the opinions and predictions of the
supporters of Mr Heseltine, Mr Major, Mr Hurd, whose biographies, the newspaper
morgues, I'm sure, are busy bringing up to date.

Well, it's a change and a relief to be able to say for once that an American
occasion came along this past week, that could, for a day or two, give a
legitimate pause to the anxiety, more than anything else, that has more and
more plagued Americans since the beginning of August.

The anxiety that won't dwindle or go away is, of course, the dread stalemate,
even before the game has begun, between the now huge opposing forces of Saddam
Hussein and, mainly, of the United States. Thursday was the day of the one
unique American festival of Thanksgiving, originally thanks given to God by the
settlers on Cape Cod for their first successful harvest.

They'd had a rough time for over two years, poor crops, many deaths, situation
at one time close to famine, but by the end of the third autumn, they had, as
old William Bradford, the Yorkshire scribe of their travails put it, bounteous
crops of corn, maize and – what with their discovery of a strange bird, the
turkey, and the harvest of the cranberry bogs – they survived.

Thanksgiving is the occasion for the family get-together, more so, in a country
of many religions, than Christmas and it's therefore a rather awful time to
travel. Usually by the afternoon before Thanksgiving, Thursday, the highways
that lead to the airports are jammed and the check-in counters swirl and surge
with people waving tickets and rebels protesting the airline's explanation
that, through some computer error, always today, your flight has been
overbooked.

Well this year, the glum fact was that air travel at Thanksgiving was very
markedly down, off the norm. A famous airline that patrols the whole east coast
reported for the first time they could recall, planes leaving on Wednesday
evening with empty seats.

This is only another of the many signs of first, I suppose, the recession that,
in the north-east anyway, is as palpable as an incoming rainstorm. But the
precautions that people take against it, buying less, staying home this year,
have been aggravated by the two dread words, the Gulf.

The price of petrol wobbles uncertainly according to the production quota set
by Saudi Arabia, but I think most people are aware that if the war came, the
petrol queue would be back with us. The surprising slump in airline travel has
another explanation, which does not occur right away to the passenger, unless
he's a regular flyer and suddenly notices the hefty rise in the price of his
ticket. In any oil shortage, or rumoured oil shortage, the price of aviation
fuel is the first to leap.

While I was reading about the fate of the British prime minister and the nature
of the political discourse, I came on a precious quotation dug up by a Mr
Peterson, a scholar who teaches something called business philosophy in North
Carolina.

I thought I knew the Pilgrims' literature pretty well and especially the
memorable, the eloquent, journal of that old Yorkshireman, William Bradford but
Mr Peterson has found a passage about how, in 1620, Governor Bradford of the
Plymouth Colony, as he was, dictated a communal system of farming, with the
common harvest being rationed out.

The crops for the following two years were disastrous, what with listless
workers, they were underfed and much night-time stealing of crops. By the third
year, Governor Bradford told how he came to abandon communal farming and
privatise was the word he was reaching for, or as he put it, that they should
"set corn every man for his own particular and in that regard trust to
themselves and so assigned to every family a parcel of land".

This had very good success for it made all hands very industrious, so as much
more corn was planted than other ways would have been. On the other hand, he
says, the experience that was had in that common cause, tried sundry years, may
well show the vanity of that conceit of Plato's, applauded by some of later
times, that the taking away of property and bringing it in community, into a
common wealth, would make them happy and flourishing, as if they were wiser
than God.

Well, this is a vanity that all the newly-independent peoples of eastern
Europe, among others, must now be regretting and learning painfully how to
overcome.

There's one other note about Thanksgiving that I must share with you. Up a
hundred and more miles north of New York City, in the Finger Lakes region, are
two valiant Americans, a man and wife who were busy on the days before
Thanksgiving, driving literally thousands of miles, carrying 89 of the homeless
to adoptive parents in eight states.

It's an heroic undertaking but Laurie and Jean Borston are evangelists of a
sort, with a deep, abiding concern for the homeless, especially during the
feast of Thanksgiving. Most of these homeless wards of the Borstons are
arthritic and will be delivered only to homes that have a doctor on call and
almost all these abandoned homeless will die within the year, for they are very
old – they are four years old. They will be lovingly taken care of as long as
they live.

They are, by the way, turkeys. They qualified for the care of the Borstens by
meeting their definition put out throughout eight states, "Homeless, abused or
liberated turkeys to be placed in a caring home".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP