A unanimous United Nations - 28 September 1990

It's been a long time since I turned over the pages of the morning newspaper
and came on story after story any of which, at another time, would have been
the obvious, even the compulsory, topic to talk about.

So many tremendous things happening, which before the upheaval in Eastern
Europe a year ago would have had us all agog.

But we've become inured to totally unexpected change and because, mainly, of
Saddam Hussein, most papers' commentators raised barely an eyebrow over Mr
Gorbachev's plea, which was accepted, to assume the old dictatorial powers that
it was one purpose of glasnost and perestroika to dissolve.

Next Wednesday Germany, for the first time in 45 years, will be united and for
the first time in 73 years, the Soviet Union abandoned one of Communism's
fundamental beliefs and passed a law, by the staggering majority of 341 to 1,
to grant freedom of conscience, which means to forbid the government to
interfere with the practice of religion or to restrict the financing of it, the
study of it at home or in the schools.

From now on, all religions will have equal standing in the courts with every
other Soviet citizen, however properly devoted, as all good Communists were
required to be, to Lenin's dictate, religion is the opiate of the people.

And we notice, in passing, that India is in turmoil and so is South Africa.
These, and many other large happenings, will come before the annual general
assembly of the United Nations, not to mention the American concern with the
countries below the Rio Grande, the economic collapse of Argentina, Fidel
Castro's lonely stand in the United Nations and elsewhere as the last stubborn
classical Communist.

But, overriding everything this week, so far as Washington and the Bush
administration are concerned, was the speech at the United Nations of the
Soviet foreign minister, Mr Shevardnadze, denouncing Saddam Hussein in the most
downright way and threatening him with a war if he did not pull out of Kuwait.

Now we've had downright speeches from the Russians for over 40 years, but when
passion was involved it was certain to be directed against the United States
and its western allies. It's almost comical to recall now the many years
through which the Soviet delegate, any Soviet delegate, began a speech by
deploring the imperialist ruling classes of the west.

I think of one old American statesman, who in his very old age, couldn't
rightly say whether it had been 30 or 40 years during which he sat down and
automatically turned off his hearing aid whenever a Russian, a North Korean or
a Chinese got up to speak. He tired early on of hearing himself routinely, day
after day, described as an imperialist, fascist beast.

He must be goggling in his grave over that first unanimous vote in the security
council, to resist aggression collectively and he must be marvelling at Mr
Shevardnadze's speech, warmly, angrily, doggedly on our side.

The speech surprised and delighted Mr Bush and his advisers because, only two
weeks ago, Mr Gorbachev, after his Helsinki meeting with Mr Bush, declared very
firmly that, in the crisis of the Persian Gulf, he was absolutely against any
use of force.

But this week Mr Shevardnadze was practically warning Iraq that if the economic
sanctions don't work, the Soviet Union will not only approve the use of force,
but might itself become a fighting partner.

His telling words were, "We should remind those who regard aggression as an
acceptable form of behaviour, that the United Nations has the power to suppress
acts of aggression. There is ample evidence that this right can be exercised.
It will be if the illegal occupation of Kuwait continues."

Well that's telling ''em in direct, gutsy language that the Soviets very rarely
use, inside or outside of the United Nations.

But now a lady friend of mine says, what's so special about this sort of talk
or, for that matter, about the security council's unanimous vote? Isn't that
what the United Nations is all about, to resist aggression?

Yes indeed. First you have to answer that the first and last unanimous vote in
the council to suppress an act of aggression happened 40 years ago, to resist
the North Korean invasion of South Korea. And why did it happen? Because the
Soviet Union did not, at that time, have jet planes.

How's that again? On a Saturday in June 1950, President Truman was back home in
Independence, Missouri, attending to some family business. That evening he was
sitting in his library when a telephone call came in from Washington, from the
secretary of state, Mr Dean Acheson. "Mr President, " he said, "I have very
serious news. The North Koreans have invaded South Korea."

Acheson suggested an immediate summons to the security council of the United
Nations. It met at 11 on the Sunday morning and in the early evening, by which
time Mr Truman was landing in Washington, the security council had voted by
nine to nothing, to order the North Koreans to withdraw. There was a missing
council member – it was the Soviet Union.

They were, at that time, boycotting the council because the United Nations
refused to admit Communist China to membership. The Soviet Union was, remember,
one of the so-called permanent members of the council, the big five – the USSR,
the United States, United Kingdom, France and China (pre-Communist China,
Taiwan, as we now say).

Any one of the five could, under the charter, veto a resolution of the security
council and, for the first few years, every time a vote to act collectively
against aggression somewhere, the Soviets registered vetoes as regularly as a
tolling bell.

They would certainly have tolled it again if they'd been in New York, but their
chief delegate couldn't get there before the council vote. The Soviets then,
and for some time, used turboprop planes and the one carrying their man and his
veto did not land until the council had cast its unanimous vote, which was
enough for President Truman to declare, in effect, a United Nations war and
send troops off to Korea, alongside the forces of other members. So the
Soviets' failure to register a veto against the decision to resist the North
Korean armies was a fluke.

As for the lady's more substantive and substantial question, resisting
aggression is what the United Nations is all about, isn't it? That can only be
answered by yes, in the beginning it was laid down as the chief reason for the
existence of the United Nations.

But it has never worked, never in concert of the big powers, including both the
United States and the Soviet Union, and not only because of the Soviets' early
and steady habit of opposing the west and their allies, through the veto.

There is one article of the United Nations charter that, right at the
beginning, gave us the promise that at last, after six centuries of trying to
set up an international body to prevent war, to resist aggression (it was a
French lawyer in the 13th century who first had the idea) at last we had
devised the means of doing what the League of Nations had failed at – a means
of achieving collective security.

You don't hear that article of the charter talked about today and I don't
believe it's been cited for years in United Nations debates. That article, I
still kindle the old glow when I read it, says, Article 43 – All member nations
of the United Nations shall undertake to make available to the security
council, on its call and in accordance with the special agreement of
agreements, armed forces, assistance and facilities, including rights of
passage, necessary for the purpose of maintaining international peace and
security.

In other words, though the United Nations was not going to have a standing
army, navy and air force, it was going to have them on immediate call of the
security council. Now this article had been drafted the year before in British,
American and Russian discussions in Washington and they'd already gone into how
many divisions this nation could promise, fighter squadrons from that nation,
destroyers, cruisers from another, artillery, tanks and so on.

All the machinery of war was to be pledged in stated quotas from each member
nation so that, by the time of San Francisco, it was expected that within
months, the security council would have heard from all the member nations, the
type and the amount of military force they would be prepared to dispatch, at a
moment's notice. What could be more wonderful?

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP