Clinton sexual assault case thrown out - 3 April 1998

It has not been from indifference or, Lord knows, forgetfulness that I have not
talked about President Clinton's scandalous troubles for some time.

For four years now, we've been drenched with facts, half-truths, hearsay,
fantasies, fabrications about what a Miss Jones said happened in a hotel room
in Little Rock, the capital of Arkansas, seven years ago, when Mr Clinton was
Governor Clinton and one Miss Paula Jones was a state employee. It had seemed
to me that, from time to time, a rest from brooding over this mess of scandal
was called for.

But, suddenly late on Wednesday afternoon, the judge who was to preside at the
trial of President Clinton – down in the docket for the end of May – suddenly
Judge Susan Wright threw a hand grenade into this mountainous ash heap of truth
and trash. She dismissed Miss Jones's charges of sexual assault and sexual
harassment as too weak to go to a jury trial. We'd better see what the trial
was to be about. What President Clinton was charged with, and what not.

To begin with, I ought to correct a misunderstanding that took hold among many
Americans the moment the judge threw out Miss Jones's case. Because the judge
thought there was not enough credible evidence to let Miss Jones's charges go
to trial, many people have picked up the mistaken assumption that the judge,
the court, was saying Governor Clinton did not make a sexual advance to Miss
Jones in 1991 in that hotel room, that she was lying and he was telling the
truth. Not so.

In the ruling, a mighty document of about 3,500 words which I'm not going to
read to you, the judge is not particularly interested in the alleged sexual
pass as there is no corroborating proof to what Miss Jones charged in her
original accusation, which was that a policeman, a state trooper, had asked her
to leave her desk downstairs (she was registering arrivals for a conference)
and go up to the governor's hotel room where he subsequently exposed himself
and asked her for oral sex. Yes! I myself reel at the passing thought at any
time in the past 52 years that I might one day speak such a sentence aloud over
a microphone. Well, the judge, in effect, said she didn't know whether that
happened or not. "If true," she said, "it was certainly boorish and offensive
but that conduct would not in the judgment of the court support the first
charge of sexual assault".

It's now time to say what was the substance of Miss Jones's accusations that
she wanted settled as a matter of law. I think I ought to throw in here an odd
piece of information which we didn't know about until a week or so ago. Miss
Jones brought up her case about a 1991 incident in 1994 and many people leapt
to the defence of the president by asking the understandable question, if she
was so offended, so hurt, so assaulted, so outraged, why did she wait three
years to bring suit?

Her answer was swift and plausible. She had decided to keep the incident to
herself, but in the spring of 1994 an article appeared in an American
conservative magazine describing in detail the whole incident as if from a
watching third party and mentioning the victim as one Paula. That article, in a
magazine with an admittedly modest circulation, was picked up by the national
press, radio, television and that started the blizzard of truth, half-truth,
non-truth, rumour, hearsay that has pelted us ever since.

About a week ago, the author of that original article came out with a
statement; very surprising, from an investigative reporter who had lit a
national firestorm. He said he was disgusted with himself. He'd looked further
into the whole story and began to disbelieve the two state troopers who had
testified in the Jones case that they'd been regularly employed by Governor
Clinton to fetch him attractive girls. In a word, to pimp for him.

The writer said now he thought the state troopers had been paid to lie. But
this self-disgust came four years too late. Now what – apart from all the lurid
colour of the alleged original incident and apart from the dragged-in testimony
of other women who claim to have been sexually harassed by Mr Clinton when he
was governor, or, when he was president – what are the legal charges that the
judge thought not weighty enough to support a charge of sexual assault and
sexual harassment?

Once Miss Jones decided on the very bold course of suing a serving President of
the United States on a sex charge, she, or the lawyers she hired, went the
whole hog. Well, not quite the whole hog. Even Miss Jones could not claim that
the president's sexual approach was forceful or brutal enough to warrant a
criminal charge. So it's important to note now that this was a civil suit. If
she lost it, it would be all the harder to represent to the Congress as a high
crime. And that is an impeachable offence.

However Miss Jones, having decided to report herself as the victim of an
unwelcome – the judge said if it happened it was an odious sexual approach –
she really laid it on in the legal charge. Namely, that as proof of the second
legal offence, sexual harassment, she had suffered subsequent discrimination in
the workplace, was now exposed to a hostile work environment, that she suffered
emotional distress and outrage, that on Secretaries' Day in 1992 she was alone
in not receiving flowers. The judge's deadpan comment on this outrage was,
"Such an omission does not give rise to a federal law suit". Miss Jones also
threw in a plea for sympathy in claiming that ever since the hotel incident she
had suffered something called "sexual aversion". Miss Jones added this charge
to her suit after she'd been examined for three and a half hours by what the
judge called "a purported expert, a PhD in Education". The judge didn't enlarge
on this disbelief, leaving it to us to gauge the cruel extent of Miss Jones's
aversion to sex from the living facts of a new husband and two children.

You may wonder now what effect this judgment is going to have on the
investigation of the special prosecutor who for three years has been looking
into possible perjury and obstruction of justice (which are impeachable
offences) during the Whitewater land deal case, the firing of the officials who
handled travel arrangements at the White House and the White House's
inexplicable searching of hundreds of FBI files. Mr Starr, the prosecutor, says
the dismissal of the Paula Jones case will have no effect.

Well, few other people think so because Mr Starr, in his enthusiasm for
building a thorough, foolproof case against the president, raided the Paula
Jones case, so to speak, by hauling in other women who said they'd been
sexually harassed by the president and Mr Starr certainly expected to use their
depositions, never mind public confessions, to show in the president a pattern
of chronic sexual harassment. But that behaviour is not Mr Starr's primary aim.
He'd hoped to demonstrate that Mr Clinton lied about such encounters and,
therefore, in the end hoped to show him guilty of perjury and obstruction of
justice in the weightier matters of Whitewater and so on.

But the Paula Jones dismissal has made the public recall and repeat that Mr
Starr had already spent 40 millions of public – that's to say taxpayers' –
money on his separate investigation. And it's about time he put up or shut up.

Anyway, back to the court in Arkansas and the startling ruling of Judge Wright.
Without, of course, mentioning Mr Starr's investigation, she took account of
the testimony of the other alleged presidential victims by saying, quote,
"Whether other women may have been subjected to workplace harassment, and
whether such evidence has allegedly been suppressed, does not change the fact
that the plaintiff, in this case, has failed to demonstrate that she has a case
worthy of submitting to a jury." In other, blunter words, Miss Jones did not
suffer any job loss or discrimination, in fact she was promoted and got a
larger wage. Her grief did not constitute outrage. The claim of aversion to sex
is, quote, "not credible". And the offence, if it took place, was not forceful
or hurtful enough to constitute sexual assault. End of Paula Jones's case. Her
lawyers say, of course, they will go onwards and upwards with appeals, if need
be, to the Supreme Court. A score of expert lawyers I've heard from say it is
extremely unlikely that the first Appeals Court would reverse Judge Wright's
decision.

And what was the effect of this bombshell on the public? Sixty-seven per cent
think it was a right decision, 33 say nay. Mr Clinton's overall popularity
rating on his conduct of the presidency remains at 69%. Which is as high a
rating as any president in history has earned in his second term. As for the
politicians, the Democrats are privately delighted and publicly professing just
relief at having laid to rest a long and scandalous irrelevancy. The
Republicans are simply baffled. They cannot charge party prejudice: Judge
Wright was appointed by Mr Bush, a Republican. And this year, a Congressional
election year, they prefer not to attack Mr Clinton in case, just in case, the
very worst for them happened. Like, for instance, the judge's dismissal of the
Paula Jones case, which not one politician in a score expected.

And how about the likelihood of impeachment? Well, as I say, nobody can predict
that likelihood until Mr Starr has finished his investigation and sent his
report on possible perjury and/or obstruction of justice to the House Judiciary
Committee, which would then have to find articles of impeachment and pass them,
along with the president, on to the Senate which then sits as a trial court.
For the moment, a pack or wiggery of constitutional law experts agree that the
prospect of discovering, of deriving, criminal charges out of a civil suit that
was not worth a jury's attention is unlikely in the extreme.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP