The French and immigration - 27 March 1992

In the mid-1970s, a bright, energetic young French engineer arrived across the
bay from here, here at the moment being San Francisco. He had graduated from
France's leading school for engineers and had come to spend a year at the
University of California, at Berkeley, to get a master's degree in science.

I don't know if he ever made it, to do it in one year would be impressive at
least but he now says a year there was enough. His opinions on America, indeed
perhaps on anything else unconnected with engineering, would be of no interest
whatsoever were it not that that young man's name is Bruno Mégret and quite
suddenly – quite suddenly to the rest of us outside France – he is a figure in
international politics, a commanding figure in the West, a challenging figure
to all the countries that in the past few years have found themselves having to
take in huge invasions of refugee foreigners.

He is the inflammatory spokesman of France's National Front, the extreme
rightest, France-for-the-French political party which in the regional elections
this week delivered such a blow to President Mitterrand's own Socialist party,
what we would call the government party. A blow more damaging than either M
Mitterrand or even M Le Pen, the leader of the National Front had expected.

I ought to say at once that I know very little about French politics but like
many another onlooker, who from time to time likes to compare the systems and
the behaviour of other democratic nations, I have watched M Le Pen and his
Front with perhaps a more morbid curiosity than most outsiders, more prejudiced
perhaps because I was in Germany in the summer and autumn of 1931, teaching
school among the rolling hills, the lakes and the white birch of Silesia. I'd
been in Munich for a week or two in the summer and heard about, for the first
time, a maniacal German chauvinist, but I must say, one of three or four, most
hypnotic public speakers I've ever heard, even though his audience when I saw
him was no more than 70 or 80 people who happened to be passing by.

His name, you will have guessed by now, was Adolf Hitler. But way to the north,
far from Bavaria, in that genial country town, the good, sensible burghers of
Silesia, north countrymen naturally, were proof against this tinpot little
agitator raving away in the southland. Ein Betrug, the schoolmasters and the
townsfolk called him, a fraud, not to worry. Sixteen months later, he was the
Chancellor and Führer of Germany and – let's not forget – he was elected
all-highest. I suppose ever since, I've been more leery than most of political
agitators who have a small following and who are readily dismissed by not only
establishment politicians but the well-informed in any regular political party.

M Le Pen's National Front is 20 years old. For most of those years it was
regarded by most people, including the French, as a group on the fringe. Not
the lunatic fringe, in fact what set it off from most extremists, most protest
groups like the neo-Nazis in Germany, the skinheads in more than one
English-speaking country, the National Front did not lust after frightening
public exposure in striking uniforms. It tended not to bellow and march and
chant, it aimed, I may be wrong, but I think from the beginning, to remain
respectable, to invite the middle class, not to scorn it.

But for years the national Front polled less than 1% of the vote, In the local
regional elections of 1986, it got 9%. Now that's a more remarkable jump in the
French system than it would be in America or Britain for in France's
multi-party system, M Mitterrand's 36% in the 1988 parliamentary elections was
enough to run a government. Well, last week in a result that stunned M
Mitterrand, not to mention western Europe, his Socialists polled the lowest
vote in nearly a quarter of a century, just over 18% and how about the
chauvinists, the National Front? 14%. Just imagine if, in the mid-1930s, in
Britain, the Conservatives had got 40% of the vote, Labour 30% and Mr Oswald
Mosley's blackshirts 30%. The French result is startling enough to have caused
65% of the French people, in a post-election poll, to say that M Le Pen's
National Front is a threat to democracy. If that's the way they felt, why
didn't they say so with their vote? Which leads me, maybe only just ahead of
you, to say, what has all this to do with America?

Well, one thing is clear from the comments of the most influential French
political scientists and commentators. The National Front's success is not just
a dig at the Socialist government. It's equally a blow at the other regular
parties, the whole political establishment is the way one man puts it and in a
milder way we're hearing the same thing in this country. At least one third of
the French people find something attractive about the National Front. What
could it be?

The wide appeal of M Le Pen and M Mégret is the theme in their political
message that regular politicians in many west European countries are willing to
look on as a problem but which the National Front says is the only big
thundering, overwhelming problem, that something drastic must be done about
now. And that's where they have a policy, what we now call a message they would
like to send to all of us. The message is bold and frightening. Expel all the
foreigners, don't try to absorb them.

M Mégret, M Le Pen's magnetic, demagogic helper – one old French newspaper
dares to say he has a touch of Dr Goebbels – M Mégret says it plain to willing
audiences: who took the jobs from the French? And the crowd answers, the
foreigners. He proposes, insists would be better, that France stop building any
more mosques, that all foreigners, visitors, should be medically examined
before coming into France, which was notably true here of, only of the millions
of immigrants who came into Ellis Island after the turn of the century, and
that all immigrants should be shipped back where they came from.

Like Dr Goebbels, M Mégret plays to the chronic national disposition towards
anti-Semitism. He too has discovered that old or maybe a new cosmopolitan, for
which read Jewish, conspiracy to turn nations into polyglot compounds and, oh
yes, the conspiracy has a secondary aim, to spread Aids around the world.
Discount this rubbish and give the anti-Semitism the contempt it deserves. I'm
amazed a demagogue as acute as M Mégret should not see that these old parrot
cries detract from the wide appeal of the main theme: what to do with four
million immigrants.

A regular feature of M Mégret's speeches, repeated as a warning to us all, is
the line that America has been corrupted by its immigrants. In this country,
the general line is that America has been enriched by its immigrants. They have
over there, he says, a big problem with the melting pot. Now here he says
something which may be contentious and can be hotly debated, but touches the
nerve of anxiety all over Europe – in West Germany, Poland, Italy, France – and
is becoming in the United States a fretful question, a challenge to the
American pride in its role as a host to the poor, the persecuted, the
oppressed, as well as the fugitives from military service. People, says M
Mégret, of European origin could live together in harmony but with Hispanics,
blacks and Asians I expect a grave crisis.

Sixteen years ago when he was a student at Berkeley, he said he was amazed at
"the tolerance of Americans". He was right. I had never heard then and until
very recently, never heard an American politician of any party maintain that
America must renounce its oldest tradition of welcoming everybody who wants to
come in. Of course there are periods when quotas are set, some of them as
against, at one time, the Chinese and the Japanese, and America more than
anybody gets landed with freakish boatloads like the mental prisoners that
Castro decided would be useful to get rid of. But I have to say that there is
an historically new strain in the relationship between the settled population
and the latest kinds of immigrants, only partly the fault or the character of a
new generation of immigrants. The old ones, the incoming hordes of the 1900s
and the 1910s from Europe, came with the full expectation of being absorbed,
after the first generation, of seeing their children become Americans.

There has been a dramatic and disturbing change. A whole new generation of
Latin Americans, Hispanics as we say, particularly, that comes here and in time
seems determined to set up a little Puerto Rico, a little Mexico here, a little
Colombia there. Now this, I guess, is a natural reflex of strangers surrounded
by the babble of a strange town. This tendency was, I think, fatally encouraged
by the abandonment of the old general rule that you had to learn English to be
able to vote.

Today, in some big western and southern states, you can work, live, vote, go
through life without English. In this state of California over 30 languages are
printed on the ballot forms. What we see, what I see, is a deliberate, though
unintentional, slackening of the bonds that gave meaning to the motto on the
seal of the United States, "e pluribus unum" – out of many, one. The one, the
unity, is beginning to be dissolved. I hope, I fervently hope I'm wrong. If I'm
right, we could have a Mégret just round the corner.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP