Mississippi relief package - 23 July 1993

I've been reminded, accused by some genial correspondents: you have not, they
say, talked about the Mississippi and the floods. True. What is one to say,
except to elaborate gruesome particulars that all add up to saying, isn't it
awful. Talk is gagged before any great natural disaster and where the pains and
cruelties of it have not been described, they can be imagined, by any person
who's ever seen a small fire, a modest flood, a minute earthquake.

Reporters from all over the world have rushed out there in the certain
knowledge that they could startle their readers for weeks to come. At least
till the day, which blessedly seems to have arrived, when the crest has been
reached and the waters subside and revel billions of dollars worth of ruined
farms, wrecked cities, a landscape or seascape the size of England, plastered
with an apocalyptic layer of mud.

No one has described the Mississippi more fearsomely than Mark Twain, who after
all trained for 18 months to become a licensed river pilot and plied his trade
for four years before beating it out west on the arrival of the Civil War, a
quarrel in which he felt he had no business interfering.

Twenty years later he went on a trip, just after a great flood and he wrote:
"This present flood of 1882 will doubtless be celebrated in the river's history
for several generations, before a deluge of like magnitude will be seen."

It put all the unprotected lowlands underwater from Cairo in Illinois to the
grey and muddy mouth at New Orleans. It broke the levees on both sides of the
river and when the flood was at its highest, the Mississippi was 70 miles wide.
So that, in many stretches, what looked by night to be dense bushes rising from
the swirling waters, were seen by day to be the tops of a drowned forest.
Islands that used to be were no more. The pilot's skill enjoyed its most
exquisite agonies for it was possible to steer into a fairly level stretch of
river and find yourself next day grounded for weeks on a sugar plantation,
miles away from the river bank. The properties of multitudes of people were
underwater for months and the poorer ones starved by the hundred. Mark Twain,
as a romantic boy, aching to become a steamboat pilot, came to lose his
romanticism in learning the extreme and constant treacheries of the long river
with, as he called it, its capacity for calamity.

Well, the only objective comment I can offer to the disaster seen from
Washington is that Mr Clinton is going to have to shell out yet another mighty
sum to eat away at his austerity budget. Nine billion dollars at the latest
count. It was being remarked by people in Washington the other day, that one
thing you can say for the federal government, whoever's in charge, is that it
has always been generous and forgiving when it comes to providing relief for
natural disasters, floods in particular. But then there are also politicians
equally generous in thought, who complain they have the devastating Florida
hurricane in mind, I think, complain that the federal government can too often
be too generous and forgiving, in providing such abundant help and means of
reconstruction, that victims tend to stay put in their new homes, in a place
that is still open to similar disasters.

Well, do people still say it was an education? Usually after first visit to
some natural marvel, Bryce Canyon or the Mount Palomar telescope or Disneyland
or some other human confection? I can say I have just emerged from an education
in a subject I've supposed to have been educating myself in for so many years
that would make the mind reel backwards. How came this revelation? I went to
England and I have to confess it was for three weeks, as long a stretch as I
can remember since my old newspaper days, when the editor insisted I spend four
weeks every summer with what he called the audience, to gather from the horse's
mouth, the sort of thing he'd most like to read about. What I found, the
surprising education I referred to, is that when you stay too long in the
country you're reporting on, you can't say for sure what topics, political
problems, social conditions, whatever, are peculiar to it. In a word or two
I've found, by reading every London paper in sight, every day for three weeks,
that many social ordeals, puzzles, problems I'd thought were peculiarly
American afflict Britain at least just as much or just as naggingly.

For instance, so far as I can gather, the main problems of university education
that vex the American establishment, vex you too. Britain, finding it cannot go
on affording to give free university tuition to everybody, is now thinking of
some dependable system of student loans. Lots of luck. This country instituted
student loans two, three decades ago, and that too is an expensive mess when
more than half the borrowers, after college, get on their feet or don't, but
anyway can't meet their obligation or won't or have forgotten to repay. In one
English paper I read the sentence, even people on the left begin to think that
the rich should be made to pay for the tuition, as well as the food and shelter
of their young. Which sounds also just like the Medicare debate here. One
certain way of saving billions from the budget is to stop the nearly free ride
citizens over 65 get from hospitals, doctors and surgeons. Those same old folk,
now known as senior citizens, they have one of the most powerful lobbies in
Washington and at the whiff of a rumour from the White House, that the
comparatively rich old must pay out of their own pockets, they set up a
resounding hullabaloo about the fact, and it is a fact, that everything the
federal government pays out for their hospital needs, was taken from them in
the form of weekly social security deductions going back, for some of us, to
the spring of 1937, when the system was set up.

Also I was going to tell you about the peculiar problems that attach to
Vietnamese refugees here. Here, being by the time you hear this, in northern
California, San Francisco. So I just saw a piece in a London paper on exactly
the same topic. You may not have as many Vietnamese refugees yet, but you will
unless Mr Churchill, the living one, has his way. Or I feel I must sooner of
later get around to a morbid, but pressing, subject problem here, the bursting
American prisons, the consequent setting free into life of not only petty
criminals but the mentally sick, actual psychopaths, some of whom, with horrid
despatch, kill or rape again. Then I heard much protest on this very topic most
days in London. It reminded me how pressing the problem became here, or was
made to become, in 1988 when a vivid and grossly unfair little dramatisation of
the problem propelled Mr Bush into the White House. That was the notorious
Willie Horton incident, a name that will live in Republican infamy. Willie
Horton was a black convict who was allowed to do what Massachusetts and several
other states practised, which was to be let out when thought to be harmless, on
a weekend parole. The system had worked very well in several states but that
one man, Horton, went out for the weekend and raped again. Unfortunately he was
imprisoned in Massachusetts and Mr Bush's Democratic opponent was the governor
of Massachusetts, so the Republican whiz kids got out a 30 second, it may have
been only 15 second, television commercial. A revolving door, a bulky, shadowy
figure, suggesting others behind, comes out of it, out on to the street, that
was all.

Or how about single parents? I knew you had them but I was astonished to
discover that the figures were just about as daunting as they are here. Not
though, I believe, so many proportionately black mothers alone with a child or
two or three. I imagine I would have been equally surprised to hear that drugs
are a menace with your youth too, were it not for a friendship going back some
years, a young woman I worked with in this country who revealed in her 30s,
that she'd been on cocaine since she was 17, a body blow to us all. She was in
a bad way but she gritted her teeth, went off for six months and dried out for
keeps. She now tours high schools as a warning example. But, I once
remonstrated with her, you'd been three years in England, at Oxford, in your
20s. No problem, she said, she knew the whole subterranean network. She could
take a train to Edinburgh, to the Midland cities, to the universities and
mingle and do business with her kind within the hour. Only a year to two ago,
she went to England on a holiday, drove around a good deal and to her surprise
and pride, found herself most evenings addressing small CA, Cocaine Anonymous
groups in some of the most bucolic and romantic and adorable small towns in the
West Country.

As for the ordeals of Mr Clinton in the wash of Reaganism and of Mr Major in
the wash of Thatcherism, the British brand of Reaganism or vice versa, the
similarities are so glaring and constant, that we are bound to bring them up
all the time. However, there is one attitude of denial, not much written about
on your side, that is common to the tenants of Downing Street and Pennsylvania
Avenue. Both President and Prime Minister insist on the main challenge, what
they call their priority, jobs, creating jobs. How to do this by other means
than silly old Reagan and yet don't remind the public, in either country, that
President Reagan started wholesale de-regulation, cut high taxes and spread low
ones and created 20,000 jobs, more than the whole of Europe, over a period,
eight years of continuous economic expansion. The racking problem here, at an
rate, is to find some way of repeating that undeniable achievement, while you
go on denying it.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP