1991 Cambodian peace treaty - 25 October 1991

I don't suppose Cambodia means much to European listeners but to half the world
Thursday morning's news must have been a shocker. A shock of relief, tempered
by fright. Four parties that have, since 1978, fought a civil war with a
ferocity remarkable even for our brutal century, they concluded in Paris, along
with 15 other signatories, a peace treaty.

The good news is the treaty is the creation, the invention of the United
Nations and how heartening it is to see in the past two years the United
Nations become the effective force in doing what it was always intended to do,
to maintain international peace and security. This end to 13 years of wholesale
massacre, guerrilla warfare, rapine and slaughter would not have been possible
if, another welcome novelty, the agreement had not been approved, put together,
brokered by the United States, the Soviet Union and China acting together.

The bad news is that the dreaded Khmer Rouge and its leader in hiding, Pol Pot,
he's not been seen in public for 10 years, together in three years were
responsible for the starving or murdering of 1,000,000 of the 7,000,000
Cambodians. Well, in the treaty of peace he and his are recognised as
legitimate political leaders, There's no mention of punishment or reparations,
his guerrillas will not be disarmed. The Khmer Rouge, in fact, becomes an equal
partner in a coalition government and the other parties, including the 15
sanctioning powers are left to hope that Pol Pot has decided to abandon his
ambition to return to absolute dictatorial power.

Talking of Marxist dictators, let us consider now the brave, sad condition –
posture, I suppose is the proper buzzword – of Fidel Castro. He was down in
Mexico this week, not orating, not bombasting in his inimitable fashion. A
ceremonial speech of Castro's can take anywhere up to five, six hours, a little
pep talk only two. He was sitting down with the presidents of Mexico, Venezuela
and Colombia and listening, a rare event. He needs help, he needs money, goods,
most urgently, oil, which the Soviet Union has announced it will soon stop
supplying at cut-rate prices. Moscow will also stop, because it has to, its
massive annual subsidy for arms.

The three presidents made clear to Castro at the beginning that they were not
there to help a Communist Cuba, unless it began to make drastic reforms and Mr
Castro replied that that's just what he had proposed at a party congress only
last week. He was painfully reminded that what he calls reforms are minor
adjustments of Communist Party doctrine, not breakaways from it. In the only
public ceremony at which he could make a speech, Mr Castro responded by
declaring, in the old rousing tones, that one thing must be understood:
Communism had not failed in Cuba. He's reduced to boasting to his own people,
that in a crumbling world, Cuba remains the one Communist beacon of hope
because it has not succumbed to the chaos and the greed of capitalism.

In private, it was plain what he meant was, that Cuba is sending out distress
signals to any neighbour who will pay attention. The three countries – Mexico,
Venezuela and Colombia – told Castro that he's not going to get subsidies,
economic subsidies, to make up for the withdrawal of the Soviet props. These
three have been inclined in the past to pacify Castro, even praise such things
as his health and school systems, but this was always done by pacifying too, or
rather pacifying in the first place, their own leftist malcontents at home. Now
like many another country with a threatening leftist element, they see that
element distraught and fractured by the collapse of European Communism.

Mexico and Venezuela in particular are overhauling their economies with the
promise of vigorous foreign, especially American, investment and though they
may deplore the severity of America's policy towards Cuba – the almost complete
trade blockade that's been going on for 30 years, it's still a punishable act
for Americans to bring Cuban cigars into the United States – these two
especially don't want to alienate the United States. What came out of Mexico
was the usual bland communiqué, pledging understanding and cooperation and a
glaring awareness that Castro is rattling a tin cup and nobody's paying much
attention.

But if the rehabilitation into respectability of the atrocious Pol Pot is a
surprise and the transformation of Fidel Castro into Oliver Twist, how about
the pictures on the tube this week of one famous dictator who, a year ago, we
would have sworn would by now be executed or have flown into exile. But there
he was, I'm looking at him now, ruddy, beaming, standing very tall in front of
a line of upstanding officers, leaning down and hanging across their chests
sashes and dispensing gleaming swords and pinning on their proud breasts so
many medals that when the sun caught them on the turn, it was enough to make a
bystander sneeze. It took an hour and a half to perform this historic ceremony.

The medals and sashes and the rest were being given out for conspicuous bravery
in what the big man himself, name of Saddam Hussein, called the Mother of
Battles. Fade in to a more solemn general, I guess he's a general, about to
talk to his nation and Mr Ibrahim, the vice-chairman of the Revolutionary
Command Council warned us to make no mistake, Saddam Hussein is Iraq and Iraq
is Saddam Hussein.

Well, Mr General Saddam does not talk diplomatic mush. Iraq, he said, is like
the woman who would rather be killed than submit to rape. Iraq's honour had
been besmirched, all the ultimatums that the United Nations had forced on the
country since last winter. Never despair, Saddam would provide. This brilliant,
barefaced ceremony reminded me of the wonderful pageants that Leni Riefenstahl
choreographed for the Nazis. I'm not thinking of the huge Nuremberg rallies,
but the smaller, not less brilliant shows, Hitler embracing small boys in
uniform, that she managed to mount towards the end when the Nazi prospect was
dire. Saddam Hussein was, in effect, preparing his people for a very bleak
winter.

He confounded most people, certainly the United Nations team, this week, by
suddenly admitting that he had lied, that the United Nations seized documents
were true, that he had indeed been working on nuclear weapons. This confession
apparently marks a big turn in strategy. The word from the United Nations is
that sanctions are really beginning to put the squeeze on him. I should say,
much to our embarrassment, on starving and sick children.

Saddam is well aware that the winter could cause food riots and there is always
the threat of a coup. He wants, therefore, before everything else, to concur
with the United Nations, so as to make its sanctions seem cruel and unnecessary
and apart from his policy with his own people, he's cultivating not any
particular Arab country, certainly not the ones that joined the UN allied
coalition, but opposition parties, political and intellectual propagandists,
who might be persuaded to echo Saddam's daily chant that Iraq is a pitiable
example of how the detested West can insult Arab pride and mock its human
dignity by staving its children.

Among all the great and the humble who died recently, I noticed a short item,
half a single column in the New York Times on Thursday about a man I'd never
heard of, one Timothy Cook, without an 'e'. The subheading defined him crisply
as,"ex-civil rights aide who set off a storm" and further down we learn that he
blew up a storm against President Reagan's attorney general and assistant
attorney general in 1983. I only vaguely remember it but the paper reminds me
that this man accused the justice department of doing nothing or rather of
doing their utmost to thwart the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, which required the
government to make special provision for employees of the federal government
who were disabled in one way or another.

Mr Cook suffered from fused knee joints which had been caused by a childhood
illness, so he was himself disabled and when, after he graduated from the
University of Pennsylvania Law School, he got into the civil rights division of
the Justice Department. He devoted his remarkable energies to whipping the
department's lawyers into enforcing the rights of handicapped people. In one of
the last cases he argued, he compelled the foreign service to hire blind people
and I see that he, more than any other person, was responsible for those little
symbols of a man in a wheelchair that you see everywhere, I hope you see them
where you live, which in this country signify that in all government-supported
public transportation, a place is kept, a parking place or room on a bus, for
people in wheelchairs. Mr Cook died of a stroke. He was only 38 but he managed
to do something we should all envy, he left things a little better than he
found them.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP