President Jiang in America - 7 November 1997

The President of China has come and gone and it's fair to say that nothing has
changed except the deposit of a cheque for $3billion. China has no intention of
opening up its markets more widely to American goods.

For the third time it has promised not to do what it has been doing, which is
transferring the technology for making nuclear bombs to Pakistan. For once the
United States, through Mr Clinton, asked China what it had to say about the
massacre in Tiananmen Square, a nine-year memory that does not fade here.
President Jiang maintained his perpetual smile and said that in a nation of
1.2billion, it was essential to preserve social stability and discipline
dissidents.

Mr Jiang did not hem and haw or retreat into vague political jargon. He firmly
dropped the reminder that Taiwan is part of China, though he didn't say that he
has any present designs on the rebellious island. Most of these themes, with
the same responses, came up in the social occasions, the implied threats or
lamentations very much softened by many toasts and mild jokes.

These banquets vividly reminded me of the last night at Yalta all those years
ago, when President Roosevelt, Mr Churchill and Stalin raised their vodka
glasses on high, mellowed into a jolly old boy relationship and agreed to the
coming independence of the countries of eastern Europe invaded by the Nazis
while Stalin, who could smile with the best of them, toasted the agreements and
quietly laid his long-range plans to take over Poland, Hungary, Romania and
Czechoslovakia.

So, President Jiang, how about the repression of Tibet? No repression there.
Tibet had not been repressed but liberated. I don't suppose for a minute that
President Clinton had hoped to change Mr Jiang's ideas on any of these
ideological points but every survey of popular opinion shows that most
Americans cling to the belief that American foreign policy ought to have a
moral basis. That it's only right to protest against any country that gaols,
let along tortures, people for their opinions.

Some nations, Europeans particularly, regard this American passion for
exportable democracy as noble but naïve. Well, whichever it is, it's been a
constant in American public opinion since, you might say, President Woodrow
Wilson and nobody has expressed it with more conviction, especially when he was
running both times for President, than Mr Clinton.

If that's so, why did he invite Mr Jiang in the first place and what did he
expect to get out of the meeting? The question was put to him by many powerful
voices in the media before Mr Jiang arrived and the answer, never expressed
quite as nakedly as this, was: China is about to become the mightiest economy
in the whole of Asia.

Twenty-five years ago, if there was an Asian economy to woo and fear, it was
the Japanese. In those 25 years the economy of China has kept a self-made
promise, that the wiseacres of the West – the bankers, economists, financiers
–ridiculed at the time, to quadruple its economy. In fact it has quintupled.
Just to state that simple massive fact gives an immediate deceptive picture of
a vast, confident, newly-prosperous nation.

All the knowledgeable people who've been there lately say, not so. The Chinese
are as much bewildered by their economy as impressed by it. The institutions
that should control any economy hardly exist. Banking systems, government
methods of policing the markets and they've descended to, as in Russia, a
plague of corruption and – in the wake of unprecedented industrial production –
very wide destruction of the landscape, of the environment. And all this in a
country larger than the United States with a population greater than the
combined populations of North America, Europe and Russia, all ruled from a
single capital.

So, to the Chinese leaders, the word stability does not mean keeping in order a
great continental nation with ripples of trouble, it means controlling voices
of reformers, even if there are only 3,000 of them, who might cause millions of
people to run amok. China on the loose, an old long-gone pundit used to say,
was the worst thing that could happen to the Western world.

A sign that President Clinton had this in mind was made clear when he talked
about China's historical fears of chaos and disintegration. American policy
towards Communist China for the first 20 years or so from the Communist
conquest in 1949 officially hardly existed and, a Chinese historian has
recently pointed out, it was a period of almost uninterrupted disaster and
misery for the Chinese people.

And then, in 1972, the world, certainly the mass of Americans, was astounded to
hear that their president, Mr Richard Nixon, had arrived in Beijing to make
friends, to establish an American policy with Communist China. Nobody, no
politician in America, had ever risen to fame, to the House, then the Senate,
then the Presidency, on such a single emotion, so tenaciously held, as his
hatred of Communism.

Accordingly Mr Nixon's forceful gesture in this breakthrough to China was
mocked by all good men and true. The pundits who support Mr Clinton's expansion
of this Nixon engagement policy point to great improvement in China's economy
and also in the recognition of human rights. The people who are against it are
mostly conservative Republicans who have now jumped on the ideological
bandwagon and accused Mr Clinton of having parked all ideals to accommodate
despotism. The liberal Democrats, as usual, go on regretting the imprisonment
of two famous dissidents, but hope that Mr Jiang will one day decline into a
liberal.

Of course, in view of his old rhetoric about despots and human rights, Mr
Clinton had to ask the questions along those lines and he got unembarrassed
answers. But what had moved him to recognise what his administration calls a
reality check was, of course, the first fact we mentioned – the sudden looming
up on the horizon of China as an oncoming economic giant, the economic giant of
Asia.

Mr Jiang had no trouble accepting this realistic invitation because he was
willing to pay a price, higher by far, than all the Asians who'd paid thousands
to have coffee in the White House. Mr Jiang paid $3billion to give an order for
50 aircraft from – who else – the biggest airplane manufacturer in the world,
Boeing of Seattle, a mighty firm that, inexplicably, in its last report was
over $200million in the red.

So Mr Jiang went back home where those millions and millions had seen, on
television in public squares, the salutes and the trooping ceremonies of
welcome, the handshakes and smiles between the two presidents, the tour of the
House with the Speaker, Mr Newt Gingrich, no less, as host. No shots, of
course, of the questions about Tibet or Tiananmen Square. Altogether a picture
of the leader as the jovial ally and equal of President Clinton.

When Mr Jiang flew home though, I felt there was among more Americans than
would care to be polled, a sense of relief, an inner feeling that perhaps,
after all, what was good for the economy, the American economy, was good for
American foreign policy.

The relief didn't last long. Exit Mr Jiang, enter the incorrigible, the
inimitable, the detestable Saddam Hussein. A friend, waking to a morning
bulletin of the tube, said in a pained phrase what I believe most Americans
felt – "Not again".

Saddam Hussein had made the bold, the outrageous, announcement that he would
stop any Americans on the United Nations inspection team from going on with
their job, which is to poke around, find and destroy any weapons of mass
destruction that he might still be making and hiding, in spite of the
six-year-old United Nations ban, agreed to by a defeated Saddam, on all such
weapons including poison gas and germ warfare labs and to permit, at all times,
inspection by United Nations officers.

What it's hard for most of us to believe is that the UN has been at it all
these years, constantly finding new dumps and sites and now, according to the
Australian head of the inspectors, coming on a buried weapon that Saddam very
much wants to keep hidden.

Even more outrageous to the "What, not again", Americans. Saddam announced he
would shoot down any American airplanes fulfilling their UN function of flying
over a region of Iraq. To which, as you know, the United States, with United
Nations agreement, has said it will withhold, for one week only, any more U2
reconnaissance flights, while a UN team goes off to negotiate, that is argue,
with Saddam Hussein.

There's a lively fear here that an interval for so-called negotiation will give
him time to cripple more monitoring equipment, which he's been doing, or
dismember or immobilise equipment that can grow biological seed stocks, not
tomorrow, but today.

The hugeness of the problem is reflected in the fact that England is the size
of New York State and that Iraq is eight times as large as either of them and
until we develop radar and sonar cameras that can penetrate deep underground
from invisible altitudes, the job of clearing even a few thousand acres of
hidden stocks of small lethal weapons, is obviously enormous.

The weapon Saddam feared the UN was just beginning to move in on was probably
the hideous nerve gas, VX, a small canister of which is capable of paralysing
the population of a large, perhaps the largest, cities. That's what we're up
against and the time to find it and negotiate it out of being, is short. That
is the cheerful letter for the week.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP