Bombing of Libya - 25 April 1986

It’s tempting, but I believe too soon to attempt what the bankers call a trial
balance on the American bombing of Tripoli.

That's to say, a double-entry review of what has to be taken into account, for
the moment, though one or two facts and attitudes, have come to light which I
ought to mention before we move on as all of us must, to living our lives.
First, some of you may recall my saying that a decisive factor, in calling on
Britain to release the F1-11’s based there, was the assurance of the men in the
Pentagon that the F1-11 is the best, the most dependable, fighter bomber we
have for precision night bombing.

Well, I hope somebody in the Pentagon or the White House is making an
unflinching review of their performance. Five of them apparently failed to
function, and the ones that worked didn’t set up much of a record for precision
bombing of military targets, if they hit a schoolhouse, Allied embassy grounds
and several civilian suburbs.

If it was assumed, in the briefing that Colonel Gadaffi’s tent and living
quarters were terrorist headquarters, then somebody ought to have guessed that
women and children would have been almost certain victims. It’s something that
military planners, must, these days, think twice about. One, from simple human
considerations, but secondly – and it's why I said, these days – because
television crews are going to be on hand, and the victim is going to see to it
that they get gruesomely selective pictures.

So, of course, the first human result shown here, as well as everywhere else,
wherever, the colonel's wounded children, and other civilians. Which presented
the radical young, in many countries, with the golden opportunity of
maintaining through marches, and chantings and posters, that President Reagan
is in the child-butchering business.

Another item causing question the White House’s irrefutable or refutable
evidence that the Berlin disco bombing was Libya’s doing. It was the arrest
last Monday of a Jordanian charged with that crime, and the identifying of him
as the brother of the man who was picked up in London on suspicion of trying to
blow up that Israeli airliner. At the last report, both brothers were being
linked not with Libya but with a pro-Syrian party in Jordan.

So, we have to note down for the record, when it comes to be written that the
main provocation given for the attack on Tripoli – Libya’s involvement in the
Berlin bombing – might now be refuted. And a question should be jotted down, in
view of the performance of the F1-11s – why couldn’t the fighter bombers aboard
the two American aircraft carriers in the Mediterranean have done the job?

On the other hand, the other side of the ledger, we have to recognise that the
American action, if it stirred innumerable anti-American marches and riots, as
practically any American military action anywhere, is bound to do today, it did
put on the spot the western governments that have sat around for so long,
deploring international terrorism, and getting out such innocuous resolutions
as the one the European Community foreign ministers, passed on the very eve of
the Tripoli attack, which expressed the customary brave concern, and ended with
the brave sentence that states clearly implicated in supporting terrorism
should be induced to renounce such support and respect the rules of
international law.

How induce, wherefore respect? Well, after the attacks several European nations
at least felt obliged to publicise new restrictions on Libyan nationals: the
closing of embassies, the expulsion of suspected Libyans and so forth. And
France directly warned Libya that it would use military force to respond to any
attack the colonel might think of mounting against Tunisia.

The final item to enter into the ledger before we put it back on the shelf is
the news, which seems to be thoroughly authenticated, that when the French were
consulted by the Americans before the attack took place, their government was
ready to support, whether in the spirit or in uniform is not clear, anyway, to
support a larger American attack, one aimed – one official put it – at
effecting a major change in Libya, which could only mean the overthrow of
Gadaffi.

But they would not go along with the fringe attack on Tripoli or, as one
Frenchman put it, a pinprick, that should intimate to the countries which
sponsor terrorism that the United States is not the only country whose patience
is frayed and who was prepared to take more drastic action, than the signing of
a resolution to induce such people to cease and assist, and please, to be good
boys and respect the rules of international law.

Last Sunday, I expect, I hope, many of you were able to tune in and make the
acquaintance of an old gentleman who lives round my corner, and tends, like me,
to totter off to the same shop and the same bakery, to procure the delicious
goodies, which all the best dieticians forbid to the aged.

He is the towering, if tottering, artist whose name for 60 years we have
approximately pronounced as Vladimir Horowitz. I notice that, his Russian hosts
called him by the same name of course, but in a manner almost unrecognisable to
us, uncouth, non-Slavs. It reminded me of a night in Madrid long ago, when I
was taking with a Spanish film director who told us that the Spaniards'
favourite American film actor was Horace Estiad. I took his word for it, till,
when he talked with enthusiasm about the Lindberg film and Hitchcock’s Rear
window, I recognised his hero as none other than James Stewart.

Well, Horowitz then. Hororwitz is 81, born in or near Kiev, nobody is quite
certain, what is certain is that after the revolution he saw his father
arrested and taken to a prison camp where he died. That Horowitz, already a
star pianist at 21, left his homeland in 1925, toured far and wide and acquired
the reputation as long ago as the 1930s or '40s, of being one of the two or
three greatest living pianists.

In 1942, he became an American citizen and swore, as he did as late as last
year, that he would never return to Russia. What changed his mind was the
pleading of President Reagan that he should be the one to initiate the new
cultural exchange programme which the president signed with Mr Gorbachev last
November.

Mr Horowitz finally gave in, on his own rather imperious terms. He will not and
would not, play any other piano than his own, it would have to be dismembered
in New York and assembled in Moscow. We had an engaging and funny little
feature on the network news about this procedure. What was needed, said the
commentator, was three or four burly Americans, to be told to be careful. And
then at the other end, three or four burly Russians, who would be told to be
careful.

It couldn’t have been better if it had been done by professional actors. The
actual dynamics of trying to get the thing out whole and then taking off the
legs and manoeuvring it into the lift, was worthy of Laurel and Hardy and the
moving men, I must say, seemed completely unaware of the camera... "Hey Bert,
easy Bert." Watch it please, the Moscow end looked like the American original
who had been flown over to complete the act.

The care and comfort of the piano were only a preliminary condition, of Mr
Horowitz’s surrender to Anglo-Russian friendship. A private jet, a television
crew of 43 members, his wife and secretary and chef and others of his personal
entourage 30 adventure film cassettes you might want to see in the restful
hours between his recitals in Moscow and Leningrad. An agreement that he would
have flown in from France, his favourite vegetable, artichokes. And, from
London or Paris, his favourite fish, sole de Manche, which is his funny way of
pronouncing Dover sole.

Last weekend, the Russians must have had many misgivings about the fringe
benefits, or fringe nuisances, of the cultural exchange programme. I hope
somebody told them that there are artists of the top calibre, who would be
content to fly public and settle for wurst and vodka. But nobody at this end
doubted these personal stipulations were worth it. Of course, many of the best
artists from both countries have been coming and going for years, but always at
the instigation of private sponsors.

What the president’s decision to start an official government-blessed exchange
has done, or should do, is to extend, the availability of the best talent in
both countries, but also to make the performers themselves feel that they are
immune from suspicion as enemy agents, or individualists defying their
governments. May seem a small point, but it’s an important one.

The fact is that many, perhaps most, first-rate artists or second-rate or
fifth-rate are non-political. It has always been so, and there is no crime in
being non-political, until I suppose you refuse to serve your country in any
way during a war. A curious blighting shadow was thrown over the otherwise
joyous event of Horowitz’s Moscow appearance by the fact that his visit was not
advertised, that in the local, I presume, national also, newspaper
entertainment columns there was an actual blank beneath the name of the
conservatory in which he played.

Fourteen hundred officials and their wives had seats and 400 only were left for
the public. There seemed to be a strenuous official campaign to pretend
Horowitz wasn’t there. But, a couple of thousand people mobbed his car when it
first drove up to the theatre. Somehow, the people had heard. One Sunday
afternoon in Moscow, for a short time, the people triumphed over the
politicians.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP