Preserving the peace in Serbia - 5 August 1994

I suppose because the Second World War happened in the early 1940s and the
early 1990s being exactly 50 years away from those great events, we were bound
to be drenched as we'd been lately with anniversaries. And yet in talking to
people alive and accessioned then and now, I find I'm not alone in harbouring
personal anniversaries more than what Sir Walter Scott writing about the
battles against Napoleon called the "big bow-bow" events.

Well this week, there passed a date that to me strikes a note of recognition
like no other date in my lifetime. I imagine everybody has one other date apart
from their birthday that has for them a special what shall I say, I'm trying to
avoid the dreadful buzzword resonance, let's say then a date that rings a bell
in the memory. My date is 4 August and this year it resounded more than ever
because it flashed me back to a small boy 80 years ago to the day sitting
tailor-legged on the sands inverting a small bucket and making a fourth gun
emplacement to the castle I was building. Wafting in across the Irish Sea and
the smell of seaweed was a band playing on the central pier, it was playing I
learn the name of the tune later Alexander's Ragtime Band. My father, who'd
been supervising the construction of my fortress, had gone off up on to the
promenade to see what all the bother was about. There was a boy maybe two boys
shouting their heads off, they were waving something I remember paper banners
some such flapping poster. My father's form grew bigger as he strode across the
sands and stood against his deckchair. All he said was, "We're at war with
Germany". Of course, this meant very little if anything to me, he might have
said we're at war with Tibet, but two or three people lying nearby sat upright,
it was a shocker an absurdity, why Germany, over what?

In the months and the years that followed while I was studying in school, the
causes of the Wars of the Roses or the 100 Years War, I was picking up from the
newspapers the causes of the war we were in, which we called then the Great
War. And I remember almost as sharply as I recalled the names of the early
battles, the Battle of Mons, the Battle of the Somme, certain place names that
were memorable because they were so odd and up to that time unknown, names like
Bosnia, Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro. There was one city you could almost
parrot as a one-word cause of the war, it was the capital city of Sarajevo
where some Emperor of Austria, I think, had been assassinated for reasons
nobody was going into with an 8-9 year old, that was the prime cause why, don't
ask me me why, we the British had to go in and save what we called gallant
little Belgium.

Later on when it was all over and studying the great First World War became a
normal part of modern history, we began to hear from our masters; our
schoolmasters some of them were now back from the front. All through that war,
I was taught by women. We heard about something called Greater Serbia that it
seems is what the Serbs had wanted all the time, whatever Greater Serbia meant
it was a big enough threat in the summer of 1914 to engage subsequently about
20 nations in an enormous slaughter, but by the mid-'20s we'd forgotten all
about those odd named countries, no wonder, they'd all been wiped off the map
and come under the general label of Yugoslavia.

In the following, believe me, 60-odd, 70 years, none of us Americans as well as
British gave a thought to those old vanished or absorbed countries until three
years ago. As for the phrase Greater Serbia, I hadn't heard it until I talked
just lately with a Croatian doctor in London, a young man pretty close to
despair. The Geneva Partition had just been drafted and urged on the contending
countries, this man as you can imagine had a point of view very different from
our own, he regarded the partition as a "reward for aggression, a Munich," he
said. And since the aggression had included the practice of genocide under the
sanitised name of ethnic cleansing, this angry doctor said, "it's worse than
the Munich surrender, it's the signing of a Munich after Dachau. What he
wondered, is America going to do about it, what had held America back two years
ago.

He evidently assumed that the United States was the one automatic protector of
small oppressed nations everywhere. This gave us awful pause. Of course, the
slaughter of his own countrymen and the seizure of much of their land was the
dreadful personal hurt, but he maintained that the big ominous threat that lay
beyond the present horrors was the urge for a Greater Serbia, as he said, in
1914 that's what tolled the old bell.

Does America realise that he almost cried this phrase aloud, "the Serbs are
only 12 miles away from the Adriatic"; that, he maintained was what Serbia had
wanted all along and Russia. His view of Russia as you might guess was also
very different from ours, he didn't believe Russia had given up it's yearning
for or its claim to a greater Russia. And with their ancient allies, the Serbs,
they could make Romania, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovakia vassal states
again. He was a man plainly obsessed with the fear of the Russian-Serbian
Alliance as the cause of the next big war and believed that if the Geneva
Partition was accepted, it would be only a kind of Munich pause before another
bout of expansion.

I suggested that the Russians had had a change of heart since the break-up of
the Soviet Union, whether or not he said Moscow has given steady and open
diplomatic support to the Serbs throughout the two years of this war. And
Russian businessmen more than anybody have ignored or broken the United Nations
economic sanctions. But now I said, I'm told the Russian foreign secretary
himself has sworn that if the nationalist Serbs don't accept the partition and
the war breaks out again in full force, Russia will play no intervening part.
Of course, he said on a note of bitter triumph that's a way of giving the Serbs
a free hand to gobble up more of our countries.

The most interesting part of this disturbing talk, to be quite cold blooded
about it, was to me the presumption on the doctor's part, and he was close to
Croatian diplomats, the presumption that the United States had been
scandalously lax in not fulfilling an historic obligation, what obligation? To
be the protector of small oppressed nations everywhere. He was evidently under
the delusion that the United States was the dominant power of the world and the
only power that could do this.

I said as calmly as I could that this is a delusion fostered by America itself
by presidential candidates in their campaign speeches and more than anybody by
one President John F Kennedy, who in his inaugural speech made a glowing
promise that echoed round the world, a promise that was wonderful as rhetoric,
ruinous in fact, impossible as policy. It was, remember, that swinging sentence
about supporting any friend opposing any foe making any sacrifice for the
maintenance and success of liberty.

At that point, January 1961, the United States had tacit if not signed
agreements with 41 nations, any one of them or a combination of them were to be
the beneficiaries of America's sacrifice and protection. Of course, the factor
then as now was that very few Americans were going to give up their automobiles
or accept food rationing or make any other sacrifice to assure the success of
liberty in any but one or two of those 41 countries. Vietnam called the bluff
and look what immense sacrifices at home we made, not even taxed for it, which
might be one of the unmentioned causes of the deficit.

Anyway, while expressing all the human sympathy I could muster from my Croatian
friend I told him that with the severe cuts in defence spending and the now
settled mood of Americans not to go into any war that might entail many men
getting killed or wounded, the United States was in no condition to fight more
than one conventional war two at most!

By way of a practical warning and gently suggesting he should not expect too
much from any further American promise, I said something like, "once you go
into a small country you never know what your getting into" and that took us
back again to 4 August 1914 and how if you'd missed reading the papers for two
or three days only, the British declaration of war on Germany was a thunderbolt
was preposterous until two days before Britain went in, the British cabinet had
by a unanimous vote declared it would not intervene in this remote Balkan
dispute. You were there cried this astonished young doctor apparently believing
me to be about 110? No I said, I was at a toddler building a fortress against a
possible invasion from across the Irish Sea, I heard the name of your country
then and didn't hear it again until a young beanpole of a Yugoslav tennis
player appeared at Wimbledon two years ago and insisted on being introduced as
a Croat. Goran the doctor cried, Goran IvaniÅ¡eviÄ‡, a great friend. He gave me
a warm smile and shook my hand, so he said returning to his Armageddon mood,
nothing much is to be expected from the United States then? Not I thought from
America's specific mood and not so long as America wants to stay friendly with
and helpful to Russia and the Russians want to preserve on the side their
ancient I'd say unbreakable alliance with the Serbs.

All of this from the Archduke Franz Ferdinand to the recent plan to give the
Serbs control of 49% of Bosnia territory from Sarajevo to the doctors Munich
after Dacal, all of this was tapped by the memory of that sunny hot 4 August 80
years ago and a small boy building sandcastles and hearing his father say the
meaningless sentence, "We're at war with Germany".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP