Gorby mania - 13 December 1987

Coming out of four days of Gorby mania is rather like the feeling on, say, 27
December when you've just emerged from a funfair of razzle-dazzle, of barkers
and winking lights and blasting music and unceasing merriment and everybody's
stuffed to the gills. And then some innocent, some small child says, "What's
Christmas all about anyway? What does it mean?"

I imagine a hundred years from now the printed word "Christmas" will carry an
asterisk indicating a footnote about its quaint origin. As, today, an
inquisitive child wondering about the word "boycott" can find out it's actually
the name of a man, Captain Boycott.

Well, when all the newspapers are thrown out and the television screen has
finally gone to black, we have to admit that the summit, the reason for the
summit, the substance for the agreement, the grounds for hope or fear, that is
not what those five, some say eight, thousand journalists were covering.

They were covering – and we were absorbing – not an historical event but a
television event. Anything and everything that could be filmed. Which meant
mainly following the two principal actors, Mr and Mrs Gorbachev, every second
of the way in public.

And even before the end of it, the networks held a national poll, rather
international, not what you like and don't like about the treaty, nobody could
be expected to have read that stuffy old treaty, but how do you feel about a)
Mr Gorbachev and b) Mr Reagan? The poll, the survey, extended through Europe.

In Britain 68% took a favourable view of Mr Gorbachev, only 39% a favourable
view of Mr Reagan. In this country, it was a close thing, a near miss for Mr
Reagan – 48% favourable for Gorbachev, 51% for Reagan.

A visiting friend of mine, a musician, who never reads or looks at political
news, walked in on the telly reporting these percentages and said, irritably,
"How do you feel about Gorbachev? How do you feel about Reagan? What's that got
to do with an arms agreement?" He showed both the naiveté and the wisdom of the
innocent.

Of course it has nothing to do with the treaty, with policy, but today public
support for any policy depends not on people's knowing about the policy but on
the way they like the looks of the man or woman advocating the policy on
television. At long last – it's been half a century or more – the Russians have
understood this.

We used not to have to worry about their public image. They always hated being
filmed or photographed. And since the cult of individuality was so long
considered a sin, they tended to line up for group pictures in their
interchangeable cardboard suits. They didn't deign to cater to the press, their
own press were obedient lackeys. The western press were running dogs of the
imperialists.

Under Gorbachev, all this has changed. They allow themselves to be filmed by
us, cracking jokes, offering drinks to the running-dog press. They're eager to
let us see films of protest demonstrations outside the Kremlin – something
startlingly new – which they must pretend are as common as protest
demonstrations and marches have been in Washington and London since time began.

The Russians are shown joking across a table with the main adversaries in the
arms talks. They have, for the most part, discarded their cardboard suits. Some
of them, it's been noticed, wear grey flannel suits and regimental ties. And
always they wink, they joke. Mr Gorbachev is, has proved himself to be, of
course, the star of this new Soviet production. He looks genial, kindly,
mature, good-natured.

So engagingly so that it seems almost blasphemous to some people if you are
tactless enough to blab out that he was for so long in charge of the chilling
apparatus that makes the political arrests, runs the labour camps, commits
people with a mind of their own to psychiatric hospitals so they'll come out
thinking correctly, and practised lord knows what tortures on the recalcitrant
and the unrepentant.

Well, I, too, really ache to believe in the deep sincerity of both Mr Gorbachev
and Mr Reagan. And it's not comfortable to recall that the American CIA has
done some squalid things in its time. But whenever one of them came to light,
like the mining of the Nicaraguan harbours, there'd be a genuine howl from
Congress. The thing gets out and the Congressional committees that keep their
eyes on the CIA toughen their restrictions on covert activities.

I have to say that watching some of the social cruising and banter between Ron
and Mikhail, between Raisa and Nancy, as we're encouraged to call them, I've
enjoyed myself when I could put my mind to sleep. But on this whole topic, the
human, or packaged human, public relations, image-building side of the summit,
I keep wondering how different are things going to be when the treaty's
ratified. Which, thanks to Mr Gorbachev's engaging personality as much as
anything, it will surely be. When it's all over, how different will relations
be?

I hope and pray the American right wing will stop ranting about the Evil Empire
and how the Soviets are bound to cheat on the verification precautions. If you
feel that way, you're likely, without compunction, to learn a few cheating
tricks yourself. But I also hope and pray, with an American lady, a determined
liberal columnist, during a sonservative administration. Her name is Meg
Greenfield. And she's all for this treaty, and the next, the strategic one.

But she wrote the other day after rejoicing that the Russians have come out of
the Kremlin closet and that the attending Russian journalists have this week
been socialising with the American journalists, she wrote she was saddened to
hear her Soviet colleagues or counterparts, I quote, "argue the truth of
Gorbachev's grotesque assertion that we're inspiring Soviet emigration as a
plot to steal their scientific talent. Or that, and they print this, we have
developed an ethnic weapon aimed exclusively at blacks. And that we invented
and propagated the AIDS virus".

Her concluding comment was "Precisely because they no longer resemble aliens
from another world, or Peter Sellers' Russians, and precisely because there are
human aspects with which you can connect, even warmly and with humour, such
moments are the more chilling and instructive."

Well, that's what the summit was about. The filming of the casual social
exchanges, the tours, the dinners, the quips, the motor car comings and goings
of Mr and Mrs Gorbachev and Mr and Mrs Reagan. Those constituted what movie and
TV directors call the production values of the play. But how about the play?
The script? The things agreed on? What is Christmas all about anyway?

I can only say, after a first diligent and laboured attempt to get down to the
text of the treaty, I can only say it's so dense with abstract nouns and the
special jargon of the arms control business that it seems to me to offer
endless little loopholes for, shall we say not violation, but debatable
interpretation. And I know you don't want to get into that. Your main interest,
like mine, is peace. Isn't it? We're all in favour of peace. And I'm prepared
to believe that the drafters of this treaty truly believe they're taking a
first, positive step towards peace. All right, let's now look at how this thing
came about. And then how two schools of thought look at it.

I think it's only fair to remind ourselves, however favourably or unfavourably
we regard Mr Reagan, that it was his idea, back in 1981. But to go back to what
you might call the red alert that caused the Americans to get worried in the
first place, in the mid-1970s we heard, correctly, that the Russians had
developed a missile, intermediate, mobile, very accurate, with many warheads.
It was the SS20. And it was going to reinforce the Russian superiority all
round.

President Carter decided something had to be done. And it was he who launched
the programme, angrily resisted for so long in many countries in Europe, to
offset the SS20s with a new generation of intermediate American missiles. They
were installed, with NATO's permission, in 1983.

By that time, Mr Reagan was in the White House and at the end of his first
year, believing, or being advised, that a new American generation of missiles
would provoke yet a third generation from the Soviet Union, he proposed the
so-called "zero option" which is substantially what the treaty, just signed, is
all about.

The Russians didn't just reject this proposal, they scorned it. And the doves
in Europe and America said it was preposterous to ask the Russians to destroy
many more weapons than we were to do. The hardliners here said the number of
weapons was not the point, it was only an approximately equal number of
warheads that would ensure a balance.

Well, as we all know, the present solution was resisted all through the
mid-80s. Mr Reagan fell back on a defensive position, which was to start
research on a defence in space. And for years the Russians publicly bemoaned
this Star Wars idea while beginning to explore it themselves.

At Reykjavik, they were ready to agree to an intermediate treaty if Reagan
would abandon Star Wars research. He said, "No go!" Well, apparently the
Russians own Star Wars research is far enough along, and their economy in such
a dismal state, that these two considerations, it's the feeling here, persuaded
Mr Gorbachev to agree to the 1981 proposal and come and sign the treaty that
embodies it.

The best thing about it is surely the provisions for verification that the
hawks, the right wing, have been screaming for all along, in the certainty that
the Russians would never consent. Well, they have consented to verifying
procedures, agreeable to the Americans, except to the hard right, which has now
transferred its objections to the Soviet's huge army, its financing of
terrorism in Africa, the Middle East, Central America, and to the rather
pitiful Soviet record in flouting the human rights provisions of the treaty
signed at Helsinki.

However, this summit was not about curing all the wrongs in both societies and
setting the world to rights. The hard right, Mr Reagan's oldest, most ardent,
supporters, are in dismay.

The rest, even old hawks, know that the hard right will lose in the Senate
because if the Senate rejected this treaty, the Russians, on the evidence of
their friendly, nice-guy, image this week would gain a tremendous worldwide
propaganda advantage and make the Reagan administration, in its decline, look
like a sullen warmonger, clanking off into the twilight.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP