Franklin D Roosevelt monument - 9 May 1997

Twenty-five hundred years ago, down in the Persian desert, they unveiled a
statue to the conqueror Cyrus the Great. And, last week, in Washington DC, they
unveiled one, a little late in the day, to Franklin Delano Roosevelt.

It's a simple and, for several millennia, it has seemed a proper thing to set
up a statue to a national hero. And they started doing it as soon as some
warrior brought together a rabble of little kingdoms and called them a nation.

But a statue was not always the preferred way of honouring the dead king. The
Egyptians made the point of honour the creation of a tomb for the departed one,
on the understanding that his soul would be decently and safely housed there
and had better not be disturbed by any nosey parker, an archaeologist say, who
came afterwards to see what was down there.

When a famous one, a Mr Howard Carter, invaded the tomb of Tutankhamen, to the
applause of the Western world, the Egyptians prophesied an early end for him.
And his death, very soon afterwards, may or may not have been a coincidence.

But statues have been, right into our time, the favourite form of memorial to a
great man; sometimes, but rarely, of a woman. There's a terrific one in Western
Kansas of a pioneer wife, just a symbol of thousands, striding along into the
roaring west wind, her skirt swirling, her jaw firm.

But of the men, I should guess that throughout the late 18th Century most
statues, in Europe certainly, were of men on horseback, reminders of the
warrior king as hero, and his main form of military transportation, the horse.

After the American Civil War, and on through the First World War, the immense
majority of statues of soldiers were of a man on a horse because it was on a
horse that the commanders commanded their men. Why did it suddenly come to an
end? In a grim and entirely unpredicted way.

Just about this time of the year, in the spring of 1942, I was a correspondent
for a British paper with all the panache and wad of credentials of a war
correspondent. And I was visiting the great cavalry post of the United States
army at Fort Riley, Kansas. I was there at a bad time. America had been in the
war only four months and during that time the Japanese had either conquered or
over-run Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, Burma.

They'd captured the Philippines where General MacArthur had first meant to take
a stand. But he escaped across the wide open sea to set up headquarters in
Australia, and the rearguard was trapped at a place called Bataan. By lunchtime
at Fort Riley that day the news had finally come in that General Wainwright and
his men were besieged and starving.

After an hour of speculation over this awful news, a young officer said aloud,
"I wonder what happened to the horses?" A colonel, a small, wiry man, legs
bowed from a lifetime on his beloved horses, said simply, "On Bataan, they ate
them". And when I was leaving the base and the colonel was seeing me off, he
said almost in shock, "You know something? This is the end of the cavalry. It's
the end of the horse".

It was an appalling thought to him, as if an actor had just come out of an
operation and discovered he'd lost his legs. A pretty bleak story to have to
put together. I decided to file no story from Fort Riley.

I doubt there's been put up an equestrian statue since then. The only horses
left in the United States armed forces are a dozen or so living in a single
stable in Washington DC. They serve only for presidential funerals. So the
horse statue's gone the way of the horse. And along with it has gone, we've
only lately found out, any general public agreement about what a given hero's
statue should look like.

Statesmen were always shown standing up, clutching in one hand a scroll,
presumably of their accumulated wisdom, a 19th-Century tradition that had to
end as the old austere statues were bound to change.

But only 30 years ago, there was a dreadful dust-up over a statue to be erected
outside Sir Edwin Lutyen's impressive Georgian pile, the British Embassy in
Washington. It was designed and came out as an heroic statue of Winston
Churchill. Some busybody noticed that the great man held, in his left hand, a
half-smoked cigar. No other accessory to a likeness of Mr Churchill could have
been more suitable. But there was a big to-do. People said it was a tribute to
the humanity of the leader or a defamation.

The sculptor, who finally had enough of these snipings, revealed that he'd
looked at, in the interest of nothing but the truth, over 300 photographs of
Churchill and in 278 of them, there was his trusted cigar. Eventually the cigar
was kept, and there it is. And, as always with these public uproars, once the
thing is done, nobody makes a squeak of protest.

Now we have a new uproar, in the same place. In Washington DC, President
Clinton last week unveiled, as I say, a statue of Churchill's companion hero of
the Second War, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt. It is the highlight of a
seven-acre plot given over to celebrating FDR not only with a statue but with
artefacts or symbols of his life and appeal. There, for instance, is a model of
his little dog, his Scottie, Fala. And an image of a man bent over, listening
to a table radio – an announcement to most tourists, and a reminder to the old
ones, that Roosevelt was the first president with the gift of using the radio
with masterful simplicity and guile as a persuasive, or propaganda, weapon. A
gift that simply drove the Republicans nuts.

The main statue shows Roosevelt seated, in what looks like a simple armchair.
If you look carefully, you'll see that the legs have tiny wheels. And this
looks as if the sculptor or the committee or whoever had the final say was
scared of the prospect of a wheelchair controversy. Sure enough, it came
roaring up the moment after the main statue was unveiled. In no time, groups of
the disabled, paralysed veterans, just-injured old folks, objected. Roosevelt
was a paraplegic, was he not? Well then, why wasn't he shown as one and be open
to the admiration of everyone as an inspiration to the disabled?

It's interesting that it's only since a big four-hour documentary on FDR was
shown last year which contained, for the first time, a host of movies nobody
outside the family had ever seen. FDR propelling his wheelchair, talking from
it, moving around in it and seen, in that Infantile Paralysis Centre in Georgia
he founded, in the swimming pool, seeing, below the massive upper body, the
thin, wasted legs dangling in the water like tendrils. Only since then has the
general public been actively aware of Roosevelt as a cripple.

It was astonishing, a miracle of restraint on the part of the press which could
not possibly happen today, that, in all that time, no newsreel cameramen ever
shot or showed a picture of Roosevelt limping clumsily up a ramp, or moving in
or out of his wheelchair.

So now there are people who say that to have a statue with him in his
wheelchair would pay tribute to the man's incredible courage in staying in
office and very much in command through the 12 momentous years of his
presidency. There's another school that says first, Roosevelt, himself, wanted
a plain stone, with his name and dates. That he cooperated throughout his
presidency with hiding his disability, that he probably could not have been
elected president if everybody knew, from the start, and saw his crippled
figure.

One debater, one writer alone, so far as I know, the columnist Charles
Krauthammer has put his finger on the crux of these competing arguments. "The
point", he says, "is not what some imaginary FDR would want. The point is which
of these competing ideals, the restraint of the historical FDR versus the
self-revelation and display of today's politicians, do we most want to honour?
What a balm is Roosevelt's attitude of defiant and dignified denial."

I have to say that this is a mighty persuasive argument to me. But it's one
that no current politician dare uphold. The cry of the disabled cannot be
publicly flouted or ignored, and President Clinton got the Senate to concur,
without a vote, to have another statue with FDR in a wheelchair. The house is
certain to go along. Not to do so would be as bad as voting against Mother or
Santa Claus.

But the whole brouhaha should be a warning to all future sculptors and
memorialists, in whatever medium. The Vietnam War Memorial is a simple, huge
rectangle, a thin slab of black marble, with all the names of the dead
inscribed. It is immense, and immensely moving. But the protests soon came
thundering in. And by now, there's an addition, a group of soldiers and nurses,
of several races, of course. The Korean War Memorial shows veteran heroes
plainly defined as white soldiers, black soldier, Korean soldiers and
American-Indian soldiers. And after another wave of protest, there was an
addition too, a women's Korean War Memorial, in another place.

It makes me think, with a tug at the heartstrings, of Mr Jefferson. When the
founding fathers were busy in Philadelphia creating the Constitution, Jefferson
was busy pottering around Paris making notes on what the new nation must have
and especially what it mustn't have. He jotted down, "Titles of nobility.

"One thing a fine Republic could do without, a very great vanity" he wrote.
Another thing he noticed, too often bruising his eyes and his Republican
sensibilities, big, pompous things, over-idolising this man or that, public
statues. "Let us not have", he wrote, "any public statues. A very great and
pompous frivolity".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP