Kevin Curren and Flushing Meadows - 30 August 1985

He looks like an intellectual trying to look like a San Francisco hippy of the
late 1960s sixties and not making it.

He slouches. His hair is a tousled Robin Hood effort that also doesn’t succeed.
He has a thoughtful, musing look which doesn’t go with his thighs, which are of
the dimensions of Apollo’s. His thighs let him down on Wednesday but he finally
gave vent to those thoughts and that musing.

“I hate New York,” he said, “the environment. In Flushing Meadow there’s noise,
the people in the grandstand are never seated and it takes an hour and a half
in traffic to get here. It’s sickening that with all the money they get from TV
they don’t build a better facility. The United States Tennis Association should
be shot and they should drop an A bomb on the place.”

These are the words of Kevin Curren, the native South African and now an
American citizen who will not look back on 1985 as his finest year in his
chosen profession of tournament tennis. Less than two months ago he loped on to
the centre court at Wimbledon as the obvious, the experienced, favourite
against the chunky teenager from Germany, Boris the Becker. He left that
encounter deeply dazed to wind up the Becker’s first star victim.

On Wednesday he played in the first round of the United States Open tennis
championship and this time we knew that against a promising but fairly obscure
young Frenchman, Guy Forget, Curren would unloose the thunderbolts that so
recently and so astonishingly disposed of Connors and McEnroe. But on Wednesday
only eight of the terrible Curren thunderbolts seemed to be available, whereas
the young Frenchman had the gall to release 16 of them. The result was a fairly
easy win in 90 minutes and Mr Curren was slouching off home, which is in Dallas
these days.

His views on New York and its tournament centre are, of course, being called an
outburst, but there was nothing explosive about them. They were spoken quietly,
thoughtfully like the confessional of a man who was at last glad to get
something off his mind and I’m glad to say that there were sports writers who
applauded him.

One of the best, Peter Alfano of the New York Times, wrote “It would be easy to
dismiss Curren as tennis’s grey cloud but there’s something refreshing about
his honesty, even if he doesn’t always say things we like to hear. There are
too many people in public life who smile only for the cameras. Curren doesn’t
even smile for them and considering his views on New York and the Flushing
Meadow tennis centre we shouldn’t be surprised.”

New York, of course, is too vast a place to generalise about. Like all
metropolises it’s a huge collection of small towns bunched together to give the
residents the agreeable feeling that they are much more sophisticated than the
residents of small towns that are separated by a stretch of countryside. But
the relatively new home of American championship tennis is surely a fair target
for anyone, even non-tennis players. Who could picture in their mind’s eye the
sort of stadium that would be an improvement on the ivy-clad charm, but also,
eventually, the cramped and inadequate charm of Forest Hills.

So what, at great expense, did they build instead? First they chose a site on
Flushing Meadows. Flushing Meadows? Isn’t that the site of La Guardia Airport?
It is, and no one has ever explained who decided to give the contract to
somebody who thought that the tarmac of La Guardia Airport was just the place
on which to play United States tennis championships. Someone with the authority
of success, I’m not sure it wasn’t Martina Navratilova, jokingly advised a
young newcomer to plug your ears with cotton wool and go to it. The planes,
about one every 25 seconds, take off and, fortunately, always miss the flagpole
and the scoreboard of the stadium.

There are, of course, planes coming in all the time and between the income and
outgo they cause a fearful racket. If the Flushing tennis centre had been there
for years and years the city fathers would have been hounded and bullied long
ago to set up a new centre somewhere in the surrounding country and I may say
that one of the pleasures of New York city is that you have only to go over to
the west side of Manhattan and drive north beyond the George Washington Bridge
and you are at once in quite deep, rolling wooded country. But no, to plant a
tennis stadium right in the glide path of hundreds and hundreds of planes is
sort of exciting, isn’t it?

I’m sure that Mayor Ed Koch, the most inveterate, incurable New Yorker extant,
looks benignly at the TV sound and light spectacle of the centre court and the
banked crowds and the thundering planes and sighs “I love New York”. The
architectural masterpiece of Flushing Meadows is, however, a great rectangular
grid like one wall of a skyscraper that houses the bank of lights which go on
when the sun is declining.

They could have erected it in the north or the south or the east. They put it
up on the west side of the stadium, so that the summer sun would drop slowly
behind it and throw a deep, ever-slanting shadow across part of the centre
court, so that the player up that end enjoys not only the excitement of not
hearing the ball but of not seeing it.

I believe that if this stadium had been built anywhere else on earth it would
have been so raucously condemned and ridiculed by the American invaders that
I’m pretty sure sooner or later they would have boycotted it.

Ivan Lendl, the present number two seeded men’s player, or number one according
to whose computer you’re reading, made himself instantly unpopular with the New
York tennis crowds by when he first came here pointing to this bright, giant,
waffle structure and saying, “This must be what they mean by American
know-how."

Lendl too is not the most popular tennis star in this city. He’s a poet, for
one thing. He has a wry, sarcastic sense of humour. He looks thoughtful and
forlorn. Curren looks thoughtful and broody. I don’t know how their managers
feel about their airing of their sentiments but I’m all for the Currens and the
Lendls if only because they are so scarce among the big blond clones, male and
female, who dazzle their teeth when they win and sulk when they don’t, but
don’t ever dare to point out the elephantine failure of the Flushing Meadows
centre, saving their temper only for their opponents or the umpires.

Which brings us, briefly I’m happy to say, to the cocky jumping jack of Jimmy
Jimbo Connors, who loves New York and whose crowds love him, so that in his
first round he could tell the umpire to get lost, to take up another
profession, in a bout of plainly manufactured indignation which, if performed
this year at Wimbledon might have threatened his survival into the second
round.

Well, Curren also breaks the mould of the bland, beautiful athlete with no
improper opinions outside his game by talking in his worried, thoughtful way
about his native land. There was a time only a few years ago when South
Africa’s best golfer Gary Player received death threats through the mail and
when at one or more tournaments he was paced not only by his caddy – a black
man by the way – but by a bodyguard. Well Curren, and also Johan Kriek, have
become American citizens, we don’t know whether from conviction or expediency.
Since they make their living at tennis they are certainly not to be blamed if
they foreswear the citizenship of a country that has become an outcast in
international sports.

Most other South Africans in the game keep their mouths shut about their native
land, but not Curren. He said the other day after his defeat, “I don’t agree
with the system and I believe apartheid should be abolished. It’s a shame when
people are denied their rights but I’m not for a one-man one-vote system yet
either. You look at other countries in Africa – Zimbabwe, Angola, that were
granted this and they have a coup and get a dictator.”

Having said that, he made it clear that he’s not off on any crusade. He does
not think that athletes should use their status as celebrities for political
ends. “We are not,” he said “legitimate spokesmen”.

But we’ve been hearing plenty this week from legitimate spokesmen, from Prime
Minister Botha, from Bishop Tutu, from the daughter of the imprisoned Nelson
Mandela about that tragic country’s gathering storm, the worst turn in the
weather this week being the refusal by dozens of international banks to renew
loans to the country’s borrowers.

All this and the decision to impose sanctions, how severe, how limited, will
come up before Congress once it assembles again in September. The New York
Times on Thursday had 11 separate dispatches in 26 columns from or about South
Africa.

However not all Americans see the New York Times, but most see one of the four
networked nightly news programmes and the visual onslaught of images of
violence and protest is unceasing. It is, I think, a powerful hint that the
mere exposure on television of the more lurid face of a great nation’s policies
today will be enough on its own to force change.

This week is theoretically the last week of summer, a theory Americans took
from the founding country Britain, even though most of this country will be
sweltering or balmy for another two months yet. This week is known to
shopkeepers as the dead week, to restaurant owners as the empty week, before on
Tuesday the whole human hive starts buzzing again after this slack lazy
interval, as usually typified by some folksy, rural image of America in its
last week of summer play – shots of crab fests, clambakes, midnight picnics on
the shore and so on.

There was one caught my eye this weekend that is at once bizarre and
startlingly typical of our time. It was of Captain John Testrake, the pilot of
the TWA 727 that was hijacked to Beirut. Testrake spent 17 days on the jet
liner and his behaviour was impeccable.

This week he was shown grinning in his plane, which showed bullet holes and
Arab scrawls. Along with him in the cockpit were two little tow-headed boys,
his grandsons, looking things over. “Isn’t it great”, said Captain Testrake,
“to see that baby on the ground in Kansas City?”

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP