Labor Day and school closures - 3 September 1993

So here at last is the possibility of an end to steaming days and muggy nights!
Come Monday, the first Monday in September, Labor Day, so called because 119
years ago, a New York carpenter one Peter McGuire thought there ought to be an
annual holiday between Independence Day and Thanksgiving to celebrate what was
then and for many generations since called the working man.

In those days, the 1880s, a politician would be no more against the working man
than against mother or Santa Claus. The definition of a working man was the
same for everybody, a skilled worker. And Peter McGuire thought it time to
found a carpenters union as a stimulus to other skilled trades and celebrate it
with a parade and so in New York it was.

It was only 12 years after McGuire's initiative that President Cleveland signed
a bill making the first Monday in September forever a national holiday, so next
year will be the 100th Anniversary of Labor Day. You may have noticed my stress
on "skilled", unskilled workers weren't a threat to anybody, they were always
available in large numbers and from the turn of the century on by the millions,
poor immigrants who plainly could have no say in the terms of their employment.
So though craft unions were well established by the 1910s, unskilled labour was
on its own and the unions failed to penetrate a great range of industrial
labour until the Depression years of the 1930s, which is when Labor Day became
a big noisy trumpeting national affair, parades everywhere, bellowing speeches
from labour leaders to huge rallies in public squares. The president, whoever
he was, he was usually Franklin Roosevelt giving a special solemn fireside
radio talk on the eve of Labor Day and/or getting out of solemn proclamation
expressing the external gratitude of the American people to the men and women
who made all things possible by the sweat of their brow.

Well the vanishing of Labor Day as a national festival is one of those social
phenomena that happens so gradually there not noticed till they've gone, like
the vanishing of the drug store as a sociable centre and lunch counter and only
incidentally in one corner a place that filled prescriptions. For, ooh I should
say 10, 15 more years, there have been no parades, few speeches, cursory
proclamation by the sitting president. Why is this? Nobody I know has given me
a satisfactory answer, but the steady in decline of unionism must have a lot to
do with it. After the great organising campaigns of the 1930s and the later
merging of the national craft union with the national industrial union, one
third of working Americans in all sorts of jobs belong to a union. Today, 85%
of employed Americans don't belong to a union.

Labor Day for most of us is simply the last day of the summer holidays, it's
the day when everybody on holiday shuts up the rented summer cottage, comes in
from the seashore or the mountains when families get home early to pack the
children off to bed and make ready for the opening of the schools on Tuesday
that's the theory that's the clockwork annual practice. But to the anger and
despair I should guess hundreds of thousands of parents around the country, the
public schools in some cities will stay closed for a week two weeks, a month,
who knows.

In Chicago, 400,000 pupils were told last week that the schools couldn't open
until something was done about a $1 billion debt or as we poignantly called it,
shortfall. The governor of the state of Illinois had just signed a bill for
bidding rates, what Americans call property taxes to be used to sustain the
school budget, so some other institution or method will have to be found,
probably a new whacking great school bond issue backed by a friendly bank. I'm
sure it will happen. We read every day of great corporations, famous firms
declaring bankruptcy under a law that's become a godsend to collapsing big
businesses. Chapter 11 – file under this famous law and the trustee approved by
the owners and the creditors is appointed to re-organise your bankrupt firm and
keep it going.

The creditors, the security holders of course, are going to have their existing
claims reduced, but the alternative is for the owner to go bust under Chapter
7, which happens after the courts have decided that reorganisation is a
hopeless prospect and the firm had better be liquidated. I doubt that the
public schools of Chicago are going to be liquidated.

New York City has a different problem and one that must look as bad as
insolvency to Mayor David Dinkins who's running for re-election in November and
needs all the political booster shots he can get. The 1,069 city schools will
positively not open on Tuesday, probably not the next Tuesday or the next. One
city official guessed the likeliest date would be 4 October. The problem is
asbestos.

I'm sure I mentioned sometime in the past year, the enormous job this city and
many others was undertaking in stripping all public buildings and private
apartment buildings of any remaining asbestos insulation. Asbestos we learned
in school long ago is a fibrous form of magnesium and calcium silicate, which
does not catch fire and so is an incomparable material for insulation. By the
way, I hope it will be of morbid or ironical interest to note in passing that
the word derives from the old Greek name for a fabulous stone that once set on
fire could not be quenched. Asbestos has been since the late 19th century a
tremendous world industry, all sorts of uses – drop curtains in theatres,
perhaps the most conspicuous fireproof wall linings and boiler pipe backing,
brake linings, tiles, protective gloves and on and on. Although the Soviet
Union wouldn't report its total deposits, it was thought to be about third or
fourth in total production. Canada, which I imagined as lately taken a beating
was responsible for 60% of the world's production. So, as we say in New York,
what's to be frightened for?

Well again, I have a creepy feeling that I talked about this some years ago, on
second thought maybe not, because I remember very vividly a pledge the first
time I heard about asbestosis, which is a lung disease that comes from
protracted breathing in of asbestos particles. It was from a doctor friend of
mine then at the Mayo Clinic who like the hero doctor in AJ Cronin's The
Citadel had in his practice come across men with lung trouble that to him was
at first very baffling, it wasn't any of several familiar lung afflictions, it
came out that all the sufferers had on their job as construction men, builders,
plasterers and similar trades been fairly constantly exposed to asbestos dust.
This doctor came to make a specialty of it and at one point he was looking into
the incidence of the disease in, shall I discreetly say, a mountain community.
He happened also to be something of an amateur geologist and after looking over
a geodetic map, he saw that throughout one range close by a city there was a
long and deep vein of asbestos, he swore me to lifelong secrecy. The point was
that the city's water supply arose from the mountain spill and while the
presence of asbestos deep in the mountains posed not the slightest hazard to
life or limb, don't breath a word my friend said or the entire city will sue
the state or god or somebody. I never breathed a word.

Well for the past two years or so, they've been very busy taking the asbestos
out of the New York City schools. And last month on 6 August, the mayor ordered
an emergency inspection of the thousand-odd schools to make sure that they were
all free from any asbestos hazard, gun-toting 11-year-olds are bad enough, you
don't want to have to cope as well with asbestosis. August the 6th seemed
rather late as Mayor Dinkins political opponents are pointing out. All that
came out by Friday of this weekend was that the inspection was not complete and
that the schools could not open till later in the month at best. Need I say
that hundreds of thousands of parents who arranged their life's and their
family budgets around the regular school re-opening are now breathing outrage
what to do with one million kids on the loose?

And there's a little social novelty that is guaranteed to increase,to inflame
just a normal amount of outrage, it is and it's already epidemic across the
United States, the new digital telephone system. Briefly, American telephones
have been since the invention of the telephone the envy of the world, before
you could dial anywhere outside your town, the operators would give you the new
address of a vanished tenant, get you a long distance number in a jiffy in
every way speedy, courteous putting the burden of inquiry on themselves not
you. No more, now you call say as I did a hospital to talk to a doctor friend,
a social call. I won't grind your teeth by repeating the intolerable boredom of
the procedure itself, just say that a voice comes on "you have reached St
Christopher's Hospital, if you wish to continue this call in Spanish dial one,
if in English press 2, if you wish to speak to the emergency clinic press 3, if
you wish to talk to a particular department press 4 and follow their subsequent
instructions, if you want to reserve a hospital room press 5, if you wish to
proceed in either language go back to 0 and press the key, if you wish and on
and on and on". I used to make say six business calls in 15 minutes; I know
make three out of four every half hour, the fourth I can't get. I sent my
doctor a funny postcard.

Imagine the raging ordeal of these thousands and thousands of frustrated
parents who not only don't know when the schools are going to open but can't
reach any official even if he knows. Stay tuned.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP