Church and state - 1 December 1995

While the president was urging Congress to approve the 20,000 troop mission to
Bosnia and the two parties were hoping to agree on a budget so as not to
shutdown the government again in two weeks, the Supreme Court was back in
action beginning to deliver rulings on cases it has been pondering for some
time, quite often a year or two.

And I was reading about the court's making a strange request of the state of
Colorado. How would it defend itself against the charge that it had no right to
display a four foot high stone monument, which has chiselled – I guess
chiselled – on it the Ten Commandments. Why not? Well thereby hangs years and
years of a never resolved argument about how much religion, any religion, can
intrude on, how can I put it, the public life of the United States?

Anyway, I was in the midst of this intriguing item sitting in a cafe doing no
harm, staying strictly within the diet that has guaranteed my longevity so far
– open toasted tuna sandwich and a double chocolate milkshake – when the
waitress – she was a female but the menu described her as a "waitperson" –
delivered my bill and I fished out a dollar bill for the tip. Because what I
was reading coincided with a glance at the dollar bill, it flashed a comical,
not to say hilarious association that will become clear as we go along.

I mentioned the other week, the great seal of the United States and its famous
motto or device: "E Pluribus Unum," out of many, one, which may not sound as
inspiring as "for Queen and country" or "Deutschland über alles" but it
expresses in three words an immense idea or ideal for which 200,000 men laid
down their lives in a civil war. And if that statement sounds at first a touch
mysterious, let me remind you what the civil war was all about. It can best be
done in the fewest words by Lincoln himself: If I could free all the slaves and
save the Union I would do it. And if I could free some slaves and not others
and save the Union I would do it. And if I could free no slaves and save the
Union I would do that. The thing is to save the Union.

Well those fateful three words were starting at me from the dollar bill, the
commonest bit of currency in America. For to the right of the huge printed
denomination, "one" is reproduced the great seal, with a picture of the
American bald eagle – an endangered tribe by the way – carrying in its talons
the arrows of war and the olive branch of peace, in its mouth is a ribbon
bearing the device we all know and quote all the time: "E Pluribus Unum".

But on the left side of the word "one" is printed the reverse emblem of the
seal which we never talk about at all: it shows an unfinished pyramid and then
in a dazzling white glow, the top of the pyramid is completed with an inset
eye, a rather terrifying single eye. No wonder, it is the eye of God! And just
to make the message clear, printed in bold letters under the phrase, "The
United States of America" is a declaration, a confession I'd say, which is also
printed on every other denomination of the paper currency, 10 dollar bills, 20,
50, 100, it says, "In God we trust." Now these pictures, symbols, religious
declarations, have been there for I don't know how long. The design, as I've
described, it was approved by Congress and adopted in 1782 and here it is every
time you reach for money. In a nation in which the Supreme Court by a thumping
majority has banned the recital of prayers or Bible verses in the public
schools as a violation of the Constitution's line: "Congress shall make no law
respecting an establishment of religion."

Now of course in the late 18th century when that was written, establishment
meant, setting up an institution, as in, the established church. I think this
little niggle is necessary to mention because about 40 years ago an English
correspondent in Washington invented a new usage for the word establishment,
which is now universally understood to embrace, not only what we used to call
'the system', but also the going ruling class if there is one, the plutocracy
the conservatives and almost any other in-group that the out people envy or
don't like.

Well in many rulings on that first amendment phrase, the Supreme Court has rung
every possible meaning out of the word establishment, like a starving man
squeezing a grapefruit, and so as the Supreme Court gets into its stride, again
inevitably, it has facing it this session ,several cases that pound away at
that poor old battered clause: "Make no law respecting an establishment of
religion." It has already pronounced on one case, much publicised, by refusing
to review the finding of a lower court and here's what it's about.

A young girl in a public school in Tennessee was required to write a paper on
any topic she chose, using four or more sources. It was therefore correctly
called a research paper. She chose to write about Jesus Christ. The teacher
said no that wouldn't do, because the girl's strong religious beliefs would
make it hard for her to approach the topic in a fresh and scholarly way. Fair
enough. Not so, said the girl's parents. The girl went ahead and wrote her
piece anyway and she got a zero mark. Her father complained, nothing was done
and so he, in her name, sued the school board citing this time, the other
balancing phrase of the first amendment: Congress shall so so so and so or
abridge the freedom of speech.

The father maintained that's what had been done, her freedom of speech had been
abridged. A federal district court ruled against the girl, it went up, to a
circuit US court of appeals, and that court dismissed the appeal with the
rather bold, I should think rather un-loyal like remark: "Learning is more
vital in the classroom than free speech." As I say, the Supreme Court also
dismissed the appeal so that's the end of that. Though I think we shall hear
more at later times of the dogma, learning is more vital in the classroom than
free speech. Wow!

Another rather grim religious case came up to the Supreme Court and will be
ruled on. It's that of an 11-year-old boy who died of diabetes while he was in
the care of a Christian Science nurse who, to save the boy, just prayed instead
of sending for medical help. The boy's mother, the nurse and stepfather were
ordered to pay one and a half million dollars in damages in a civil suit
brought by the boy's natural father. But wasn't he a Christian scientist? He
had been, and I imagine there would have been no suit if he'd stayed with the
faith, but he renounced it and he sued. The defence are appealing on the ground
that the state may not impose destructive penalties on the exercise of
religion.

How about that four foot high stone monument inscribed with the Ten
Commandments that we started with? The suing party this time, is something
called The Freedom From Religion Foundation. It holds that displaying the Ten
Commandments in a park adjacent to the Colorado state capital building is a
violation of the 'no establishment of religion' clause. An intermediate court
upheld that view, but the Colorado State Supreme Court overturned it saying
that if the monument stood alone, there might be a problem. That the park in
question has so many monuments commemorating so many historical events, that
the flock of them negates any suggestion that the government is endorsing
religion. So now it's up to the immortal nine – we used to call them the nine
old men, but now there are seven old men and two young women. By the way, that
monument was put up 40 years ago when I imagine the members of the Freedom From
Religion Foundation were babes and sucklings, unaware of the daily violation of
their rights in the park they were playing in.

Now if all this weren't enough, the Court does have other things on its mind.
Christmas is coming and one absolutely dependable feature of Christmas in the
United States, along with the snowflakes, is a flurry of law suits all across
the nation, of people deeply often exclusively, concerned with that clause
about an establishment of religion. For instance, there's always one group
protesting the setting up of a crèche. I don't mean a day-care nursery for
infants, but a model of the manger scene in Bethlehem. Put this anywhere inside
a Christian Church and all is well, but set it up in the village square or on
the street or one place last year in the outdoor garden of a Catholic Church
and the lawyers and the lawsuits start to fly. I won't even try to dream up
preposterous scenes of just things, that can be made, by a vivid imagination to
express a religious idea, however grotesque or farfetched they have been
thought up, and protested against.

I've recently been reminded how Europeans coming to this country for the first
time, and I'm thinking of religious people, irreligious, non religious, they
cannot understand why this public brawl, which has been going on for years and
years over school prayer, is never settled. It was a foreigner, an agnostic
incidentally, who recently sat for the first time as a visitor in the House of
Representatives and came out astounded to discover that the day's proceedings
started, as they always do in both Houses, with a prayer to Almighty God. How
do the atheists feel about this he wanted to know, why don't they protest and
when are they going to organise to abolish the pyramid and the eye of God from
the dollar bill? I don't know. I suppose the standard defence is that no
particular religion is being flaunted. The way they get round this at big
national ceremonies, presidential nominating conventions for instance is to
have a Baptist parson one day, a Rabbi the next, an Orthodox, Russian, then a
Episcopalian and so on, but whoever he is, the parson will surely commit this
constitutionally irreligious nation into the keeping of our Holy Father. Amen.

NOTE: The Lincoln quote is: "If I could save the Union without freeing any
slave I would do it, and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves I would
do it; and if I could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone I would
also do that. What I do about slavery, and the colored race, I do because I
believe it helps to save the Union."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP