The 14th amendment - 5 October 1990

After about, oh, five or six years of reading and re-reading the same bed book
or rather the same nine volumes of my favourite diarist, I've discovered a new
sedative.

One of its advantages is it's so bulky and heavy that after about half an hour
you fall asleep from sheer muscular exhaustion. This is an unexpected bonus to
the fun and enlightenment I pick up from the text. It's nothing less than a
bound volume of Punch, six months of the weekly issues.

I started a few months ago with January to June of 1919 and I intend to riffle
through all the volumes that saw me out of my teens and into my 30s, the 20
years between the two great wars, when I was alive and sentient, during what
Robert Graves, as the title of his splendid social history, called ominously,
The Long Weekend.

Last night I found myself in April 1928 when my own interest in social history
was confined to shocking my parents with a new pair of Oxford bags and enjoying
the society of a girl who really knew how to Charleston. In April 1928 I came
on a debate, two Parliamentary debates, two burning issues that were really
inflaming the kingdom.

The first was a debate in the House of Lords on the Petroleum Amendments Bill.
It was led by Lord Buckmaster, who assailed red and yellow petrol pumps of the
most hideous kind that were, as he put it, disfiguring the countryside by oil
advertisements. Lord Cecil went further than a resolution to confine them to
the cities. He wanted petrol filling stations, these disgusting erections, to
be abolished altogether. For the record, I ought to add, he didn't make it.

The second debate was in the House on something called the Representation of
the People Bill and who do you suppose they were? Women, that's who. At that
time, 1928, only 60 years ago, the only women who could vote were married or
were women householders or university gradates. The new Bill would extend the
vote to all women over 21, a move that Mr Churchill thought was unnatural.

One opponent had a theory about the preponderance of females over males in the
population. It was usually attributed to the enormous casualties of the 1914-18
War, that Britain, 10 years later even, still suffered from two million surplus
women.

His theory was that the higher an organism was developed in nature, that means
Man, the harder it was to rear, harder than rearing lower primates, that means
Woman. Up leapt the chief proponent of the Bill, the first woman Member of
Parliament, a Virginian at that, Lady Astor. Not at all, she said, women's
superior numbers were due to a fundamental law of nature, the survival of the
fittest.

The Punch reporter commented that Lady Astor's ebullient feminism permeated the
debate. She not only permeated, she dominated it, if you can allow the word
dominate to apply to a woman. The opposition to the Bill, she said, was the
diehards' swansong. She was right, the Bill passed.

All women over 21 were enfranchised and Nancy Astor's name passed into the
history books along with Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Christabel Pankhurst, as a
standard bearer in the long battle for women's equal rights. As usual we've
forgotten, or never knew, the name of a New Zealand pioneer. New Zealand gave
women a vote 35 years before Britain got around to it.

In the United States there is a long and honourable roll of embattled women who
have tried and are still trying to make the phrase in the Constitution "the
equal protection of the laws" apply to women in everything. You might say,
looking at the famous Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution that the equal
protection of women is already guaranteed.

It says – this was passed in 1868 – it's addressed to "all persons born or
naturalised in the United States and citizens of the United States and of the
state wherein they reside. No state shall deny to any person within its
jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws".

I'd say that person means women too but evidently not all the courts have so
judged. Consequently, in the early '70s the swelling feminist movement rose to
propose a new amendment to the Constitution. It was very simple, it said –
equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United
States or by any state on account of sex. Well, it didn't go through.

A proposed amendment to the Constitution must be passed by a two-thirds
majority of both Houses, which happened, but then ratified by three-quarters of
the 50 state legislatures, which didn't. It fell short by a few states, through
formidable objections.

Organised labour saw jobs that were always men's domain – bricklayers, railroad
engineers, shop stewards – being open to women. Some states opposed the
amendment by saying they meant to protect some inequalities that must remain.
They didn't want to see an end to laws that compel a sinful or errant husband
from supporting his ex-wife and their children. And there was, I recall, a
heartfelt national response, and from women, to the cry of a lady witness
before several state legislatures. Mothers, she warned, would be subject to the
same draft as fathers. Can you see women going into combat carrying 40lb packs?
Of course not, we said, ridiculous.

I commented at the time with what I regarded as a waggish aside. Wouldn't be an
interesting twist, I wrote, if five, ten years from now, worthy women were in
the marines and worthless men were getting alimony.

Well, it's 17 years since that comment, but for many years now, lots of men
have been getting and enjoying alimony and the other evening we saw on the
nightly news, a scene that 17 years ago could only have been the subject of a
comic strip.

A marine captain in the blank horizon of Saudi Arabia, a very stalwart and
attractive lady, certainly in the habit of carrying a 40lb pack. A combat
soldier, squinting against the dust and the blinding sun and talking directly
and affectionately to the rest of the family back in Iowa, which was keeping
the home fires burning or rather the air conditioner purring.

Cut to her precious audience, two children, a small boy and a girl in the
kitchen and father there finishing the supper dishes. Now, said the marine, you
take care of your father and be good and do right, you understand? Yes mummy,
they said. Yes ma'am, said the non-combatant husband.

Next night we saw three air force officers, two white, one black, on an
airfield in Saudi Arabia, talking through the thunder of departing planes and
the scudding arrival of fighters they were about to go over for repair and
maintenance.

They wouldn't have chosen any other career. They thought it was their duty to
be there. Thoughts of home, they agreed, got buried under the labour of working
from dawn to dusk. At the very end, one of them, an upright, comely, blonde
woman, suddenly mentioned that she hoped her 17-year-old son was behaving
himself. Right on, ma.

The interesting thing to me about these exchanges is that these women are not
noticeably rampant – or even couchant – feminists. New careers have opened up
to them and they like it and now to the rosters of warriors for equal rights,
there has been added a new name – Lisa Olson.

She's a sportswriter for a Boston paper – by now, incidentally, there are over
500 full-time women sportswriters in every sort of game in this country. Miss
Olson writes about football and I mean American football, not soccer.

On an evening in September she went into the players' locker room for an
interview. The players were all men, of course. I ought to say that since the
1970s the basketball and hockey managers have allowed women reporters equal
access to men's locker rooms.

Baseball and football jibbed at first, but when a woman reporter was denied
access to a locker room during the World Series, she sued in federal court and
the judge ruled that those wise 50-odd 18th-Century men who wrote the
Constitution had anticipated her humiliation. Her constitutional rights had
been denied. In 1985 the Commissioner of Baseball ruled that all teams should
allow equal access of women to locker rooms. It's now standard practice.

Well Lisa Olson, on that September evening, she was sitting interviewing a
footballer when five of the team's members came by, stark naked and stood in
front of her, mocking her, some said – jeering, said others. She said
attempting sexual harassment or harassment, which is now a regular charge
against employers who get flirtatious or affectionate or worse.

The incident has caused a hullabaloo throughout the sports world. Golf and
tennis officials huffily point out that they observe the better policy of no
access by male or female to locker rooms. Let the men, the women, shower,
dress, undress, cheer or lament their performances in private.

But the courts have decided that equal rights does not mean the equal denial of
rights, but the equal right to get your own interview, the chance of your own
scoop, that's the rub. And it's hard to see how this gross bit of behaviour can
be resolved inside the law.

"What do you expect of professional athletes," I asked one veteran woman
reporter. "How can they grow up when they spend their lives perfecting
childhood rhythms?"

One of those founding fathers, who was in on the writing of the Constitution,
said that he was obliged to explain why America broke with Britain and set up
its own government. He was obliged by something that the athletic managers
might suggest to their teams and that the courts might somehow try to enforce
as law.

Jefferson's reason? A decent respect for the opinions of mankind and, of
course, womankind.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP