William Fulbright (1905-1995) - 17 February 1995

A man died this past week who meant a great deal, not only to this country, but
in strict fact to 130 countries and over 200,000 of their natives. The name is
Fulbright, William Fulbright and his death is not to be mourned. He'd lived for
89 years and given the best of himself to his own country and to yours,
wherever you are.

For 30 years he was a United States Senator from Arkansas, what we now think of
as Clinton country. Indeed, young Clinton, as an apple-cheeked late teenager
with a Prince Valiant hairdo, served on the senator's staff for a year, almost
30 years ago. For half his time in the senate, Fulbright was the Chairman of
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and as such, was a powerful force for
getting the Senate to join the United Nations. It had turned down the League of
Nations, remember. He became a continuing pain in the neck to President
Johnson, as more and more, month after month, he deplored the American
involvement in Vietnam. And at the end, when South Vietnam surrendered and
Fulbright's political career was over, he concluded it was an immoral war. Dean
Acheson, a former Secretary of State and for a long time a very hawkish
supporter of the war added, it was not only immoral, it was a mistake.

But so far I've been talking about a name without a face. You are to imagine
then, a trim, rather short but muscular figure, balding over several decades,
broad features, but handsomely balanced, a generous mouth, given to sudden
switches from broad grin to a mock scowl and twinkling, mischievous eyes: the
eyes of a born politician. And at all times, a beguiling, warm, almost resonant
southern baritone, equally well constructed for righteous indignation and
persuasive charm.

His record in the Senate will go into the history books, though I shouldn't
dismiss it without paying him the compliment of mentioning that he was the only
senator to vote against any more financing of the communist-hunting committee
of the dread Senator McCarthy. Also I ought to say briefly, why he failed – by
as long as it takes to look something up in a file – to become Secretary of
State. I remember in the sunny, heady December days of 1960, when John Kennedy
had just been elected president by a hair's breadth over Richard Nixon, and was
down in Palm Beach at his father's mansion, revelling in the sun and the ocean
zephyrs and the early exercises of power, which include picking a cabinet. One
day the smiling, vigorous, Senator Fulbright came down to Palm Beach, ready to
be shown off as the incoming Secretary of State. He never appeared.

Sometime late that morning, somebody in the Kennedy crew suddenly remembered
Senator Fulbright as one of the Southern Senators who'd signed a so-called
Southern Manifesto, which protested the Supreme Court's six year old ruling
ending the segregation of the races. It was enough for John Kennedy to realise
he couldn't possibly appoint a segregationist Secretary of State. Kennedy
wondered who had blundered. Senator Fulbright stepped out with good grace. In a
way this lamentable but, at the time, understandable Southern prejudice, came
to be triumphantly mocked by Senator Fulbright's main achievement in life - the
invention of the Fulbright scholarships and the launching on the world of a
quarter of a million students from every continent, of every race, religion and
colour.

How that came about is the nub of his story. First though, I must give you a
preliminary glimpse of the political savvy of a young Bill Fulbright that made
this congressional sleight of hand possible. Some time – it must have been in
the '50s – I decided to follow one United States Senator for a few days,
stomping around in the back country of his state in the year he was running for
re-election.

Senators, as you know, are elected for a term of six years and it was one of
the complaints held against the sitting Senator Fulbright of Arkansas that he
never bothered to go home to electioneer until the spring of his sixth year. I
picked Mr Fulbright to follow because he was in trouble on three counts. First,
as I say, that he neglected his constituents for five years. Second that he
gave all his time to foreign policy. And third, that he'd grown too big for his
boots, that he was, as President Truman once saucily put it, an over-educated
Oxford S.O.B.. Luckily that awful crack was not yet in circulation in Arkansas
when I went down there to do a stint of hedge-hopping on a small plane with the
Senator, and see how he was doing with the home folks.

But many locals I found were grumbling the same Truman tune. The simple case of
this comical slander was that the young Bill Fulbright had won a Rhodes
Scholarship to Oxford and people who didn't like him said therefore, he'd
picked up an Oxford accent. Now to anyone outside Arkansas, that would be like
saying that Ronald Reagan, after holding half a dozen meetings with Mrs
Thatcher, had started to talk exactly like her. The three charges against
Fulbright all coincided in the damning remark of an old farmer. "Trouble with
Bill Fulbright," he said. "He's gone international."

Two of the small towns we went into were holding protest meetings disguised as
caucuses. Oh, I think I'd better say that I went in disguise. To have him seen
travelling in the company of an Englishman would have only confirmed their
worst fears. I broke away from him when we landed at small airports, I mooched
into town in a rather shabby old seersucker suit. I kept my mouth shut and
sidled into the caucuses as probably some visiting delegate from a remote,
impoverished county. Our first stop was in a town called Hope, which advertised
itself as the watermelon capital of Arkansas, if not of the world. Next place
was De Queen, which was quite sure it was the chicken capital of the entire
South. The assembled farmers in both places made it plain, first that they were
the victims of falling prices for their commodity and second, that if Fulbright
didn't do something radical, they'd send him back to his home town in November.

At both meetings the Senator was transformed from the elegant, courtly
Southerner that I'd known. He took off his jacket, he bedraggled his tie and he
put on one of the most moving performances I have ever seen from a southern
politician, not excluding the master tearjerker, Lyndon B Johnson. Mr Fulbright
listened humbly, he shook his head, he wiped a tear, he then held forth in his
best Arkansas country traveller accent that he was going back to Washington,
and giving his heart and mind exclusively to the salvation of chickens and
watermelons. When he left, all was forgiven. As he waved goodbye, they moved to
touch him, as he might be Mahatma Gandhi.

He was triumphantly re-elected.

Now let's go back to his green days, his first term in the Senate, late summer
of 1945. The Second World War just over and the Congress was turning back to
the home front and its needs. It would be two years before they came to
appreciate the scale of the devastation of Europe and moved to repair it
through the inspired generosity of the Marshall Plan.

One of the first orders of business about post-war Europe was what to do with
the wealth of Army materials: trucks, food, blankets, jeeps, telephones, vast
deposits, all over Europe of American services and supplies. The Europeans were
bankrupt and couldn't pay for them. What to do. A bill was proposed to sell
them off to the Europeans who would pay by letters of credit, promissory notes,
barter exchange and so forth, and the act was about to go sailing through the
Senate along with a harmless amendment or two – some pork concession to this
senator and that – before it was sent on to the house.

All ready, the gavel raised. There was a freshman Senator – they are not
expected to shoot their faces off in public in the first year – and this man,
name of Fulbright, had been biding his time. He was not going to risk proposing
an amendment to be debated but he waited to make use of a custom, so casual,
that it's often not brought up: a calendar call, a routine question. Calendar
call anyone for some matter that won't even require a vote. Up spake the
guileless, humble new senator from Arkansas. Might it not be good idea to use
one or two of the I.O.U.s to pay for all this Army debris, to subsidise a few
American students wanting to study abroad?

By Jiminy, great idea. It was passed without debate by unanimous resolution. A
worthy cause, proposed by, who is that fella? Nice do-gooder from Arkansas, It
now went to the House, where it might not seem so harmless. One congressman
grumbled, this is no time to be sending our fine American boys back to Europe.
They might become infected with some of those isms. There was another Mid-West
congressman, similarly suspicious, and then something struck him. He shouted:
"But my God, it's not going to cost us a cent." It was passed at once as an
Amendment to the Surplus Property Act 1945, and the thing took off with six
young Americans going to China. Today less than a third of all Fulbright
scholars are American. As I say, just touching a quarter of a million students
from 130 countries, Senator Fulbright went international in the biggest way. So
how did the scholarships play down in Arkansas? In De Queen, the chicken
capital of the South, when they heard that Senator Fulbright had bought and was
driving a Mercedes. "Well of course," he said. "It's only tactful. West Germany
is the leading importer of Arkansas chickens".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP