Millicent Fenwick - 27 November 1992

A listener writes in to say whatever happened to the Year of the Woman? Right,
I'm sorry, I made a promise to talk about it, it must have been about two
months ago when the emergence of the phrase as a campaign slogan coincided with
the death of a great woman and because she was a political woman, she offers a
good starting point for a discussion of women in politics and the promised
flood of female senators and congresswomen who were going to flush all those
bad old men out of office.

First then, Millicent Fenwick who died in September at the age of 82. By that
time she was a vivid legend in and out of Washington, people who had once sat
in the public gallery and the House of Representatives got the impression from
her easy confidence, her familiarity with House procedures and the spontaneity
of her rebuttals to opponents especially if they were sentimental you'd have
thought she'd been a congresswoman for ever. In fact, she didn't get to
Congress until she was 64 and retired at the age of 72, but in those eight
years she made her mark in a role, which is generally unpopular in her party as
a doughty Republican liberal.

When she died, an old political aide said "with her dignity and elegance,
Millicent could get away with sayings things the rest of us couldn't; she was
the Katharine Hepburn of politics." That's not bad, much the same breed a type
of American woman who because of her upbringing and the social conditions of
her time is fast becoming a period piece. And so because the type had much to
offer to society, which will have to be offered by other types in a changed
world, her life is well worth looking over.

Millicent Hammond she was born to one of those late 19th-century, eastern New
York, in fact, families that was at once wealthy and felt an obligation to
public service. Her father was a financier and for a time a member of the New
York State legislature, an Anglo type, much like the Roosevelts as Dutch types,
natural patricians. His daughter was brought up in a family mansion across the
river in New Jersey, a house with 50 rooms and unlike their counterparts in
England or France not with a flock of flunkies but with lots of rooms closed
off and one cook and one maid.

Millicent Hammond's mother was active in war work long before the United States
got into the First World War and her main concern was for the European civilian
refugees who'd been wounded or incapacitated and she raised enough money to
found a French hospital for them, so in the in the spring of 1915 she sailed
for Paris. The ship was the Lusitania and off the coast of Ireland, it was
attacked by a German submarine and sank in 18 minutes. It was natural then that
when Millicent was in her teens and her father was appointed American
Ambassador to Spain, she left her school in Virginia to become his hostess. It
was a mild family joke that she never graduated from high school let alone
college, she'd had, she said, no time to get educated and to use her time in
Europe to become fluent in Italian, French and Spanish.

Back in this country, she appalled her family as such high spirited girls will
by falling in love with a married man a businessman and eventually they married
and very soon he died and she had two children and the added burden of her
husband's considerable debts. Since she refused all money help from her family,
she'd got the habit of living an active frugal life and she maintained it even
when she came into her father's fortune. She arrived in Washington in an old
Chevy when she won a seat in Congress and though the law didn't require it of
members of Congress, only of cabinet officers, she put all her unearned income
into a blind trust.

And for the next eight years delighted the Democrats and scandalised her own
party by working and arguing and voting for civil rights bills for renovating
the inner cities, for getting out of Vietnam, for prison reform, for cutting
down the military and cutting political campaign spending, for gun control and
for publicising and drafting a bill to help asbestos victims – a peculiar
speciality, but it resulted in the compulsory destruction of asbestos lining
and insulation in for instance all the residential buildings of New York City,
enforced in most other cities it will sometime present a bill of something like
the magnitude of the national debt. She was, of course, an early and steady
champion of equal rights for women, but wanted first to make equal pay for
equal jobs compulsory throughout the country.

When I say wanted first, I'm thinking of her special gift as a legislator, she
didn't by any means fall in with the whole agenda of the feminist movement, she
wanted to go step by step and get first things first like the suffragettes a
thought, a comparison which reminds me irristibly of another battling woman of
the following generation, the wicked writer Florence King who put a finger with
withering mockery on the most persistent flaw or if you like strategical
mistake of the 18 carat women's libbers in this country.

Miss King wrote in a passage I'm pretty sure Millicent Fenwick a humorous woman
would have approved off 'I am in favour of most feminist goals and I realise
how much the women's movement has accomplished, but the feminists have made a
fatal error that the suffragettes were wise enough to avoid, they have
scattered their shot". The suffragettes went after one thing the vote, the
reason that if they got it they could then use it to obtain their goals, but
our feminists have entered so many battles with so many flaming swords I can
only conclude that the all purpose feminist goal is an abortion performed by a
gay black doctor under an endangered tree on an Indian reservation."

Millicent Fenwick was a type we could use in large numbers in the new Congress.
When I say type, I'm not referring again to the social type I said was valuable
but gone for good, the genuine lady bountiful, well bred philanthropist
hardworking devotee of the sick, the poor, the dispossessed. I now mean
Millicent Fenwick as a precious type of woman politician. She was highly
intelligent, articulate, devoid of sentimental rhetoric, not motivated by hate
or sarcasm, hate's smiling partner, she liked men. She kept her eye on the main
object, the new good law rather than bemoaning the old bad practice.

Well now, how about the promised Mr Bush thought the threatened tidal wave of
women in Congress. To be fair to him, I ought to say when he prayed that they
would be defeated he was guessing correctly that most of them would be
Democrats. Well in the old Senate, there were three women; in the new Senate
there will be seven, which has caused an immediate outlay of emergency funds to
build for the first time outside the Senate chamber a lady's lavatory that is
the first blow for liberty of the Clinton Revolution.

In the House, there were 28 women. In the new House, there are one or two
disputed results; in the new House they'll be over 50, but perhaps more
remarkable than the numbers of women is the ethnic composition of the whole
House male and female. A generation ago ethnic composition, even the phrase
would have been bizarre, so in the whole new Congress then there will be 28
blacks, 19 Hispanics, 9 Asians and 1 chief of an Indian tribe or as we must now
say, over my wife's strenuous objections that she is one, a Native American.

California, it would be California, which is a pioneer of many novelties has
become the first state in history to have both its senators women. California
has quite possibly taken the worst beating of any state in the long crawling
recession, mainly because it's the home of so many defence factories and being
800 miles in length and facing the Pacific has a giant share of military, naval
and marine and airbases. Apart from the many thousands of men and women in
uniform who are being released, something like I think 180,000 have lost their
jobs in defence work. All this is due of course to the brutal cutbacks in the
defence budget, which President Bush approved off, which the Democrats for so
long, long before the melting of the Cold War graved and argued for. Now the
plight of California is on the doorstep of the Democrats in Congress and at the
White House, so there will be a short honeymoon only a quick slurp of champagne
for those two lady senators, the former Mayor of San Francisco Dianne Feinstein
and the Liberal Democrat with the appropriately splendid name of Barbara Boxer.

I notice from Ms Boxer's resumé or campaign flyer that her big line against her
Republican opponent was for abortion rights, which coming from a Democrat
usually means going beyond the 1973 Supreme Court ruling and sanctioning
abortion on demand. You know that President Bush who was as he'd say sort of
for the abortion thing early on, then wobbled, then decided – a fatal decision
– that he needed the embrace of the evangelical right wing of his party, so
throughout the campaign he came out unreservedly against any federal approval
of abortion. Said the retired Senator Barry Goldwater home in Arizona, he'll
loose the damn election on that one issue alone, could be. And it came out
after the election that 70% of all American women favour a right to abortion
and more tellingly close on 60% of all Republican women favour it too.

Last time 1988, the women's vote was exactly split between Bush and Dukakis.
This time 47% of all women voters plumped for Clinton, 36% for Bush. When all
the the new girls, new women legislators arrive in Washington in January, I
wished they might learn about the example of Millicent Fenwick of New Jersey, I
wish there were tapes of her speeches and a record of what she was prepared to
yield to get not always what she wanted, but what the Congress could be
persuaded to want and an important feature of her character keep the good
opinion of the best of your opponents.

In other shorter words, she was that very rare politician, she never gave
quarter in debate, but she had always at the back of her mind the thought that
perhaps her opponent might be right. Try that out on your favourite politician
and see how short he/she falls.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP