Tiger Woods' ethnicity - 2 May 1997

With superhuman restraint – or what some listeners seem to regard as startling
sensibility – a week or two ago, when all America was hearing about the first
black man to break into major league baseball, I said nothing about the
21-year-old black man the whole world was talking about breaking into big-time
golf.

I have never yet, in these talks, mentioned the name of Eldrick "Tiger" Woods.
Two weeks ago, the omission was deliberate. I rush to say that this is not
going to be a talk about golf. Too tiny an audience for that.

From time to time, I check the conventional wisdom about this and that against
the available scientific evidence. And there is a sports statistical bureau;
its last national survey revealed that only just over 6% of Americans ever play
golf, read about golf, watch golf. And the figures are, if anything, bleaker
for England and the other English-speaking countries so, say that at most, 94
English speakers in 100 have never heard of Ben Hogan or old Tom Morris or
Harry Vardon or Jack Nicklaus.

The astonishing exception is that for the first time in the history of the
game, it seems that about half the human race has heard about a golfer, Tiger
Woods. In the past couple of weeks, the most unlikely people who wouldn't know
the difference between Chilli Dipping and chilli con carne, or even between a
Mid-Iron and a midwife, are crooning, "Wasn't it wonderful about Tiger Woods?"

Why I never mentioned him in the talk about Jacky Robinson's bravery, and the
social ordeal he suffered for several years, was that coupling the two names
tended to imply a false comparison, which was elaborated on in every other
paper and every television network. The implication that, whereas Robinson had
broken the colour line in baseball, Tiger Woods had done the same in golf. This
is quite false.

On that famous Sunday there were old black men looking on with pride who were
retired after 20 or 30 years in professional golf on the white tour. And two of
them, at least years ago, had played in the Masters, more than once. Of course,
the thing about Tiger Woods was his winning the Masters in such a spectacular
fashion and being the first black man to do so, not to mention the relentless
promotion that his sponsors are putting on.

After all, when you pay out $40million to a man to wear a shoe and another 20
million to hit a particular ball, you expect a lot. Even before Tiger's
triumphant last round, there was shown, on the telly, a one-hour glorification
– commercial, it really was – which exploited the effect a win was going to
have on the black community.

After a collage of Tiger Woods driving, chipping, putting, winning, it showed a
parade of little black boys, some girls, saying, chanting in turn, "I'm Tiger
Woods! I'm Tiger Woods!" You could see from the gleam in their dark eyes that
they meant to learn golf and go onwards and upwards and maybe they too, the day
after they turn pro, can bag a sponsor, two sponsors, with a collective promise
of $60million. Those happy faces with their proud little recitations formed,
for me, the saddest image, memory, of the day.

This has happened before. After the emergence of every star basketball player,
every black city slum came alive with a square of bare ground and an iron hoop
and a clutch of small black boys practising, practising, endlessly at throwing
the ball in from every angle. Many black boys, many more blacks than whites,
saw basketball as the blessed escape from poverty.

Of course, what it is heartbreaking even to hint to them is that not one boy in
200,000 will ever make it. Though it costs very little indeed to rig up a hoop
on a patch of raw ground, but where are they going to get and buy and have
access to a 130 acres to play on? The disillusion will set in next year, or the
one after.

Like the day after uhuru, the day of freedom for an old colony which is
celebrated with bands by day and firecrackers by night. Next day, having
knocked down the old regime, they have the awful job of building a new one.

Still, one thing is for sure. There'll be a spectacular increase in the number
of black boys, and I do mean boys, teenagers, who begin to infest the public
courses in America. And people who still believe golf is an exclusively country
club, rich man's game, should know that 65% of all the golf courses in America
are public courses.

Well, now, to move on to related matters that will affect American society much
more in the long run than the professional fate of a talented black college boy
who decided, after winning the national amateur for the third time, to turn
pro. An old friend of mine wrote to Tiger to stay on for his last two years at
Stamford University. "You will find", my friend wrote, "that nothing can be
more enriching than two more years of university life". Well, the shoe and
golf-ball manufacturers saw to that.

So, we now take up with no relish the howling gaffe of a most agreeable man. A
famous golfer. An attractive and funny man. It is the custom for the winner of
the Masters to choose the menu at next year's dinner of the ex-champions which
is held on the Wednesday evening before the tournament begins on Thursday.

Dear old, easy-going, Fuzzy Zoeller, himself a Masters champion, said, in
walking off after talking with a reporter or two, he said – and here again, he
was the victim of the new fact all public men should be alive to, a television
camera and a microphone – so there, for all the world to see and hear in about
five seconds, was our old, easy-going pal, Fuzzy Zoeller, saying, "Maybe he'll
pick fried chicken and collard greens."

Collard greens is a cabbage dish, derivative of kale or cole, a favourite dish
among black families. "Thank God", a friend of mine said, "at least he didn't
mention water melon" After a day or two, when the whole country had seen that
little scene, Fuzzy's national sponsor, which had kept him in secure millions
for half a dozen years, dropped him like a brick. He read aloud, with evident
humility, an apology. But apologising for a condescending joke about blacks is
today no help whatever. It's been done. The mind set, as they say, was there.

You can still make jokes about Scotsmen, about the Irish, about rabbis and
priests – most stupid jokes used to be about Poles, but have gone underground
since a Pole turned into a pope. I run into people who still make faint jokes
about Englishmen. They don't even guess that the English they have in mind were
stage creations of about 70 years ago. They say things like, "Jolly good, what?
" and "Ripping, eh!"

You can still tell Japanese jokes. In New York, Jewish jokes, provided they're
told by Jews. I suppose Jacky Mason is the last of the old vaudevillians who
has an entire act of kidding, ridiculing, belittling, his friends and family
and every other type of Jew of his acquaintance.

But you can no longer, anywhere, make a halfway public joke about blacks.
Public sensitivity on this matter gets more touchy every day. By now, we are
never quite certain what to call them. First, well into and beyond the
mid-century, Negro was absolutely correct both in speech and in writing. Going
along with it was the word coloured. In 1951, I remember, an old friend on the
staff of my paper, in fact, the London editor of The Guardian, visited me for a
week here. It was his only visit, and he went on a night-time radio show. I
listened in. At one point, he said to the MC, "Well, how do the blacks feel
about it?" There was an intake of breath from the studio audience like an
oncoming whirlwind. I was appalled. When he came home, I said, "Good God, man!
Did you think you were in Africa?" He was, in his turn, appalled.

But only about a dozen years later, after the integration ruling of the Supreme
Court and the civil rights marches, leaders like the Reverend Jesse Jackson
were chanting as a mantra, "Black is beautiful!" And we whites learned that
"negro" was offensive, "coloured" was now patronising, and we'd better switch
to "black". Which we did. And now, I suspect, that black is on its way out. In
newspapers, magazines, in discussions on the telly, in every sort of public
discourse, from the most august to the most humble – talks with the homeless,
say – "African-American" is now the term of choice.

And now Tiger Woods with his abrupt, vast fame has further complicated the
problem. His mother doesn't like him to be called black because she is a Thai,
once known as Siamese. Her marriage was a wartime Vietnamese romance with a
black soldier, an American soldier. His family claims some white blood and some
American-Indian blood. Which, incidentally, you must now call Native American.
So Tiger precisely defines himself as Afro-Asian-American-Indian and white.
Which surely is too much for a passport? And how about the census? The Census
Bureau is getting ready for the 1990 count and is worried about the standard
terms, Caucasian, Hebrew. Used to be "coloured", it's now "African-American".
Asian, so on.

A congressman has introduced a bill to try and solve, or simplify, the whole
ethnic linguistic social problem by having a code which, for purposes of the
next census, divides everybody into white or multicultural. Not multi-racial.
Multicultural. Can you imagine? The millions of youngsters of every colour and
race and religion just loving to be known as "multi-cultural". That's going
nowhere.

In the meantime, if we're all going to be precise about how we should be
described on our passport, I want to be put down as white, Anglo-Irish,
Scottish, Protestant. On the other hand, you could just call me "whitey!"

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP