Colin Powell and "Mickey" Leland - 18 August 1989

Here's a clue for lovers of crossword puzzles and historical trivia – but he
knew well that a hot dog eaten smilingly in America might be worth a dozen
battleships. Who is he?

Well, since, I suspect the only person able to pin that down at once is dead –
the late Denis Brogan – I shall tease you no longer.

The consumer of the hot dogs, though he had a choice of cold ham, smoked
turkey, salad, baked beans, was King George VI. For he knew well that a hot dog
eaten smilingly in America was worth a dozen battleships.

Under what extraordinary circumstances could the King of England have stifled
his normal appetite and ventured on the humblest article of American
maintenance food, which he almost certainly had never tried before? It was at a
picnic given for the King and Queen, the present Queen Mother, by the President
of the United States and Mrs Franklin Roosevelt, in the woods of the Roosevelt
estate at Hyde Park overlooking the Hudson River.

It was June 1939, and with the Munich Agreement only nine months gone, and the
prospect of war with Hitler very visible on the horizon, when the King and
Queen arrived in Washington on a day of terrific heat, a flight of bombing
planes roared over the procession to the White House and the cars of the King
and the President, the Queen and Mrs Roosevelt, were convoyed by 60 tanks. A
strange reception in what was then a very un-military country.

What President Roosevelt had in mind we shall never know, but his enemies, the
growing body of Isolationists, as they were called, deeply resented what they
thought they knew – that the suspect Roosevelt, who had spoken his mind often
and bluntly about the character and menace of Adolf Hitler, was hoping, by the
parading of a few military symbols, to ensnare the United States into the
coming European war.

Of all the events of that memorable Royal visit, three were made much of in the
newspapers of the time. One, the fact of the invitation itself and its timing.
Two, the bombers and the tanks. Three, the fact that at a state dinner given in
the White House for the King and Queen, one of the greatest contraltos of the
day sang for the party. She was Marian Anderson, and she was black.

Well, nothing much this month has been written about the other events of that
steaming summer 50 years ago, but this past week there have been in the papers
and on television around the country 50th anniversary pieces commemorating not
Marian Anderson's appearance at the White House but her non-appearance in
Washington's Constitutional Hall for a concert already announced.

The sponsors of the concert were the Daughters of the American Revolution, a
title that should frighten no one, for a less revolutionary group of Americans
than these splendid matrons it is impossible to imagine.

Their organisation was founded in 1890 as a patriotic society of women. Any
woman was eligible who could properly claim direct descent from anyone who, in
military or civilian service, had helped the cause of American Independence
either before or during the War of Independence, what Americans call the
"Revolutionary War".

Another qualification so obvious that it never had to be mentioned was that you
had to be white. "The purpose of the daughters" it was announced in the
beginning, "was to perpetuate the memory of the early patriots to develop
enlightened public opinion and to cherish and maintain and extend the
Institutions of American Freedom".

You might think, now if that was their charter, they would have been among the
first people to extend the Institutions of American Freedom to Negroes, as we
called them then. But in August 1939, they cancelled the appearance of the
famous contralto simply on the ground that she was a Negro.

It caused a shockwave of protest at the time, for Miss Anderson had been in
Europe as early as 1933 and been treated and housed like any other first-rate
artist. She was nothing short of a sensation.

She came home and sang at the Metropolitan Opera. She had established herself
as one of those few black artists, Paul Robeson and the dancer Bill Robinson
were others, who were allowed to cross and transcend the colour line. And then,
50 years ago this month, the Daughters of the American Revolution issued its
blasting edict. "Simply", they said, "because she was black".

But this explosive reaction was as much as anything a slap at President
Roosevelt, at his cheerful hosting of Britain's King and Queen, at his
summoning Miss Anderson to sing before them, but also the Daughters were about
as Isolationist as any other American body and they would show, too, that they
were not going to be bamboozled by Roosevelt's flaunted bombers and tanks.

Fifty years later, the mood, the circumstances, of this foolish act have been
all but forgotten. But the act itself was recalled in many a press and
television piece, perhaps – probably, I think – because it offered such a
bizarre, ironical contrast to two events that happened this week and showed how
far this country has come, not so much since 1939 as since 1954 when the
Supreme Court handed down its ruling about equal educational and social
facilities for blacks and whites that sparked the Black Revolution.

Last week, President Bush announced that he'd found the man to replace the
retiring Admiral Crowe as chairman of the joint chiefs of staff – that's to say
the commander-in-chief, in fact, as the president is in name – of the army and
navy, air force, marines, all the armed forces of the United States.

The new man is 52 years old. He's the youngest man ever to be appointed to the
supreme command. His name is Colin Powell, General Powell. He's a four-star
general and that is as elevated as you can get – Eisenhower was one, so was
Bradley. But he's also black and, need I say, the first black man to rise so
high in the American armed forces. He was born two years before Marian Anderson
was barred from Constitution Hall.

Born in Harlem, the son of Jamaican immigrants, and raised in what today is the
malodorous, drug-ridden slum of the South Bronx, his parents brought with them
a notable asset or two for the rearing of a black child in those surroundings –
good manners and a determination to rise above, in the new country, their lowly
station in the old.

Young Colin was, as I'm bound to say, bright. He was also intelligent. Very. He
sailed through high school and, as the first of his family, went to college,
the City College of New York. His own ambition came into focus pretty early on.
In college he joined the reserve officers training corps and became a soldier,
just in time for Vietnam, where he was wounded and decorated for bravery.

Afterwards, he went up and up, in staff positions, becoming eventually the
president's national security advisor, alongside Reagan's last secretary of
defence. Evidently what kept Powell in high office and helped him to vault over
30 other generals for this highest post, was his impeccable stance as a serving
soldier, not lured by any outside ambition, and his extraordinary knowledge of
Congress and respect for its competing factions and lobbies.

When Admiral Crowe announced his coming retirement, a whole raft of generals,
including Powell, were eligible for early retirement. Powell's cool head, his
dependability and his connections with all sorts of congressmen brought him
dazzling offers from business corporations, industries, arms manufacturers as a
consultant.

Simply, he could have assured himself a fortune. He turned them all down and
appeared to be headed for retirement on what is still a comparatively modest
soldier's pension. Then, he got the call.

He is as weary as any other black of becoming whitey's favourite black. In a
published piece written this year, he said, "Institutional racism is still part
of our society. We cannot rest until every American sees and judges every other
American on the basis of competence and character."

While the media were reporting and applauding the promotion of General Powell,
a plane fell on a remote mountainside in Ethiopia. There were no survivors.
Among the dead was a Texan, 44 years old, very little known here outside
Washington, but known and almost revered in Ethiopia.

He was a black man named George Thomas Leland, called always "Mickey". The son
of a short-order cook, whose husband deserted them both, Mickey Leland grew up
in, you could say, Houston's Harlem, a district he represented in Congress.

He'd been in Congress 11 years and right from the start thought up odd
programmes that puzzled some of his constituents and antagonised others. He
sent young blacks from Houston to Israel to learn to know Jews and – over tough
opposition for five years – he eventually got the House of Representative to
set up a select committee on world hunger.

He'd been visiting Africa since the early '70s and in the past five years he
spent much time in Ethiopia, using the $800million Congress had voted for
starving Ethiopians. And in the Sudan, rescuing fugitive children from the
malicious slavers who sold them for $20 a head.

Indeed, he spent so much time in Ethiopia that many of his constituents, not
least the poor among the blacks, noisily reminded him that "Charity began at
home". To which the Catholic Leland replied, "I don't want to sound hokey, but
I was brought up as a Christian and you're supposed to help the least of your
brothers."

Even his critics concede that Mickey Leland, however soon forgotten in Texas,
will long be remembered in Ethiopia and the Sudan for simply saving thousands
of young lives.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP