Economic recession and military spending cuts - 30 April 1993

Coming back to San Francisco after the unusual interval of the year, I was
struck by the same small signs of recession that hit us in London a month ago
after a similar long absence.

I went to pick up the out-of-town papers from a favourite shop on Russian Hill
and incidentally seize a delicious snack from the little French deli across the
street. The newsagent had gone out of business and so had the Frenchman, sad
for them but not to worry there are heaven know hundreds perhaps thousands of
delis and lunch counters and bistros run by in all over 200 ethnicities, what
we used to call nationalities.

In the evening, we have two old friends to dinner, where shall we take them to?
Our steady favourite, founded I don't know maybe 25, 30 years ago, by a
Hungarian couple who fled from the Russian invasion of 1956, who met in the
emergency clearing house and escape hatch of Vienna. Came to America with
nothing, got on their feet in Berkeley with a tiny pancake parlour – in the
Hungarian cuisine pancakes a wrap everything from veal to asparagus soufflé,
they made a conspicuous success when they opened a large restaurant and then a
larger one here in San Francisco overlooking the Bay and this became one of the
best, if not the best Hungarian restaurant, true Hungarian, not the Viennese
overlay we almost always encounter. The best certainly on this coast, they were
never chic, but they prospered exceedingly so there is never much of a question
the first night. I dialled them. The number you have reached is that of the
former home of Paprika Fona, but in July it will be the home of the new
exciting family blah, blah, blah restaurant. All people can tell us was that
they had folded. I hope the Fonas are basking in a laid-back retirement.

Now that would have been the picture, the talk in almost any city in the United
States three years ago, but since the election we've been saying that the
economy really did pick up last summer at the latest; because George Bush said
so, nobody believed him and we preferred to believe with Mr Clinton that things
were just awful.

But we're all agreed now that the American recession is well and truly over.
The latest news is not so. The Wall Street Journal on Monday put it with
typically dispassionate bluntness, "stocks are sliding adding to evidence that
Clinton's honeymoon with the stock market may be over", bond prices declined.
Worse, I'm saying worse, orders for durable goods those are things like
motorcars and dishwashers that have or or guaranteed to have a life of their
own for three years or more. Durable goods orders fell by 3.7% the biggest drop
in 15 months raising new questions about the vitality of the economic recovery.
Vitality is a tactful word; relapse is another way of putting it.

And California is a special case. No state in the country has been hit so hard
so conspicuously, conspicuously perhaps because the economy of California is
greater than that of all but nine foreign countries. Californians do not yet
recognise a recovery. The state went for Mr Clinton with a cry of hope that he
not the old firm or style of Reagan and Bush could somehow bail California out
that is quite an undertaking.

One of the first positive things that President Clinton did was to have his
secretary of defence go over the Bush administrations list of military, naval
and air bases/stations that must be closed under the pressure of the last
Congress. Of course as always, a Democrat controlled Congress. For years and
years the Democrats have nagged away at the need to cut the defence budget
beyond what either the Republicans or the Pentagon thought wise. Mr Clinton's
list of likely closures is formidable and accords with the Democrats' long-time
dogma. Almost any Democrats, senator or congressman, will vote for shutting
down the military bases on principle, but the moment you start to do it another
principle comes into play, the Nimby principle – not in my back yard. And this
is where Californians, with more cause than most, rise on their hind legs and
scream, they have between a quarter and one third of all the military bases and
stations in the United States, consequently California presents a prime target
for economy, a state where you can be seen to be making the most dramatic cuts
in the defence budget.

Now, most people who don't live near a naval base, a military fort, in fact I
suppose most people in any big country, when they talk about defence are
thinking of bombs and tanks and guns and missiles, but they constitute in the
peaceful pauses between wars less than half of the defence budget, which is
taken up by wages, salaries, pensions, housing, transport, medicine. And the
people who do live hard by or even a mile or two away from a military base know
something else, which is at the heart of the Californians' cry to have no more
of there bases closed. It is the life of the towns and the livelihood of the
ordinary citizens in and around the bases.

With the defence plants already shut down and the military and naval base gone
here and there, California has already added another quarter of a million to
its already high unemployment. If all the California bases on the president's
list are closed, it's estimated that another 350,000 people will lose their
jobs.

President Clinton has sent a panel of experts so called around the country
visiting the bases that are due for closing, it came this week to Oakland,
across the Bay from here. The panel called witnesses to make their case against
shutting down in the San Francisco Bay area, which alone has six naval
installations, one air force base and the old Presidio down the peninsular at
Monterey, which is the headquarters for the defence department's intensive
foreign language training – all are due to close.

Among the witnesses where the governor of the state, Mr Pete Wilson, and the
new senator Dianne Feinstein who used to be mayor of San Francisco. Governor
Wilson is an ardent Republican and Senator Feinstein a fervent liberal
Democrat, but you can be sure that they were comrades in arms when it came to
fighting the president's list and pleading the superior facilities and military
preparedness of the California bases, they know of course they're not going to
save all of them, but they made a persuasive pitch for an air force base just
inland from here at Sacramento. The alternative western base would be a 1,000
miles inland in Colorado, their strongest case was about keeping Alameda, a
naval air station on an estuary here. An admiral testified that Alameda's free
berths for nuclear aircraft carriers would be almost impossible and ruinously
expensive to reproduce elsewhere. The naval station that is down as the open
alternative if Alameda is closed is way to the north in Washington state. The
California witnesses pointed out with zest that that station has no housing as
yet, no hospital and no piers for nuclear carriers and so on and so on. Every
state the presidential panel goes to will hear the same arguments, the same
complaints of unfairness, the same pleas for mercy from the axe.

Senator Feinstein was very powerful in saying that this has come at the worst
possible time for California. By 1988, the loss in defence-related jobs could
be 650,000.

Well 50 years ago exactly, California got its first steel mill in a state
without ores, easterners mocked at the prospect of Californians running more
than 2,000 miles east to Pittsburgh to get their ores, but they found them
almost next door in Utah. And that find introduced, introduced industry –
steel, fleets of freighters, aeroplanes, weapons, research and development – to
this state; it turned California from an almost wholly agricultural state, the
supplier of the fruits and vegetables to half the nation into an industrial and
farming state. California boomed through the war years and on into the '50s and
the next three decades and became the most prosperous state in the Union, but
yea so, so it has felt harder than any other state the long recession. Every
corner of this huge state over 800 miles long, 200 wide has a particular story
and what is so striking to me after a year away in a state that I've visited at
least once or twice every year since, oh since 1939, is the still firm grip of
recession.

In Los Angeles, it's a cause for despair for reasons we thankfully can't go
into here. San Francisco is a special case; its economy has taken a triple
beating. The earthquake for a time almost banished tourism, Desert Storm scared
people enough not to travel by air and all the airlines have suffered
grievously since and the general recession applied the triple whammy.

Today, this tumbling city glitters with that heavenly light, which made Matisse
in New York wonder how do you paint such light? And the tourists packed the
cable cars and flock all over Fisherman's Wharf and switch off in the fast
ferries to visit Alcatraz and meditate on Al Capone, but if you live here
there's no corner of life that doesn't still feel the cold hand of the
recession that won't withdraw.

Latest social note, the city pound just announced that lost dogs would now be
kept alive for no more than three days in which to pray or win for a saviour.
There's not enough money to maintain the old, the immemorial tradition of
feeding and maintaining the lost and the strays for five days.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP