Thirtieth anniversary of Kennedy assassination - 26 November 1993

I've always thought of anniversary, the turn of the year or literally the
return of the year, I've always thought of it as a happy word, but there have
been one or two anniversaries lately that considerably bruise the idea of an
anniversary as a festive time.

I'd say that 10 years ago, less, most Americans asked to respond offhand to the
prospect of 1992, the anniversary of Christopher Columbus limping ashore at San
Salvador would have looked forward to it as an all-American fiesta, but in the
meantime, a literature of disillusion had been spawned and when October 1992
arrived, there were very few fireworks and from one end of the Americas to the
other many memorial parades, many trooping Indian tribes observing the 12
October as a day of mourning. What they were mourning was their experience, the
native experience of the conquistadores, the conquistadors, the very name says
conquest. And in the 15th century, the conquest by any European nation of a
native society meant subjection, enslavement, rape, often torture and
suppression of the native religion. It took about four centuries for intending
conquerors – the French and the British are the best examples – to have the
sense to let the subject peoples keep many of their mores and all of their
religions.

The sudden revelation of all this last year in books and magazines and
newspaper pieces can only mean that for a couple of centuries or so, the white
man's settlement, conquest of the Americas must have been very badly taught in
the schools. The truths revealed last year were always true, but had been
quietly relegated to the shadows while the big spotlight was turned on the
European, the white few of Columbus, as a master sailor an extremely courageous
explorer, a remarkable commander, a visionary and a devout Catholic, all of
which he was.

However, once the brutal side of the Spanish conquests became common knowledge,
became in the past two years something of a publishing industry, it was not
possible to say "well, too bad, let's forget that part and on the great October
day, let's enjoy as John Adams recommended for 4 July – fireworks, parades,
bands and general rejoicing". In fact, when that Columbus Day was over, the
governors and the mayors not to mention members of Congress furnished sighs of
relief that the few riots and eruptions of violence happened in only two or
three countries and they were in Central and South America.

Well now, I have to say I believe very many Americans young and old will be
greatly relieved that 22 November is over, not from any fear this time of
protest, marches or riots, but relief from the sheer din of morbid nostalgia –
22 November, 30 years ago, 1963, was as everyone knows the assassination of
President Kennedy. If disillusion with Columbus was a publishing industry, two
industries based in the life of John Kennedy have flourished and overwhelmed us
this past month or two. One is what you might call the Camelot industry, the
perpetuation and embroidering of the beautiful myth taken from the Tennyson
poem of an ideal small nation whose shining hour was the time it was presided
over by a brave young king. The other a growth industry that gives no sign of
stopping growing is the Kennedy conspiracy industry and to say much about it,
would only massage the sales representatives of that feverish speciality.

Let me just say, I have no peculiar or privilege knowledge of the affair, I
have fairly credible credentials: I was there at the time, I practically wrote
the next days issue of the English newspaper for which I was at the time the
chief American correspondent. I read every word of the Warren Commission's
report, which by the way was a commission of able, inquisitive and honourable
men, none of them so far as I know crippled by a hobbyhorse. Subsequently, I
read the early books and a summary of the, was it 1974, House committee's
renewed enquiry and of course like everybody who was at the time a senescent
adult, I have paid attention to most of the following reports and theories and
revised versions and I will say "I do not believe that the president was killed
on the orders of the Kremlin, Fidel Castro, Lyndon B Johnson, J Edgar Hoover,
Mao Tse-tung, Generalissimo Francisco Franco, Carrie Nation or Dr Crippin.

I lean to the belief that a very forlorn agitated lonely psychopath named Lee
Harvey Oswald did it without help or coaching and as for the maze of motives
that the conspiracy boys and girls would have you thread through, it seems to
me that the likeliest is one small enough to seem trivial to the big
apocalyptic revisionists but big enough to have inspired some of the world's
greatest literature, including Othello and Madame Bovary namely Oswald's false
suspicion, which his widow says, playing him at the time, that she adored
Kennedy and was at the same time sleeping with an FBI agent. So far as I'm
concerned there's no more to say.

About the, about the mythical kingdom of Camelot, which during the run of the
fanciful musical with the same name came to be merged with the fact of the
Kennedy presidency, we can only say now it must show that nations like
individuals have a constant yearning for leaders who are largely more heroic
than life and John Kennedy and his wife arrived as something quite new in the
history of the presidency, a beautiful young couple. I don't know of any other
president's wife who was beautiful and if we have to indulge a prejudice in
favour of say Martha Washington and/or Grace Coolidge we can say for sure that
neither of their husbands could be called handsome, so what was wrong about
having a handsome young president with a beautiful wife? Nothing except we went
on from there to romanticise their public life, the private life seemed
blissfully right, a delusion that was not shared by the White House press
corps, but in those days one of the taboos that was observed and never talked
about was a taboo against writing about the sexual peccadilloes of the
president, if any.

A White House butler who wrote, ooh 50 years ago, a memoir of the presidents
he'd served described President Harding as a lady's man, but only in the
opposite sense to his characterisation of Teddy Roosevelt as a man's man.
Fortunately for John Kennedy, the taboo against writing about or publicly
disclosing the sexual habits of public men were still in force. If it had not
been so, I doubt he'd ever have been able to run for public office.

As it was after the grim years of the Second War and the unexpectedly bitter
ordeal of the Korean War and a stretch of government by late middle-aged men,
it was a tonic thing to see a young handsome president up there on his
brilliant frosty inauguration day saying the torch has been passed to a younger
generation, even though all the equals he had to deal with were the old men of
the recent wars. We readily embraced the glitter and charm and promise of a
kind of chivalry in the presidency. This romantic hunger was so strong that
when the ill conceived and wretchedly executed the invasion of Cuba failed
miserably and Kennedy said he was sorry for it, his popular standing in the
polls went soaring.

A journalist I know wrote movingly the other day about his boyhood view of
Kennedy as a magical little guy on a black and white television set who,
although he was a rich politician from Boston, I believed represented me and
understood me. This boy enjoyed chanting over what he called the sing-song
atheisms of Ted Sorenson, he was the author of the Kennedy inaugural speech
"ask not what your country can do for you, ask rather what you can do for your
country".

Well, my journalist – now I guess crowding 50 or so – wrote on this 22
November: Kennedy was the first great fraud of the post-modern era. He was the
surprised and grateful object of a massed illusion, he came from a state where
electing Irish politicians by fraud was an art form; his father was a bandit
and a profiteer; JFK never won a majority in a national election; it seems
likely that the election of 1960 was stolen for him by the Daley machine in
Chicago – that is I think almost certainly true, but as for the other
judgements, they are too brutal, they are the cynical outcries of a
disappointed sentimentalist.

We should not now blame Kennedy for our misplaced romanticism, he brought to
the presidency the energy of an optimistic spirit. On the initiative of the
suggestion of a congressman from Wisconsin he invented the Peace Corps, he got
us deeply involved in Vietnam, in the early assertion of the civil rights of
blacks, he did use the national guard with as he would have said vigour where
Eisenhower had used it with a reluctance. He had wit and a low-key gift of
Irish blarney, he was disorganised and acted too often on impulse, he had no
gift for cajoling and nudging and arm twisting the Congress, he once called
Congress the enemy.

When he died, there was something like 90 bills that were dead or dying.
Luckily, he was succeeded by Lyndon Johnson, no charmer but the best con man
who ever converted a political enemy, who got more than two thirds of those
bills through the Congress in the following six months. It's been remarked that
when an American president dies a halo descends on him and stays there with his
memory. This is not true of McKinley, it's very true of Lincoln and Kennedy the
debates about their true worth still go on or perhaps only about Kennedy.
Lincoln has almost been sanctified and the bad and arbitrary things about him
are buried in his grave, let it be so once for all with John Fitzgerald
Kennedy.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP