1990 Mid-Term Elections - 9 November 1990

From time to time, I clip or cut out pieces from the newspapers and magazines
and put them away in a folder, expecting one day to use them in one of these
letters.

They are rarely expressions of opinion. Mostly, they could be filed under some
such title as "Things I never new till now", and they span the gamut of
interesting items about life in this country. Sometimes, rarely, but sometimes,
bizarre items about life in some other country that we're all interested in.

I've just pulled out a news despatch, two months old. A writer's report from
Moscow that Mr Gorbachev had dismissed one, it says here, one of his top
officials, whom he blames for an acute shortage of cigarettes, that has caused
demonstrations in Moscow and other cities.

I suppose I cut this out originally as a possible lead into a talk about the
very different view of cigarette smoking in the west and in eastern and Asian
countries. There seems to be no official campaign, in either the Soviet Union
or China, against smoking as a health hazard, an omission that brings joy and
gratitude to the western cigarette manufacturers, who have more than made up
the slumping tobacco sales in this country with aggressive and successful
advertising campaigns throughout what we used to call the Third World.

But looking over this piece and thinking over that dismissed Soviet official,
who had so bungled the distribution of cigarettes as to cause riots among
deprived smokers, I'm not sure that it was his incompetence that attracted my
attention, or the social implications of Mr Gorbachev's act, as the name of
this sacked deputy prime minister.

Believe me, I speak nothing but the truth when I tell you that he is a Mr
Nikitin – honest – and that could well be the reason why I kept this hilarious
item buried for two months, because, simply, it's frivolous and during the past
three months, many another unserious item has crossed my mind and been guiltily
sent on its way.

Since the invasion of Kuwait, I've had the feeling, you may have noticed it,
that to talk about the lighter side of life would be a form of fiddling while
the Middle East burns.

I never felt this way over Vietnam because, I think, the American involvement
was so gradual and for so long, so tenuous, that American technicians and
advisers had been out there under two presidents before we really came awake to
the fact that there were many thousands of soldiers committed to a big and
protracted war.

Life went on in the United States very much as before, just as prosperously as
before for – we never knew it at the time – Vietnam was one war we didn't have
to pay for, at the time. No jump in tax rates. We're paying for it, and many
another spending splurge, now.

But this administration's response to the invasion of Kuwait was spontaneous
and massive. More so than to any previous provocation in American history.
Close to 300,000 Americans have been put in the Gulf in three months, almost
twice as many as crossed the Atlantic during the first nine months of America's
participation in the First World War.

Those first 175,000 men who sailed for Europe between April 1917 and the end of
December, went willingly. They responded to a declaration of war by the
Congress and they knew what they were fighting for. This time, there has been
no declaration of war and nightly interviews, television interviews, in the
desert, a daring and I must say, perilous innovation, tell of men who are
confused about the aims of a prospective war or who increasingly grumble, let's
go or let's go home.

So what I'm saying is that the situation in the Gulf offers so many prospects
of carnage or chaos, that Saddam Hussein casts a long shadow on our daily
lives, it seems irresponsible to dwell on lighter matters.

It's a feeling I must get over, and this week we have fair justification for
doing so in the general elections of last Tuesday, what's called a mid-term
election, being midway between the presidential elections, which are held once
every four years.

Reams and reams of speculation went into print and into television gabble
before the election, warning us of national trends that would be revealed in
the election results. The particular trend you had to watch out for depended,
of course, on the particular prophet you were listening to, Republican or
Democrat.

Neither of them predicted what their partisans would do, they spoke, as they
always do, for the people – that wonderful abstraction, so useful to
speechifying politicians and editorial writers. When in doubt about who's
thinking what, say the American people.

Well let's then match what the soothsayers said would happen against what
happened. The Democratic astrologers said the people were so fed up with the
continued pollution of the land and the rivers, that they would rise and
thumpingly endorse any new green initiative to discipline or punish the
polluters. Result: in the five states that put such a punishing act on the
ballot, it was soundly defeated in all of them.

The Republican fortune tellers said that the people were so enraged at the
performance over the budget talks of the Democrats, and they've been a large
majority there for over 40 years, that they would finally throw out these
incumbents in wholesale lots. Result: 96% of all the House incumbents were
re-elected.

One point both parties agree on. The incumbents, most of whom have been in the
House for three or four or more terms, have accumulated so much campaign money
from special interests who want to be catered to that they can almost never be
dislodged by a newcomer, a challenger, with little campaign money.

Now this did not seem to be true in the races for governor in Florida. A man
who refused to take individual contributions of more than $100 beat a
well-financed incumbent. In Texas, a free-wheeling tycoon who campaigned in
cowboy costume, a joker who could call on $8,000,000 in campaign contributions,
lost to a woman with a third of that supporting money. When Mr Clayton Williams
conceded defeat, both his wife and his mother wept copiously. No wonder four
million of his campaign chest came from his own pocket.

All right, so what other thundering prophecies? The Democrats said the national
swing to their party, which for so long has claimed to be the party of the
common man against the heedless rich, the national swing would be revealed in
colossal majorities for the two men who, at the moment, head the list of likely
presidential contenders in 1992, Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey and
Governor Mario Cuomo in New York, running for a third term.

The result? Senator Bradley squeaked in so narrowly against an under-financed
unknown, that several Democratic leaders at once said you could forget him as a
presidential possibility. Governor Cuomo, who last time took 65% of the vote,
this time took only 53%, and against two opponents that had never been heard of
a year ago. So, perhaps Governor Cuomo is no longer the saviour many Democrats
had been heralding.

The Democrats said Mr Bush had hurt himself, his political standing, so badly,
with his flip-flopping, zig-zagging indecisiveness about the budget that his
personal campaigning across the country for Republican candidates might
actually hurt them more than it would help. Result: the Democrats were right.
Of the 18 candidates that President Bush went out of his way to plead for, 14
lost.

The Democrats went further, they said Mr Bush's prestige, his national
popularity, was slumping so fast, that the Republicans would lose six, seven,
eight seats in the Senate and lots of seats in the House. Wrong. They lost one
Senate seat and eight House seats.

The Republicans said that while the president's popularity has weakened, he is
still, in the polls, more popular than any president in living memory at this
stage, after two years of his first term and that the Republicans would lose
fewer seats than usual in the mid-term election. Result: the Republicans were,
embarrassingly for the Democrats, right.

It is a matter of record, over many decades, that the party of the president,
in a mid-term election, usually loses 36 seats. Well, the Republicans lost only
nine seats, a remarkable result and one they could fairly call a victory.

So, if you want the truth about the American elections, I don't know where you
should go to find it. There is no truth, or rather, there are many truths, most
of them contradictory.

Just about the only unquestioned conclusions that have come out of them are
that to be already in the House of Representatives and therefore the recipient
of moneys from the special interests in your constituency, whether it's a
building contractor or a steelworkers' local, a baseball team owner, a
schoolteachers' union, whatever, to be already a congressman is a big help in
staying a congressman.

The other conclusion is that the Democrats will spend their spare time in the
next two years looking for a Moses. Neither Governor Cuomo, nor Senator Bill
Bradley seems to be he, him, it.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP