Martin Luther King Day - 11 November 1983

There was once an English newspaper editor who, from time to time, would send
out a cable to one of his foreign correspondents who had been working long and
steadily at his job.

The cable read, simply, "Go fallow, go doggo". The idea behind this order or
advice was that the man – they were always men in those days – that the men had
been too close to the politicians or people or the life, of the country he was
writing about, and might have developed a little near-sightedness about it. At
any rate, nothing but good, at the least nothing but useful misgivings, can
come from a break from the bacteria you have had under your microscope all the
time.

Well, nobody asked me to go fallow or to go out to pasture, which at my age
would be a very risky procedure, since, I noticed long ago, nothing is
commoner, in the world of business and the professions, for a keen and vigorous
man to say to his wife, complaining about the constant postponement of a long
break, "Mildred, the day I am 65, or whatever, I shall lock up this desk and
we’ll take off for a trip around the world, or wherever".

About a month after the birthday party the man keels over, in Bangkok or
Blackpool or some other wonder of the world, and to tell a writer to take a
holiday is like telling him to stop thinking.

This is by way of reminding you that I am about 9,000 miles away from base –
from the Big Apple that is and, silent on a peak in the Alps – the New Zealand
Alps, that is – am able at least to brood a little more calmly about some of
the burning issues whose smoke and steam tend to fog up your vision when you
stand too close to them.

Just as the appalling explosion in the marine base in Lebanon, was happening
and just before the little war broke out to save democracy in Grenada,
something came up in Washington that got squeezed out of the running
commentary, though it can rightly be called historic – the decision, on the
part of the Congress and then on the part of a rather reluctant president to
proclaim, for only the second time in the history of this republic, a man’s
birthday as a national holiday.

The man, as you probably know, is the late, the murdered, Reverend Martin
Luther King Junior, who, during the 1950s in the South and during the 60s
throughout all the country, was the most unflagging crusader against all the
ills, the discrimination, the injustices, that black Americans had, for over
350 years, suffered from.

It all started for him – and in the long view, for the country – in December
1955 when a solitary black woman, no agitator but a comfortable, motherly sort,
refused to follow the immemorial tradition of taking a proper place in a public
bus.

In Montgomery, Alabama this was, that proper place was, the back of the bus. I
suppose she wouldn’t have dared have thought of making her little protest if,
the year before, the Supreme Court had not reversed its age-old ruling that
Negros were entitled to separate but equal treatment under the law. The great
reversal came on the appeal of a small black girl in Topeka, Kansas who had to
walk a couple of miles, including a toddle across railway lines, in order to
get to her black school when there was another public, but all-white, school
practically round her corner.

A lawyer for the little girl, whose name was Brown, challenged the local board
of education on the ground that the fourteenth amendment to the constitution,
which guarantees the equal protection of the law to all persons born or
naturalised in the United States, was a guarantee that contradicted and
over-rode the practice of separate schooling.

So, in the spring of 1954 the Spreme Court heard her case, immortalised now as
Brown versus board of education of Topeka and ruled that the separate but equal
doctrine was unconstitutional, that the constitution is colour-blind that, in a
word, the segregation of blacks and whites in the public schools was illegal
under federal law.

We all know by now that in the intervening 30 years, the new ruling came to
apply not only to schools but to theatres, public eating places, trains,
planes, employment and on and on. However, the first adult challenge to the
ideas of separatists came from that motherly lady who decided, on a day in
November 1955, not to sit in a separate place reserved for blacks at the back
of the bus, but to sit up front. She was made to leave the bus. Other blacks
tried to do the same; they were ejected.

There were small rallies and there came into Montgomery the young, handsome
black figure of one Reverend Martin Luther King. He organised a boycott of the
bus company and there were so many blacks who normally used the buses who just
went on walking everywhere, that in the end the bus company gave in.

During that boycott I went down to Montgomery and listened to both sides. The
company's side was that the boycott had been engineered by a minority of
blacks, and that most of them were happy enough with the old custom. I found,
by the way, a surprising number but no majority truly did not want to raise a
fuss about it.Then I went, the only white person, into a service in
Montgomery’s Zionist African Methodist church one memorable evening.

When this extraordinary young man, in his early 30s, this confident black man
preached in a strangely hypnotic language I’d heard only once before from a
black preacher, in Beale Street, Memphis, an easy, eloquent earthy idiom that
derived from nothing but the Bible and the poignant repetition of the folk
wisdom of the blues. He certainly hypnotised that swaying, shouting
congregation and, even then, he was talking about the day of deliverance, "such
as Moses brought to my people Israel".

We all remember, after that, the years of the Reverend King's leadership when
he became to the blacks a figure very like that of Ghandi. He went everywhere,
he lead marches and protests; he went to jail; he was at the head of rallies,
small and huge, that suffered from police dogs, from being hosed down, from
stoning and other humiliations.

He curbed the hotheads among his flock and, everywhere, preached non-violence
and, on a day at the end of August 1963, held a peaceful and
never-to-be-forgotten rally of a quarter of a million blacks and whites in the
shadow of the Washington monument, in the capital. I recall that rally when it
was commemorated 20 years later, couple of months ago, but this time by over
half a million people.

Well, the move to have a national public holiday in honour of Martin Luther
King started quietly, shortly after his assassination in Memphis, in the spring
of 1968, but it was a small, exclusively black movement and if anybody had
publicised it much at the time, I am sure there would have been millions of
Americans, who’d have thought of it as a cranky crusade.

The thing must have been gathering momentum, down the years, without our
knowing it because quite suddenly, and surprisingly to most of us, a bill was
proposed in Congress, and before we knew it, it had appeared to be a serious
bill, and a great deal of support was promised to it by senators and
congressmen of both parties.

It’s still something of a mystery, how a bill should come to the floor of both
houses, the Senate and the House of Representatives, to do something for the
reverend King which was never done for Thomas Jefferson, for Benjamin Franklin,
for any of the colonial worthies, nor for Franklin Roosevelt, not even for
Abraham Lincoln.

I had better remind you now that there are only four national holidays so
ordered by federal law: George Washington’s birthday, Memorial Day, Columbus
Day and what used to be called, armistice day, Veterans Day. All federal office
buildings are closed, including post offices and the banks and most businesses
follow.

Independence Day and Thanksgiving Day are holidays not by law, but by
presidential proclamation. And, of course, very few people have been known to
challenge their right to work on them... but the glaring novelty that stands
out from these celebrations is that only George Washington is, by national law,
accorded a national holiday.

You may wonder about Abraham Lincoln. Many people have wondered. There was
movement, years after the civil war, to have his birthday proclaimed, at least
proclaimed a national holiday, but the feeling in the South that Lincoln was
not so much the saviour of the republic as its betrayer, remained deep-seated
and, to this day, no southern state observes the Lincoln holiday except
Florida, which for so long has been a remote bedroom suburb in the south for
retired or refugee northerners.

So now, Martin Luther King, the bill, passed with scarcely a dissent in the
House of Representatives. And in the Senate, only two southerners of four nays
voted against it. One was the indomitable senator Jesse Helms from the
Carolinas who wanted the FBI’s file on the Reverend King started, by the way,
at the instance of Bobby Kennedy when he was attorney general, wanted that file
opened up now, to reveal, according to Senator Helms, that King was a Marxist.

The file was sealed by agreement between the King family and the Department of
Justice for 35 years. And when the president was asked by a reporter if he
thought King was a Communist, the president made the astonishingly imprudent
reply, well, we’ll know in 35 years, won’t we? He afterwards apologised to the
Reverend King’s widow.

It can be held that the Congress voted cynically because, in the coming
presidential election, blacks are going to register to vote in unprecedented
numbers. One senator indeed said if the vote had been based on phone calls, I
am not sure there’d have been any votes at all.

Certainly nobody running for president dared have come out against the bill,
but there was not a whisper of a popular protest movement against the vote, for
the reason I think the Wall Street Journal gave – everybody now knows that
since Lincoln’s emancipation proclamation, black citizens have not been free
and the reason everyone knows it’s true, is that Martin Luther King made
America see it.

It was, I believe, put better than anybody by Senator Dole, a Republican. He
said, it is simply a symbolic acknowledgement that the work of the declaration
of independence is unfinished.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP