Perot, Buchanan and Dole - 29 March 1996

There's a problem, a puzzle I've never solved to my satisfaction. Through all
the years from time to time, letters come in saying we don't hear enough about
the political issues in America and after all, so many of us ultimately depend
on the policies of the only superpower. This sort of reprimand – Cooke fiddles
while America burns – is infrequent, but it arrives often enough to keep the
finger pointed in my direction.

It induces a little wash of guilt which is then, by the next post, washed away
by letters complaining I talk too much about American politics and its
principle characters, who are, at best abroad, shadowy or lumpish figures. This
complaint is most impressive when it's most colourfully made and whenever I get
deep into presidential politics.

For instance, I can never forget the Englishman who wrote me a postcard years
ago. Now, I imagine him still as a marvellous character, come alive from the
works of P.G. Wodehouse: on the surface he's an ass, below the surface there's
a strong vein of commonsense. The postcard I still recall said simply: "Please
don't go on so about American politics, one's own politics are all one can
handle but you're asking us to understand the system like an alternative form
of chess in which the pawns move backwards, the bishop are not allowed to move
at all and there's no King or Queen."

It's obviously necessary when you can't pick your audience to try to satisfy
both schools.

But in a presidential election year, there is I think an obligation from time
to time to keep people posted, at least on the racing form of the nags who are
entered, so for the moment, and as crisply as I can before we return to a spot
of fiddling, there's an interesting, to Americans a fascinating, new line up
that we've never expected even a week ago. Until then, everybody knew that
President Clinton was always on the hop around the country campaigning like mad
and running up an enviable, to any other candidate, an enviable 55 per cent
approval of the way he handles the presidency.

This 55 per cent is something remarkable, especially if you consider the
landmines that he circumvented, that would have exploded the presidency of most
of his predecessors: substantial charges of marital infidelity when he was
Governor of Arkansas, his involvement, more exactly his wife's deep involvement
in the real estate land development banking Whitewater scandal, which will not
go away and for which three participants have already gone to jail.

And, by the way, the failure of that interminably elaborate national healthcare
plan of Mrs Clinton's has faded quite a way. She goes soldiering on, spending
all her days out in the open, visiting day care centres and children's
hospitals, going to depressed places, turning up this week in Bosnia and quite
justifiably looking more and more like the spiritual child of Ellen Roosevelt.

So there he is Bill Clinton, at the moment the favourite. And now we have
posted, on his right, and certain to be, we thought, his only rival in this two
horse race, we have Senator Bob Dole of Kansas. Small town Kansas he keeps
reminding us, a Currier and Ives' print of rural America at it's finest, where
he was born 72 years ago. It's never mentioned by him or his team that Russell
Kansas would have gone from the map ages ago if it had not been sustained most
of his life by farm subsidies and other federal handouts.

Senator Dole with the small chiselled features, the wicked humour, which he's
now decided need not be suppressed, Senator Dole had a truly emotional moment
at home this week. He went there he said to pay off a debt of gratitude to the
good folks, the old friends and this was not for once a bit of a sentimental
campaign rhetoric. Senator Dole stood there pawing the air with his only good
arm, the shattered right arm limp at his side, tears welling up and barely
dammed when he thanked the people for what they'd done for him after he came
back from the wars a badly wounded soldier, their liberal subscriptions to a
fund that paid his expenses for his three year hospital stay.

I dwell briefly on the picture of the humble war hero because after years and
years of saying nothing about it, Senator Dole has lately brought it up
everywhere. I think this must have been a desperate decision right after the
first of the important primaries, New Hampshire, where the conventional myth
says, if you lose in New Hampshire you'll never be president. Well some of you
will remember Senator Dole lost there to the amazement of everybody except
those obstreperous far right conservatives whose votes produced the astonishing
victory of the battling Pat Buchanan.

That loss may have been a godsend to Senator Dole because even Mr Dole conceded
later whatever Buchanan may have been and is, with his free wheeling bigotry,
his Mexican mocking, his anti Semitism, his not very coded racism. What he did
was strike a nerve that no other candidate had touched on, namely the rising
national anxiety over the corporate habit of downsizing, of abolishing the
sheet anchor of everybody whoever worked a steady job. "Huh," said Mr Dole
shortly after New Hampshire. "I didn't think jobs would be an issue." A
let-them-eat-cake remark that horrified even Senator Dole's campaign managers.
Ever since, the senator has expressed on all occasions, deep and compassionate
concern for everybody who's been laid off.

Well now, why did I say that a week ago, we knew that the racing card was
complete, that it was going to be a two man race. We knew it after that rush of
primaries in the South and West and Middle West even before last Tuesday's
Californian primary. Senator Dole had well over 900 pledged delegates, he needs
996 for the winning total, so one thing is as certain as President Clinton's
being the democratic nominee, Senator Dole will be crowned in San Diego in the
summer. That as I say was a week ago. Suddenly there are not two candidates
running for president, but quite likely five.

Remember Ross Perot the little bantam cock squawky Texan with two gifts that
can help greatly to sustain a political candidacy, a gift of racy colourful
speech and the possession of billions of dollars? Well he didn't vanish and you
can't honestly say he failed. He didn't win the presidency in 1992 but he
successfully robbed George Bush of it by taking, it's admitted, mainly from
Bush, by taking 19 per cent of the total vote. Well his movement, his third
party has waxed and waned since '92, but renamed the Reform Party it's waxing
again and is getting on the ballot in many states not least California the most
popular state and one which even the White House says, Mr Clinton has to win in
November to win the election.

Who is to lead the Reform Party? They've been looking all over and coming back
beseechingly to Mr Perot himself. No never again he said and then having said
he’d ne’er consent, consented.

And then there's Mr Pat Buchanan who seemed to most of the Republican primary
voters too extreme, too frightening. He's won nothing since New Hampshire and
like two other candidates who appeared to have drowned in Senator Dole's floods
of votes they sank without trace. But Mr Buchanan won't sink. He thrashes the
otherwise smooth waters of the Republican establishment, he swears he's going
to take his message to San Diego. And at last check, he threatened, if the
Republicans don't join him positively on constitutional banning abortion,
abandoning trade treaties and stopping immigration, threatens to run as an
independent Republican.

Well this is surely fine news for President Clinton. It's figured that all Mr
Buchanan and Mr Ross Perot could successively do would be to take away the
votes of people who would otherwise vote for Senator Dole, but now there
appears a new man, a passionate environmentalist and consumer hero. Who should
pop out of the woodwork, or should I say the greenery, but Ralph Nader. An
uncomfortable pause there because I wonder if I've ever talked about him much
before, which is rather like being a sports reporter who only once mentioned
Andre Agassi.

Ralph Nader is 62 and if there is a more consistent figure in American politics
I don't know him. The general populous owes him more than they know. Shortly
after Rachel Carson's silent spring, the book that fired every man's and
woman's concern about the chemical pollution of nature. Ralph Nader left no
environmental issue unbruised by his brainy attacks. He pioneered everything
from motorcar seatbelts and the abolition of the side vent window, to the more
rigorous testing of foods and drugs, and punishment for industries that befoul
our rivers and made lakes the size of Wales un-fishable.

He's been a thorn in the side of every Congress and every Republican president
for 30 years. He finds the new Congress particularly obnoxious, especially for
its intended suspension of many laws that have effectively cleaned up the
waters of this well watered continent. He has a party, naturally the Green
Party and he has announced he's going to get on the ballot in a few states most
disturbingly for Clinton. He has made it in California.

Mr Nader made his decision because he sees Mr Clinton embracing more and more
of the Republicans views, turning into you might say a Republican for Clinton.
Mr Nader is disgusted. Any votes he gets would no question rob President
Clinton, so while Senator Dole has to worry about defectors turning to Buchanan
and Perot, Mr Clinton can now worry about a tiny thief in the night, who after
a very close race on a Tuesday in November, could see Mr Clinton wake up in the
morning and find the presidency gone.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP