Food safety and standards - 17 March 1989

I don’t know if I told you a month or two ago about a visit from my eldest
grandson who came down from the snows of Vermont to spend a weekend in the
comparative balm of New York City.

Once he’d unpacked, his outfits for a busy weekend were stowed in a duffle bag
the size of a small puppy, he heard the tap-tap of grandpa at his trade and
loped into my study. He’s a rangy six foot three placid type, temperamentally
equipped to be the soother and peacemaker among his four brothers and sisters,
but when he saw the object of the tap-tapping his eyeballs glowed like comets
and he said, “A manual typewriter! Wow!”

It’s been a pleasant little tale to tell to anybody of my generation, but I now
look back on it sourly for the other day I went off into the jungle of mid-town
New York on what I thought would be a very brief expedition. I was looking for
a cotton or linen ribbon for my machine.

After two hours I surrendered to the only thing available, a film of nylon
advertised on the package as being of superior quality, which means that once
installed it leaves a clean, faint imprint like an old cotton ribbon that had
been vigorously used for about six months.

In other words, Adam was not being cute; he was right. As one dealer said,
“Since we’ve phased out manual typewriters there’s been no call for your
ribbons.” Another man looked at me as if I were asking for a quill pen and
said, “They don’t make those things any more.”

I came home in a pesky temper to think that an item as trivial as a typewriter
could set up such a panic search all over town. I turned on the 24-hour news
channel for solace in order to put my little grouch in perspective to see what
mighty issue was wrecking the republic.

What I saw was a picture, in sinister colour, of two small oval balls with what
looked like a tiny eye in the middle of each. They were embryos. That was it. I
was on to some medical bulletin, no doubt. However, once I turned up the sound
I was told they were not embryos, they were two grapes and the tiny eye in the
centre of each was the point where they had been injected – heavens! – with
cyanide.

Well if one nylon typewriter ribbon could for the moment upset one old
journalist, how about two grapes – only two, they were not shown as examples,
they were the only two grapes discovered in the whole United States to have
been injected with cyanide, two grapes that immediately caused every
supermarket and mini-market in the country to be ordered to remove from its
shelves every pear, peach, plum and grape that had come in from Chile.

This is the time of the year when Chile provides the bulk of its fruit imports
into this country. The Food and Drug Administration performing a routine
sampling of imported food in a store in Philadelphia had spotted these two
grapes and the 50-state alarm went out.

The prompt results – 200,000 fruit growers, packers and shippers in Chile were
idle. The FDA – the Food and Drug Administration – detained at the piers and
warehouses of every port of entry into this country the half a million cases of
fruit a day that arrive at this season from Chile.

The people on the receiving end here, the importers, shippers, distributors,
cooperatives, chain-store owners and so forth were holding emergency meetings
with officials of the FDA to see how, if, those three and half million cases a
week can be saved or – so help us – recompensed.

In the helter-skelter meantime, FDA inspectors were at it night and day
searching through hundreds of thousands of Chilean fruit to see if there are
any more contaminated items. You understand there’s no suggestion that Chilean
fruit breeds or is susceptible to cyanide or any other toxin. Some
mischief-maker, some criminal, at some point injected the stuff in those two
grapes, an act of terrorism of immense unprecedented success.

He, she, they, had only to perform that single act to set off the natural
suspicion that perhaps that was not all. The dollars lost to the Chileans, to
the American importers, to the markets everywhere here is at this point
incalculable – certainly hundreds of millions, at the least.

Within two days of that casual discovery in Philadelphia the Chilean foreign
secretary was winging his way to Washington to meet the secretary of state and
Mr Jim Baker had on his hands a kind of problem – for once what can genuinely
be called a crisis – which I doubt any other secretary of state has ever had to
deal with.

However it is, I suppose, typical of the sort of problem that will become at
least familiar in the new age of terrorism. While we were glumly pondering this
front-page news, not very far back in the papers and way up front on the tube
was another scare which has nothing to do with anonymous criminals in a remote
country.

This week another government agency, the Environmental Protection Agency,
proclaimed that daminozide, commonly known as alar, can be a cancer-causing
agent. It is used to control the ripening of apples shipped long distance, also
to heighten their colour. Apples sprayed with the chemical, says the EPA, are
unacceptable for human consumption.

So, thanks to the instant messenger of network television, apples started
pouring off the shelves of stores and markets and shops throughout the 50
states. Within 24 hours of the EPA’s warning, a friend of mine in California
called to ask what sort of signs are going up on your fruit stores.

I went round our corner to the Korean fruit stand. The immigrant Koreans have a
monopoly in New York now of fruit stands and stores which they set up at four
in the morning with tidy mountains and graceful pyramids of fruit. They close
down at ten at night, dismantle the whole show, draw and lock the gates and go
home.

They are, you understand, fairly recent immigrants and like all such people
from the late 19th Century on they believe in what they’ve been told, that in
America if you work very hard every day of young and middle life you will
prosper and realise the American dream.

It usually takes one generation to get them used to the more normal routine of
working, say seven hours a day for the legal minimum wage, health and pension
plan.

Well, sure enough, a mound of apples bore a new legend painted on cardboard –
“Not treated with alar”. I called back my California friend and told him. “Same
here,” he said.

The phrase “the mind boggles” would have to be reinvented to imagine the speed
and the extent across this entire continent of fruiterers rushing to their
stores on the same morning sifting through their apples, removing boxes of them
from their shelves or, in much relief, posting the signs that all was well.

However the government, the EPA, were quick to advise the states of their
warning as it applied to schools and it was a brave school anywhere that went
on serving apples for school lunches until the parents descended upon them and
accused them as brazen poisoners.

The proclaimed menace of grapes and apples was enough to set medical
correspondents, environmentalists and plain investigative reporters to recall
or revive recent warnings about other threats to health in food, so that by the
middle of this week – with no effort on my part by way of digging into files or
other deep research – the telly and the papers were bristling with reminders of
other hazards recently publicised.

And I need hardly tell you that in this country, which surely has no equal
anywhere as a collective health and fitness nut, once a government agency vents
a suspicion, once a learned article appears in the New England Journal of
Medicine ever so faintly suggesting a possible risk to experimental mice of
practically any food you care to mention then the three, four, national
television networks scoop it up and it sounds off on the nightly news like a
fire bell.

So a series in the Wall Street Journal has been recalled “Watch out, corn
eaters” – corn being maize, the staple crop of the Americas. “Watch out for
aflatoxin”, another cancer-causing agent. Better lay off the corn – an
injunction which would in the summer here would be like telling Englishmen or
Irishmen to lay off potatoes.

In New York the National Broadcasting Company ran a series with the frightening
title, “Killer fish”, simply listing the pollutants getting into the rivers and
lakes that breed fish and shellfish. Well, that’s an old story and for ten
years or more now each state has forbidden or restricted the commercial catch
of certain specified fish.

Incidentally, a ban on antibiotics in animal feed is still being considered by
the Food and Drug Administration, not because the cow or chicken would poison
you, but because some antibiotics can make human diseases resistant to them
and, oh yes, salmonella has now found to be running like wildfire through
American chickens, some chickens.

That’s the snag. Which chickens? The Chilean or whoever poisoners didn’t need
to spend more than about 20 seconds of their time to guarantee that a whole
nation would pause and say “Better safe than sorry” and freeze at the ports
half a million cases of fruit a day.

Along with these warnings of acute hazards to health, the papers and the telly
have not slacked their daily campaigns about chronic threats. Every night, in a
score of television commercials, we are urged to buy pastes and dressings and
drinks low in cholesterol. A campaign about triglycerides will soon be under
way.

Excuse me, it’s time for my breakfast – my low-cal, cholesterol-free eggs and
country sausage and little dollar-sized pancakes with butter and maple syrup.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP