A fragment from 1947 - 12 January 1947

In the year after the dropping of the first atomic bomb, it's very hard to
pretend that the New Year is the turning point of anything very serious but
Americans, more than most people I think, like to enjoy the fallacy of freewill
and pretend that a new calendar means a new and better life.

It's just possible, this time, that history may give a boost to this old
illusion for what would strike a stranger about the 80th Congress that has met
this week is not so much the personalities and the political programme
involved, so much as the hopes that Americans are sinking in it. Even a man who
couldn't read could have learned something this week from the rash of cartoons
in the newspapers.

From most of them, I think he would have got the notion that Americans are
hoping, against their own misgivings, that a Republican Congress can prove that
capitalism, or more respectably it's called "free enterprise", is still the
white knight who will rescue a distracted Columbia from the seductive and
brutal passes of other systems of economy and government.

There's a mythical devotion in all this, which I can best explain this way.
Halfway down Long Island, there's a fish store where I stop in summer. The
moment you open the door and go inside, the air is pungent with the tang of
clams and fat lobsters and writhing crabs, and the glass cases that lie between
the counter and the sawdust floor gleam with great slabs of swordfish and the
steady gaze of striped bass.

But if you take a child in there, though he may exchange a suspicious glance or
two with a a staring blue fish, the thing he notices right away is a picture on
the wall that dominates the whole place. It's a very fancy coloured print,
about three foot long, of a desperate battle between Indians and whites. It's a
highly fanciful version, in fact, of the last pitched battle between them in
the United States, only 70 years ago, out in Montana on the plains by the
Little Bighorn River. Scalping and knifing are drawn with the greatest zest,
but while everybody else is feinting and shooting and scoring his neighbour,
there stands in the middle a noble soldier with a goatee beard. He is clothed
in white, a brave, not to say forgetful, figure quite untouched by the bullets
and the blood, measuring his height against an American flag.

He is the immortal character whose real character few Americans bother to know
about known as "Custer"; Colonel Custer, who in one of the most stupid blunders
in military history managed to go down in the massacre of his entire regiment.
However, Custer's last stand is an event and a phrase that American boys learn
about as soon as they start to chew gum. And though you can kid about him, it's
as well not to make contemptuous remarks even at this late date about Custer
himself.

The emotion that Americans bring to this picture, whether it's in this fish
store or in the mind's eye, is much like that they bring to such phrases as
democratic capitalism and a free economy. And the heart of Americans goes out
this week to the new Congress, whether their head goes along or not. For
there's a sort of secret understanding in the air which nobody cares to say out
loud, that we have taken up our position and are going to try and maintain
capitalism's last stand.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP