Shipbuilding In California - 17 August 1990

I used to wish that I had a cottage in Jamaica, or somewhere in the Bahamas –
Bermuda, even – so that friends would never wonder why I went there.

"He's gone off to his cottage in the Bahamas", which is an obvious place for a
regular holiday. As it is, even old New Yorker friends say, "Why do you keep
going off to San Francisco?" And I tell them it's my holiday town which is only
a half truth. I can't remember when I last took a holiday.

I've gone along for some time on the principle that a journalist who takes a
holiday is a man going into temporary retirement. And I've noticed journalists
who retire tend to suffer the fate of active businessmen who keep promising
their wives that come 65, or some other arbitrary date, they'll pack up and
start a trip around the world. They do pack up, and relax, and take off. And
drop dead in Singapore.

The true reason is much less alarmist and making this a letter from America,
and not from New York. Mind you, New York is nowhere but America but it is not,
or it is no longer, the hub or characteristic centre of American life, in spite
of the absolutely settled belief of native New Yorkers that, as an old radio
comedian used to say, "Everywhere outside New York, is Bridgeport,
Connecticut".

I began to make a point of coming out here regularly to San Francisco after I
spent a couple of days with a California politician over 20 years ago. The date
was Christmas time 1967. And this, in part, is what I wrote for my paper,
"Quite suddenly, California is, in population, in economic power and in its
variety of political troubles and challenges, the first state of the union.

"Whoever is running the state has to do something now about the jungle growth
of the cities, the turmoil on the campuses, the conflict about compulsory
unionism between organised labour and a freewheeling labour force, the
unceasing inflow of 1200 new settlers a day, loading the relief rolls and
straining the welfare budget. Not to mention the bewildering mobility of
hundreds of thousands of part-time workers, deadbeats, runaway hippies,
suitcase farmers and the shuttling agents of the Mafia.

"A California governor's handling of these troubles is more significant than it
would be in little Vermont, or for that matter in big Ohio, because in only 25
years California has developed from a huge, lush fruit bowl – half the lettuce
in the country is grown in the single, vast Salinas Valley – from a film studio
and the sunny haven for retired Midwestern farmers, into the first state of the
union in more things than numbers.

"All the chronic social, industrial and rural problems of America are here
today in acute form. A man who can administer California with imagination and
good order is one who, as much as any other American executive, would hold
powerful credentials to preside over the United States."

Well, the man I was talking these things over with 23 years ago, was in fact
the governor of the state and when he left office, over 60% of Californians
thought he'd done a good job. It was an omen which went unnoticed by the
Democrats, who even 12 years later basked in the popular delusion that the man
they had to beat was simply a retired, B-film actor. You'll have guessed, by
now, that that governor who did, indeed, come to preside over the United
States, was Ronald Reagan.

Every journalist remembers certain stories he covered, moments with certain men
and women which stay with him more sharply than the usual catalogue of events
he watched, which go into the books as being memorable, or decisive points in
history.

And, driving back that Christmas time to San Francisco, from the state capital
Sacramento, I remember going over in my mind – I never wrote it up – how
California had changed from the first long, rambling drive through its 800
miles in 1933, until that day, goodness, 35 years later.

I won't bore you with a chronicle but say simply that when I first knew this
state, and because of the great variety of its physical beauty I covered
thousands of miles of it, it was the great exporter of fruits and vegetables.

It was the import-export shipping base for the countries of the Pacific and, of
course, it was known to all of us as the manufacturing centre of the world's
myths and romances. In that hilly place in southern California which went in,
no more than 20 years, from a sheep town with no post office to the
motion-picture capital of the earth, Hollywood.

Came the Second World War and came into California a man named Henry Kaiser, a
more-than-life-size bullfrog of a man who decided to make freighters for
America at war. A preposterous idea man. He was preposterous to the old
shipping firms. He even talked about the "front end" of a ship, but he built
huge shipyards here, distributed all the parts of a ship into separate piles on
squares marked A, B, C, A1, A2 and so on.

Hired thousands of men who also didn't know one end of a ship from another. Got
them, with great cranes, to whisk these parts through the air, with the
greatest of ease, down to the ways where teams of welders rushed in.

And, in no time, Mr Kaiser was producing a Liberty Ship every two days. He
solved the problem of supply for the biggest naval war there had ever been,
over millions of square miles, the American battle for the Pacific. He'd built
steel mills in California which had never seen steel except coming in on a
train. "Where will he get his ores?" they cried. He found them in Utah. And
from then on, California became an industrial as well as the agricultural
state.

Today, its industries take in aerospace, fabricated metals, machinery,
chemicals, electronics equipment more than anywhere, and, of course, its huge
production of food. We used to say, long ago, "Watch out for what's happening
in America because tomorrow it will happen to Europe".

Today, we had better say, "Keep tabs on what's happening in California. For
tomorrow it will be happening to you, wherever you are, in the western world".

And that goes for the state of the economy, the health or ill-health of home
building, the handling of crime, the drug traffic, motorcar sales – which are
today a barometer of prosperity or recession, as once it used to be railroad
freight rates. How many schools to build, every week, to accommodate the
bulging population of the young, from several countries.

How to absorb Asians and Latin Americans into the system and somehow recognise,
for the time being, some of us hope, their daily use of 34 languages. How to
keep the ever-expanding welfare rolls within the limits of a state budget that
the Californians are willing to be taxed for. And on and on, including the
pressing, grim fact of a population of Aids victims higher than that of New
York.

So when you arrive here, before you weigh yourself down with these problems, I
must say there's the blessed fact that July and August in San Francisco are two
of the coolest months of the year, the average high temperature in this city
being only 7F higher than the average temperature of December and January.

So I drove into town, an escapee from the drenching, abominable heat of New
York, under a grey sky, 60F, with a mild sun winking lazily through the fog.
And I pick up the morning and evening papers to see how things look from here.

Things, of course, most of all mean, as they do everywhere, Iraq. The only
local item that edges up on the columns of despatches from the Middle East is
the closing of Yosemite National Park after 22,000 acres of forest have gone up
in the summer smoke of the long drought. The good word from the forest rangers
and the firemen brought in from several states is that Yosemite's great stand
of redwoods that has been there since Moses, the towering sequoia sempervirens,
has been saved.

As for any markedly California response to the president's management of the
Persian Gulf crisis, it is at the present masked by popular approval that is
general throughout the country. But two anxieties have already been quick to
surface here. One is from the environmentalists who are very strong in this
state. The Sierra Club was a pioneer in, what you might call, green politics.

It's been quickly noticed that in the congressional sound and fury over Sadam
Hussein's invasion of Kuwait on the night of 3 August, a senator from Alaska
slipped an amendment into a defence authorisation bill. The amendment was
passed in casual acclamation. It would open protected federal lands for oil and
gas development, an old, tenaciously-fought issue here.

The other fear or protest is noisier and has sprouted boycotts of petrol
stations across the whole state. The sudden rise in the price of petrol, while
setting off a suspicious of price gouging, is also seemed to have doomed the
prospect, this year, of a federal tax on petrol.

And that, in a state that has more automobiles than human beings, could shrink
consumer spending, encourage inflation and achieve what may well have been one
of Saddam Hussein's minor aims, a slide into an American recession.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP