Obsenity and public art funding - 13 August 1993

Do you remember the hullabaloo a year or two ago, about whether public money,
tax money should be used to exhibit what a great many people considered an
obscenity. I can sharpen the reminder of that incident, which shook the halls
of Congress by putting in a question in the very coarse form it hit the public,
in the words of a disgusted senator, "should the ordinary American citizen have
no say in paying out his tax dollars to subsidise the public exhibition of a
crucifix floating in a jar of urine?" That shocker and of course intended by
the so-called artist as a shocker, it was only one item in an exhibition, which
had been funded in part by an independent government agency, the National
Endowment for the Arts.

Another exhibition, which drew almost equal indignation in Congress and among
the public was an exhibition of photographs by a man greatly admired by the
avant-garde one Robert Mapplethorpe. His sin, from the point of view of the
ordinary protesting taxpayer, me for instance, is that much of his photography
was devoted to what is called "homoerotic figures and representations of
sadomasochism".

Now I ought to say at once that two examples of the use or misuse of public
money were minor scars on the immaculate body of an institution that does
enormous good in promoting and backing artists, musicians, historians,
documentary film-makers, works of scholarship – handing out money as so many
private foundations do to help gifted people do some original work in
scholarship or one of the arts, the media that they otherwise couldn't do
without resorting to the indignity of taking a job like Geoffrey Chaucer in his
customs house, TS Eliot doing nine to five as a publisher, Wallace Stevens
earning his keep as an insurance agent.

The row in Congress was never resolved, though the main protesting rebel,
Senator Jesse Helms the North Carolina Republican failed to get a law passed
that would more explicitly restrict the sort of thing the National Endowment
could finance.

However, Senator Helms achieved a kind of victory in alerting the public to the
extremes of free speech the Endowment was likely to sponsor. The chairman of
the Endowment stepped down confessing that the job of deciding what to put
money behind and what not was a job he wouldn't wish on his worst enemy. And of
course what the crucifix in the jar row did was to encourage very earnest or
way-out artists, self-declared artists to test the Endowments principles of
choice by putting up seriously of facetiously fairly outrageous projects. If
the Endowment then condemned them or withdrew their grant, they would then
surely sue the Endowment for violating their rights of free speech under the
first amendment to the constitution.

In the past, oh 20 years or more, publishers, television producers, most of all
movie producers, can put out almost anything they choose by way particularly of
sexual titillation or sexual performance. Wait for a theatre to refuse to show
it, howl censorship and go to court on that good old First Amendment and
probably win because the courts including the highest in, I believe, most if
not all of the western democracies have given up on defining obscenity. It
maybe worth taking a quick hawk's-eye view over what it meant in the law and
what it no longer means.

The most obvious landmark I can spot is a British act of 1857, which authorised
the seizure on the offending premises or in the malls of, quote, "obscene
matter whether it be in writing or by picture, effigy or otherwise".
"Otherwise" leaves great leeway for invention. But you see it doesn't define
obscenity at all, it just assumes everybody knows what it is like. A recent
justice of the United States Supreme Court who being asked to define obscenity
limply replied, "All I can say is, I know it when I see it". Sometime in the
1880s, I think, the law in both countries moved closer to a definition. The
intention of the author, the painter, the photographer or otherwise became the
point. The intention, the new law said "of corrupting morals", whose morals?

In Britain and America, anything tending to the corruption of minors, the
French shrugged their shoulders at that, gave a broader license to titivating
stuff provided it did not l’homme moyen sensual – the average sensual man.
Who’s he?

In law, women you notice are either beyond sensuality or corruption or don't
count. The British and the Americans alternated between applying the corruption
of minors standard and more rarely the corruptibility of the average sensual
man, many an English judge wondering in passing if he himself was more or less
average. And then almost 60 years ago now, a very large door to all sorts of
debatable literature was flying open by an American judge presiding in the
southern district court of New York, which is in practice the supreme court of
the state of New York.

He had before him the question of retaining the ban, which was absolute
throughout the United States, the ban on James Joyce's Ulysses; he lifted it
and in so doing opened up a new view of obscenity. Judge Woolsey said that what
mattered in a work that appeared superficially to be obscene was the total
effect of it as a work of literature. In his interestingly original judgement
the question was "is Ulysses titillating sexually, an aphrodisiac?". On the
contrary, he ruled the total effect is somewhat emetic, he then added a waggish
aside, which he couldn't know then, but which has proved to be an open sesame
for all sorts of pornographers, let's not forget said Judge Woolsey still
talking about Ulysses that Joyce's locale is Celtic and his season is spring.
In the long course of time, that excuse came to be exploited with enthusiasm by
sex magazines pretending that their entwined or throbbing nudes were the
victims of summer heat in say a tropical locale.

Well pretty soon to be truthful, pornographers needed no legal quibble at all
because one DH Lawrence's Lady Chatterley's Lover was let in and then the more
steamy and clinical sex novels of Henry Miller, not legal doors but floodgates
were open.

One of the last efforts to plug the dikes with a legal thumb happened, oh
quarter a century or more ago, in the 1960s, anywhere when the Supreme Court of
the United States convicted a man not for publishing an erotic magazine, but
for what it called prurient advertising and promoting it. That rather baffled
defendant, I believe he served time, you certainly find had published a
magazine that was by the grossest definition mildly erotic, but not remotely as
explicit, I mean as genital, as the gorgeous centrefolds and off-centrefolds of
the fat and prosperous magazines that sell in the western world in their
millions and that represent in brilliant palpitating colour just about any form
of sexual intercourse imaginable.

The Supreme Court has not to my knowledge ever taken up these masterpieces of
obscenity. In about 1975, the top court just about decided that there was no
national federal standard definition of obscenity, it shifted the burden of
judgment to the states of if they cared, to the cities, they could fairly ban
what their community would consider obscene – so who's that? A lot of people
raised Cain when the crucifix photo was shown in Chicago, but the moment people
heard about it, there were long long queues. I suppose people, lots of people
loved to see obscenity but hitherto somebody in society, church or the courts
have told them what they could not see.

Today, we've given up and the judges are as much to blame as anybody for
letting the media, the movies, the magazines ride a wave of filth and violence
masquerading as free speech.

As for the National Endowment for the Arts and its chronic problem of whom to
subsidise and why, it has a new director and a hilarious new problem of what is
right and fitting to fund with public money. Of course their problem starts and
ends with defining in every case what is art and what is art that is worth
backing with the public's taxes, it seems at the moment that art is anything
the so-called artist says it is.

Here's one for the books if not for the courts. Last Tuesday, three young
artists went out on the hot dusty streets of a small California town just north
of the Mexican border, they had in their hands small packs or bundles of crisp
$10 bills, which together made up of $5,000 grant given to them indirectly by
the National Endowment for the Arts. Come one, come all or some such John the
Baptist invocation was the cue for a line to form, a line of illegal Mexican
immigrants. It was important to the trio of artists with the bundles that the
people should be illegal and once that was settled, the three artists then
practised their art, they gave away to each supplicant a $10 bill.

This was meant to stress the illegal alien's role if any in the economy.
Anyway, the process of handing out $10 bills is called by the artists "arte
reembolso" – art rebate – an outrage, declared a local congressman. The head
man of the trio, a very serious artist says what their doing constitutes a work
of art and a political statement; better put it in his words which are concise,
explanatory and remarkable. "We are demonstrating," he said, "the interaction a
physical space with intellectual space and civic space." So there.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP