Impeachment for Clinton? - 11 September 1998

Only a day before I was to record this talk, I'd sworn that there was one topic
I would not talk about, namely topic A. I would not even pronounce the name of
Miss L.

I swore, after we'd meditated and philosophised on Mr Clinton's inadequate
confession of August 17, I swore then to break loose from the journalists,
politicians, pundits, public figures who'd been speculating and guessing and
prophesying what the president had done, what the special prosecutor said he'd
done, when the Congress might receive the prosecutor's report after a four-year
investigation.

And on and on through millions of guess words to the nausea of everyone who can
listen or read. So I sorted through the random deposits of Americana in my
memory bank.

I snapped up the next morning's paper and went at once to the obituary page in
the hope that some fascinatingly famous person, some interesting weirdo, some
lovely character was worth a memoir. Then I recalled a tiny incident that
happened only last weekend, when a young man, seeing a guest of ours, a very
old English lady sitting out in the blazing noonday 110F sun, something only
mad dogs and Englishmen will do, winkingly said to her, "I guess you don't have
many chances of doing this in your country." I had my topic.

Familiar old preconceptions that one nation holds about another that outlast
even the most blinding contrary evidence in your face. I made notes. Americans'
– New Yorkers', anyway – assumption that London is a city of rain. Fact – New
York has an average 32 inches a year. London, exactly the same. New York has it
in a dozen cataclysms throughout any one of which it looks like the end of the
world. London gets what only an Englishman could have called "the gentle rain
from heaven", but gets it a lot of the time.

Belief. The English drink tea for breakfast, almost as a religious ritual.
Whereas Frenchmen, from midday on, drink wine all the time. Fact – just under
40% of all Brits drink coffee for breakfast. Fact – four Frenchmen in 10 never
touch wine. How their comicalities struck me. By Wednesday afternoon I could
imagine what another old lady would have called "a fun talk in the making". And
one, of course, highly instructive.

Throughout all the eight-month roar of the rumour mill and the babble of
guesswork, there was one influential man who spoke very little. He is
Congressman Henry Hyde of Illinois. A tall, graceful, patient, silver-haired
congressman who was in on the impeachment proceedings against President Nixon.

He's the present chairman of the House judiciary committee, which is the one
that has to decide if evidence brought before the House is weighty enough to
warrant an impeachment hearing, out of which could come a vote to file articles
of impeachment. He has appeared once, possibly twice, in public and said we
should make no judgement until the prosecutor's report is in. Wait for the
report.

So early this week I decided I would never talk about this thing again until
that happened. And last Tuesday, the best information was that Special Counsel
Judge Starr would probably get the document to Congressman Hyde next week or
perhaps not until the congressional election is over in November.

Then, on Wednesday afternoon – flash, boom, bang. With no warning, or notice
given to Congress, not even a phone call to the Speaker of the House, Mr Starr
sent off 18 boxloads of documents to the House, where they were put under armed
guard in the custody of the sergeant-of-arms.

Within the hour, the Speaker of the House, Mr Gingrich – who in the American
system, remember, is not a neutral referee but the political leader of the
majority party, today, the Republicans – the speaker said the House had to take
a deep breath, and take its time, and face its gravest act next to a
declaration of war.

Through Wednesday evening, a new wave of speculation began to rise. How much
gross detail was in the Lewinsky report? Did it contain much of the old
Arkansas land deal? The White House's secret confiscation of those confidential
FBI files on the Republicans?

But chiefly the early hue and cry was "When will the report be made public?"
Every journalist worth his investigative salt was already drilling holes all
over town to be sure he'd be first and best and most lurid with the leaks.

Chairman Hyde, anticipating the coming flood of leaks at once petitioned the
House rules committee to release the bulging summary of the report to the
public on Friday. And from then on, while the House judiciary committee would
presumably be reading and digesting the 4,445 pages and the loads of Grand Jury
evidence and the 20-odd hours of Miss Lewinsky's confessional talk, as secretly
recorded by Miss Tripp, meanwhile the public could lap up the gory details of
an affair it says it's sick and tired of but is, aren't we all, aching to hear
more of. No need for us to get in on that scavenger hunt. By the time many of
you hear these words you'll know more gory details than I know now.

Meanwhile, while Mr Starr was making up his mind, in a hurry, the president
yielded to what many senators and congressmen of both parties had urged him to
do, especially the ones who want him to survive. Bury the legal quibble of
inappropriate sexual relations, quite possibly the biggest blunder of his
presidency.

To come clean and true before every audience he faces, and repent, beg for
forgiveness. And so the president did. First, and most simply, before a
Democrats' fund-raising dinner in Florida. "I let you down. I let my family
down. And I let this country down. And I'm trying to make it right".

If he'd said that two weeks ago, or better, last January, he'd most likely have
stifled all the fire power out of the Starr report. But within 24 hours of Mr
Starr's move, the president had met privately to beg forgiveness of the House
leaders of both parties, the Senate leaders, even of his whole Cabinet. It's a
reflection of how little the Cabinet matters in the American system that this
was the first Cabinet meeting since January.

However much of the huge report is released, however much or little you know,
this, I believe, is the time to look at impeachment, how it's defined, how it
works, how it has worked.

The Constitution has two relevant clauses. One, the House of Representatives
shall have the sole power of impeachment. And, two, the president, vice
president and all civil offices of the United States shall be removed from
office on impeachment for treason, bribery or other high crimes and
misdemeanours.

What are high crimes and misdemeanours? Ah, well! There was a tremendous and
inflammatory debate when that clause was being debated during the convention
that wrote the Constitution. James Madison feared a president might hold office
merely at the pleasure of a Congress. If it disliked him, it could manufacture
misdemeanours.

Alexander Hamilton thought the grounds for impeachment so vague and dangerous
to prove he wanted to throw out the whole practice of impeachment, as the
British had done. But the convention kept it. Mainly, it was intended to be a
protection against corrupt judges and in the 12 cases of impeachment that have
gone forward, nine of them have been of judges. Of presidents, only one, one
trial.

President Nixon saw the handwriting – "Guilty" – on the wall long before he was
to come to trial to the Senate. He didn't even wait for the whole House to vote
for his impeachment. When the House judiciary committee voted unanimously three
articles of impeachment, that was enough. He resigned.

The process is theoretically simple. The House judiciary committee meets,
studies evidence that charges impeachable offences which might come from a
committee of Congress, from a Grand Jury hearing. From now, the special
prosecutor, whose power to send up his own report was incorporated in the act
of 1978 that set up the emergency office of a special prosecutor, the committee
then decides if the evidence is strong enough to warrant a hearing, an
investigative hearing of the whole committee.

They can then take their time on that, review documents, call witnesses. At the
end they vote on each suggested article. If they vote any single article, it
must go to the floor of the House which then votes by a majority to send the
accused to trial by the Senate, sitting as a jury, the presiding judge to be
the Chief Justice of the United States. A two-thirds majority will convict. The
only time a president was impeached, Lincoln's successor, Andrew Johnson, the
guilty verdict fell one short. He was acquitted.

The whole process will not obey the urgent, wishful thinking of the tabloids.
It could take two or three weeks for Mr Hyde's committee even to decide on a
hearing. And if that happens, Mr Hyde could choose to wait for a new Congress
in January, to stage the hearing, and then make its grave decision, one way or
another.

Well, I hope the impeachment procedure is now made plain. What is not plain and
what could summon up a howling Tower of Babel is the earlier question to which
I gave no answer – what are high crimes and misdemeanours?

In an actual majority of the cases that have come before the House, in the
200-year life of the American system, most have been acquitted because either
the judiciary committee or the whole House couldn't agree on what was either a
high crime or a misdemeanour, or neither. Long ago, after an agonising,
self-searching session of the Supreme Court, the Chief Justice said, "The
Constitution is what the judges say it is".

Well, true or not, there's no doubt that before the final verdict can be
reached, high crimes and misdemeanours will be what the House judiciary
committee, or a majority of the House, say they are.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP