James Baker and Russians in Iraq - 7 September 1990

“Well,” said a man sitting in the oasis of Flushing Meadows, where they United
States Open Tennis Championships were being played, “things seem to be cooling
off, or at least settling down in the desert wouldn’t you say?”

He was a decent, genial man and this was not the place or time to say, "No, I
wouldn’t say". He was, after all, making a courteous attempt to show that while
he lived his life inside the very small world, the peaceful cocoon, of
professional tennis he was capable of coming out of it to take an intelligent
interest in the larger world of the Middle East whose complex of threats and
potential chaos we’re all suddenly made to confront.

But he was also expressing, in the form of a statement, a wishful thought that
millions of people hope would come true.

After only – what is it? – five, six weeks of crisis, we find we can no longer
go on living at the constant musical pitch of high C. In the days when we could
choose or not choose to read the papers, we could leave political crises to go
on growing and rumbling in the foreign offices of three or four nations and
only pay attention when, after several years of provocation, the thing broke
into our own lives in the form of recruiting posters.

But television now saturates us with fears and alarms in a week and the
mobilising of hundreds of thousands of troops on the desert borders of several
nations is made for television. The immediate American military response to the
invasion of Kuwait seemed brave, even exhilarating at the time, the country was
solidly behind the president, even before the idea dawned, that for general
approval it had better be a United Nations effort.

In case the Congress, off on its summer holiday, had other ideas, the president
dashed to Washington, called in the leaders and sub-leaders of both parties and
was mightily cheered to hear from them that there was no dissent.

Saddam Hussein with his million-man army, his poison gas, his missiles, his
biochemical weapons, was a menace to the world, and, to the vast relief of the
president who had been prepared to go it alone, 22 nations evidently felt the
same way.

It seems an age – though it was only two weeks ago – since an American General
said to camera, “We’ll kick their butts in”. It was a rousing reminder of the
spirit of General George Patton, and of that American commander who asked to
surrender at, I think it was, the battle of Bastogne, sent back his written
answer in a word, the word was “Nuts”. Great stuff.

But then once the United Nations security council had voted, once the embargo
was mounted, once we began to hear that scores of ships were sailing through
the Gulf with harmless cargoes, we began to be told that perhaps the embargo,
contrary to first reports, would not throttle Saddam and his people in a month
or two, or three.

Mr Baker, the secretary of state, back from his anonymous vacation in Wyoming,
did not promise or threaten to kick in anybody’s butts. He put a smooth gloss
on the findings of government analysts that the embargo against Iraq could take
more than a year to work.

He said, “What we ask most of the American people is to stand firm, be patient
and remain united so that together we can show aggression does not pay”. He
said this in a long session before the Senate foreign relations committee,
during which several senators wondered why goods were being shipped to and from
Iraq evading the embargo and going on to answer why the embargo didn’t extend
to the air.

You’ll have gathered that Congress is back at work and now is beginning to ask
the questions that, for a month or more, had been left to the news
commentators, the columnists, and the innumerable experts interviewed on
television.

Congress works slowly, carefully, its wonders to perform and its main weapon in
tackling the president, what he’s doing and why on any issue, is the
congressional committee. There are scores of them and they can call to testify
anybody in the country short of the president himself.

It struck me on Wednesday watching Secretary Baker, sitting there fielding all
sorts of questions from senators, sometimes friendly, sometimes not, it struck
me that the open committee hearing is a far tougher, more probing ordeal for
any administration than questions in the House of Commons.

I had the uncomfortable feeling that while for the moment Congress is willing
to wait and see, it is disturbed by the call for patience and a long run over
which we may find that Saddam Hussein is not strangled, his people survive and
the boys are still there hunkered down in the rancid heat of the desert.

Put it another way and say that, as against the usual experience of a slow
developing crisis – Vietnam for example – the dispatch of technicians, the
advisors, the advisors turning into soldiers, then scores of thousands of
soldiers and then the high drama of war itself and after that slow exhaustion
and disillusion and the new and shocking experience – to Americans – defeat.

This time – thanks to daily, nightly, television of the embarkations, the sad
partings, the scenes in the desert, the rainstorm of file pictures of fighter
planes, missiles, the mobs of hungry refugees, companies in gas masks and so
forth – this time, we’ve already had the drama, and it has not ended in glory
and medals.

It was a big impressive show that is not going to pay off, we now hear, for a
year, two perhaps and the big thrilling first act is to be followed by how many
more acts of Cabinet officers and generals being quizzed and, in time, attacked
before military affairs committees, foreign relations committees, intelligence
committees.

The tough questions which during the summer holiday the commentators and
columnists were almost too polite to ask were being rudely asked this week of
Secretary Baker.

How many billions will be added to the debt to maintain those 145,000 men in
the desert and how much are the 22 allied nations going to contribute? All
right, we are grateful for a fighter squadron here, a cruiser or two there, but
when will Egypt put thousands, say 50,000 soldiers in Saudi Arabia where are
the Syrian tanks, where are the Germans, what about Russian troops?

One old conservative is already talking about French tokenism. The questions
are not put quite so concretely as that, but if the reassuring answers are not
forthcoming they will be.

The one awkward question that came up out of that Senate chamber and was
highlighted on the national television news and, therefore, is likely to be the
one question more than another that will seize popular feeling was, why do the
Russians have over a thousand military advisors in Iraq, instructing in the use
of the advanced weapons they sold to Saddam Hussein, and when are they going to
get them out?

To Americans, obviously, their presence constitutes the most flagrant
contradiction – you might almost say defiance – of the United Nations
resolution and of the international alliance against Saddam Hussein. It’s a
question to which Americans were eager to have an answer from Mr Gorbachev in
Helsinki this weekend.

This is the week when the schools and the colleges are going back to work and
play. So somebody asks, how about the students in the Gulf? In fact the
question was put to me, how about the students and the war?

Two weeks ago, as some of you will recall, I was in San Francisco and the
question came up most naturally on the campus that was the seedbed of the
student revolt of the '60s and, later, the battlefront of student protest
against the Vietnam war, Berkeley.

The University of California at Berkeley, which lies across the bay from San
Francisco and which in quieter times is assumed by the media to be a true
reflection, a barometer, of student feeling across the nation. The most
noticeable thing was that for the past four years anyway and for the arriving
students, politics is not, as one young man inevitably put it, our priority.

A history professor said, “I don’t remember a time when there was so little
feeling, let alone indignation, about politics”. He conceded that during the
past year the temperature of concern about war and peace had dropped
dramatically after the rebellions in Eastern Europe.

The breaking up of the Berlin Wall, for college students as for many more
people, positively marked the end of the Cold War and a blessed release from
the prospect of a war in their time. After all, if there was going to be an
enemy it had been throughout their lives the Soviet Union and now the Soviets
were our pals and allies, their menacing war machine immobilised or being
demobilised.

Peace, as we went on saying throughout last winter, was breaking out all over.

What, then, were the students priorities – getting good grades to get
well-paying jobs, watching out for Aids and safe sex, feeling concerned in a
guilty way about the homeless. Then came Saddam, the swift immense military
build-up at once touched them where they lived and hoped to have their being
for another four years, would they have to go to war? Would they be drafted?

The President calmed them at once by saying, there would be no draft, though
the registration for a draft remains in place. But I noticed a general creeping
bewilderment more than anything else. They may have read about the Second World
War, but Korea has to be dug out of the history books or seen on M.A.S.H.

They were babies when Vietnam was over. American life for them has been
prosperity, sport, some study, lots of fun and games. Who suggested a war?
They’re not frightened by it, just now they resent it, they’d want a thumping
good reason to have to go into it.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP