Historical events of the 20th Century - 25 September 1992

I was about to leave the real world of sea and sky and trees and seagulls and
blue fish and sandpipers and go back to the chronic world represented by New
York City and the currency crisis and the artificial outrages of Mr Bush and
Governor Clinton who are now at that stage in a presidential campaign when they
magnify every wart on the other's face into a skin cancer, every small
indiscretion past or present into a capital crime and every one of each other's
policy proposals into a prescription for chaos and black night. I gather in
fact, from both candidates that if either is elected in November, the American
republic will cease to exist.

I was I say about to desert the serenity of the great four days when the sun
fairly crackles under what Johnny Mercer called "a blue umbrella sky", a dive
back into the planned insanity of the presidential campaign when I received a
sudden visit from an old mean friend, from Arthur. His surname is Itis, and my
old golf pro and I – he's almost my vintage – exchange at all times
reconnaissance information about him in the hopes of keeping him at bay, Arthur
Itis – a poor joke, but its our own and it keeps our spirits up in trying
times.

So I am at the moment you might say under house arrest, a hundred miles from
the heart of things.

Of course, I can read the papers as well as the next man and watch the telly,
but the papers always seem somehow more irrelevant than they do in town and
they also, thanks to the boss of the house, tend very soon to become
repositories for tea leaves and lobster shells. So this past week, I was thrown
back on the nearest thing to hand, which was a small book, a paperback and it
has been a godsend, it is a dictionary of 20th-century history starting in 1900
and going up to the very cusp or hilt of our time, by which I mean 1989.

By the way, it's a sign of how suddenly and swiftly even solid historical
institutions can collapse that there is no entry for Boris Yeltsin, whereas
Mikhail Gorbachev is presumed to be in his fourth year as Soviet president and
it says here might manage re-election for a further term. And Mrs Thatcher is
about halfway through her unprecedented third term. No Conservative, writes the
editor and I'm pretty sure he would have written the same thing today, "no
Conservative since Disraeli has made so personal an impact on party doctrine
and practice", but the writer was certainly on his toes in some things, high
enough to peek into the immediate future when at the end of a compact history
of Serbia, which begins in 1389, we read the final sentence by 1988 a Serbian
nationalist revival under the demagogic leadership of Slobodan Milošević
threatened federal unity.

One of the pleasures of reading a short history this way A to B, C and so on is
that your sliding and bouncing between decades and countries and periods
whether you want too or not. This dictionary is incidentally a one-man job,
which is a feat in itself and he's an Englishman. Consequently, it pretty heavy
on, for instance, British political history and more light fingered on America,
old Keir Hardy is in here but not John L Lewis, the first titan of American
industrial unionism. I mustn't go on this way.

Have you noticed how the immediate instinct of a reader facing anthology a
collection of anything is to complain about what the man left out? Mr Palmer,
Alan Palmer, has done a bang-up job, not perhaps, the first adjective by way of
tribute you'd think of for a scholar, but Mr Palmer is a scholar of the first
chop, though I fancy a lot of very respectable scholars will not be inclined to
receive him into their holy order because he doesn't publish reams of
references to show how much he's read. And he has another gift, which is an
anathema to the double don academic scholar, the gift of brevity, he can
summarise a whole world war with almost flip accuracy in 600 words and if
you're a history wallah and think this unremarkable, try it sometime.

Naturally at this time of an American year, I hopped around for a time between
old and new presidential candidates beginning with the Democrats. Whoops, apart
from Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson and Carter no mention of any Democratic
candidate in the past 40 years not Stevenson, not Humphrey, not McCarthy – not
Eugene – the good McCarthy that is, the bad one is here all right, not
McGovern, not Dukakis. After riffling back and forth, it strikes me perhaps a
little late what did all these non entries have in common, they all lost, not a
principle of choice.

Why then is there a brief sharp entry on William Jennings Bryan. Who? Feel no
shame, if our surveys of educational standards are correct not one American in
10 under the 30 has ever heard of Bryan. But if ever the Democrats thought they
had a golden boy it was William Jennings Bryan, a huge brawny brainy native of
the prairie the boy, orator of the Platt River he was called. He represented
for a whole generation of prairie people what we today call Midwestern farmers,
but at a time when six Americans in 10 were farmers, he represented the never
flagging opposition to Wall Street, which at that time – and we were in the
1890s – meant a gold standard. Free silver was his cry and if ever a man won
the nomination with one speech, nay with one phrase, it was Bryan, he came
roaring out of the West only 36 years of age, stood up before the Democratic
convention and cried "having behind us the producing masses of this nation and
the world, the labouring interests and the toilers everywhere, we will answer
their demand for a gold standard by saying to them "you shall not press down
upon the brow of labour this crown of thorns, you shall not crucify mankind up
on a cross of gold". That was considerably more rousing in its time than Mr
Bush's "read my lips", but Mr Bush's line won for him and Bryan's great speech
lost.

Four years later, the Democrats again looked no further than Bryan. Now he had
a new enemy, the first Roosevelt and America's first fling at empire, Bryan was
against the annexation of the Philippines or of any foreign country, he lost
again. Four years later, its now 1904, the Democrats had to turn to somebody
else, but in 1908 back again and for the third and last time the only man who
ever did this, he lost.

But there's another loser in here a Republican, Senator Barry Goldwater. Why?
Well there's a good case historically to have him there for the reason given
that during the Kennedy days and the Johnson days, he became the nation's
leading conservative political spokesman, but it says that in the election of
1964, when Johnson massacred him, his views won Goldwater only five states – a
clear rejection of Conservatism. Mmm, yes it might have had it that the setback
was temporary, his views had been planted and were harvested with passion by
the governor of California, one Ronald Reagan who twice slaughtered the liberal
Democrats a clear endorsement by the American voter of conservatism.

The question now before the country is, is this nation after 12 years of
conservative presidents about to turn once more and move back again, as it
tends to do in hard times, to the liberals, who since Presidents Bush and
Reagan managed to give liberalism a bad name, now prefer to call themselves
centrists. Not much fire in that title – we shall see.

Back to the dictionary, under the letter Q there are four entries only and a
masterly quartet they form. Quebec conferences – they were between Roosevelt
and Churchill planning the progress of the Second War; Quebec Libre, about the
aspirations of the French speakers of Quebec to be independent – to have a
longish paragraph on this, I think is brilliant because it focuses on the 1967
visit of President de Gaulle who from a balcony in Montreal electrified a great
crowd and sparked a mischief that is alive and bright today by shouting "vive
la Québec libre" – long live a free Quebec – an astonishing act of arrogance
from a foreign leader.

Number four under Q is Quisling. Quisling and if there are bright students
present who think it must be a small fish something like a herring, I'm not
going to help them. But the third item is the real surprise, look at it I've
just done it in a current American almanac or guide to current events and you
will be clever to find it. Yet I'll bet it was the most frequently mentioned
foreign word in the presidential campaign of 1960 – Quemoy.

Anybody here remember the great tense debate between Nixon and Kennedy? The
occasion when a foreigner dropping in would have thought that the honour or
safety of the United States depended on two islands Quemoy and Matsu. They
were, I presume they still are, offshore from the mainland of China. They are
tiny, they are six miles away from the mainland. The Chinese nationalists under
Chiang Kai-shek used them to mount guerrilla raids on a mainland port for five
years or more after the mainland was Communist. The Nationalists held on to
Quemoy and Matsu and the United States backed them. President Truman's great
Secretary of State Acheson went so far as to say that the rim of America
security, the ramparts we watch, lay on Quemoy and Matsu.

I have no idea if anybody ever did a survey examining the effect of these
islands on the election of John F Kennedy. All I can say for sure is that they
were never mentioned again, they have totally vanished from the American memory
and are still very far away from Taiwan but only six miles from Communist
China. A foolish crusade if ever there was one.

I wonder what issue or issues burning bright in the next, the last month before
the election will be as frivolous as damp a squib once we've made up our minds
whether to stay with old tried and true Bush or up-an'-at-'em Clinton.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP