The future of advertising - 11 June 1993

A hair-raising item came down the pipeline a couple of days ago, that I read
over twice. The first time, I thought it was a parody of one of one of the more
outrageous fashions or movements of our time, but it comes to us from a
distinguished professor of journalism that Berkeley in California adopted,
Timothy Ferris, who's been keeping up with this really hard to believe
movement.

He gives dates and places and names and quotes, well known business magazines
and I'm sorry to say that everything he reports appears to be on the level. So
you rightly and impatiently ask "what is it?" – quote, "the most ambitious
marketing endeavour ever contemplated", the industry magazine Advertising Age
calls it.

It is an idea conceived by something called Space Marketing Inc, it proposes to
put into orbit illuminated billboards about a mile in width that would then go
on floating around the globe and would presumably give a new meaning to the
occupation of star gazing. A variation of this ingenious gimmick has been
conceived by a gentlemen who represents what I should normally guess to be a
joke corporation, invented by a nightclub stand-up comic, it's called
"Bird-vertising Corporation" and, an officer of it says, there are billions of
birds in the world and virtually all of them have dull looking bellies, what he
calls dishwater-dull bellies, so what does Mr Tar the advertising wizard
propose to do about it?

Well, to begin with he's releasing 300 doves that carry on their dishwater-dull
bellies minute emblems or logos of who, of what, of whom – Gucci. And if that
works he foresees the day when our skies from Yolkahama to the Kyle of Lochalsh
will be dark or rather bright with advertisements or as this enterprising man
puts it he'll "make up for the lamentable fact of millions of square feet of
non-utilised feather space".

There's already no imaginable limit to what some advertising companies or their
researchers are plotting. Professor Ferris writes without hesitation – no
hiding behind "allegedly" or "it is reported that" – he says, and I'm quoting
his words, 'researchers at Cerulean Systems in Tacoma Washington, that's the
State of Washington on a Northern Pacific Coast are seeking ways to genetically
engineer fish, so that corporate emblems will appear just behind the gills.

There's an outfit in Barstow a desert fringe town in California that's playing
around and they've done early experiments with the idea of downwind
advertising, I'll say that again: sound, words, phrases projected into the
atmosphere from specially constructed sound windmills and carried downwind by
an atmosphere three miles wide. Three miles you understand is only the
beginning, if this thing really gets going, no reason why these brilliant
researchers shouldn't have miles and miles, the whole county soothed or
afflicted with a voice booming or whispering for hours at a time bubble fizz is
good for you it's soothing, it's new.

The first experiment was done by projecting into the air a phrase advertising a
perfume, it was effective enough to alarm a farmer three miles away when he
thought he heard, he did, a voice crooning the perfume's name, a voice from
where? From nowhere, certainly not from God. Though there are worse, grosser
ideas being acted on that I won't go on about, I can only hope to be here and
sentient and applauding when the first test case of an outraged citizen comes
up to the Supreme Court and his case against seeing nothing but ads in the
autumn sky or hearing things he doesn't want to hear coming from nowhere when
his case is upheld by the court and the advertising company is ordered to
desist for having violated a citizens constitutional rights. What possible
rights could those men of 1787 had in mind?

Well, I mentioned I elaborated last time on the marvellous foresight of those
first Americans or rather the deadpan ingenuity of the Supreme Court, present
and to come, in finding a phrase in the Constitution that silences or punishes
everything from restaurants that won't let in blacks to an undertaker who
decides to go into the insurance business. Can't be done, I suppose, in the
case of the assault on our senses threatened by using birds and fishes and the
skies for visual and sound advertising. The Constitutional right most people
would claim would be invasion of privacy or in Britain of privacy. Everybody
talks these days about keeping the government out of this and that, out of the
airline business, out of the bedroom and solemnly intoning invasion of privacy.
There is no such right mentioned in the Constitution. When a distinguished
federal judge who was up for confirmation as a justice of the Supreme Court,
Robert Bork, when he kept reminding and insisting before the confirming
committee that the Constitution said nothing about privacy they were appalled,
they turned him down.

But if you're beginning to get alarmed that you might have no defence against
the genetic engineering of fishes in the interests of selling a detergent or a
laxative, fret no more, you maybe sure the Constitution will come through –
cruel and unusual punishment is only the first of the Constitution's phrases
that come to mind – it might do very well, I hope so.

I think it's only fair to take a week off from President Clinton or poor Bill
as even sympathetic editorial writers are calling him. After my last talk
bemoaning the case of the $200 haircut, there was a brief pause and then the
president – and I make this brief – nominated a brilliant black woman, a law
professor to be assistant attorney general in charge of the Civil Rights
Department. From her many academic writings, it appears that in the main she
wants to go beyond the Constitution's rock-bottom concern with individuals and
invent or assert group rights, she leans for instance to preferential treatment
for blacks to make up for 200 years of injustice, she wants blacks as a group
to have in some cases a veto over majority laws.

In another fateful passage, she wrote that black leaders if they were elected
with the majority of white votes not primarily by black voters, such people
she's written are not authentic black leaders. This is inflammatory stuff and
if the Senate had voted her in and she began to carry out these ideas in civil
rights cases, it would have become alarmingly clear to a lot of people, people
of goodwill that we'd be reading a recipe for social mischief for endless
bitter legislation if not for social chaos.

Well the president had never read her written opinions before, he picked her
chiefly because she was an old valued friend of him and his wife when they were
all at law school at Yale, so he read them and with an embarrassed little
speech he thereupon withdrew her name. She thus became the third woman he'd
chosen to be head or assistant head of the Justice Department whose name he
subsequently had to withdraw, he didn't even wait for the Senate to knock them
down. Three out of four, the one who came through is Janet Reno, the Attorney
General.

Well, as President Clinton soldiered on, I couldn't help thinking this week of
Prime Minister Clement Attlee's remark about Harold Laski, the awesome academic
who knew the entire history of democracy, Labour politics the lot. In the
Labour landslide of 1945, he became Chairman of the Labour Party and blushingly
launched into a new career as a practitioner of all the things he professed so
well. He was a flop. Attlee made a typically short crisp comment; one thing, he
said, about Harold, never got the hang of it. The walls of the White House have
been seen to shudder slightly this week as old and wily politicians on Capitol
Hill reluctantly suggest the same line about poor Bill.

Last week, on a spring day on a great campus shaggy with foliage, I was at a
ceremony which ended with the granting of honorary degrees to eminences of
various sorts, the last one's name was called out and it was a poignant moment
when 22,000 people young and old rose to their feet and stood in silence for a
minute. The degree was awarded posthumously; the dead recipient was the late
Arthur Ash the first black world tennis champion, a man who had the atrocious
ill fortune to receive some years ago after a heart operation a transfusion of
tainted blood and developed Aids. He died of it in February. He lived the last
two years un-self pityingly with much wisdom with unassailable dignity.

He gave the rest of his active life to all the issues of the day that affected
him and blacks, he did not expect preferential treatment but he wanted to make
the path for equal opportunity smoother, against militant friends he deplored
violence in civil rights campaigns and stayed in the face of much criticism
with the attitude of Mahatma Gandhi and Martin Luther King, he was a religious
man too, touched many faiths, he didn't mind being thought at one with even
Republicans who deplored crime, drugs, floundering education, broken families
and the decline of religion. He was very quiet but firm as a rock about these
beliefs and he was, as even his crusading critics, granted essentially a decent
man. All things considered, he could be said to be a credit to his race
provided you add the reminder, the human race that is.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP