President Clinton's first 15 months - 6 May 1994

After seeing just two television shots, one a long sickening pan shot of a
whole landscape of mutilated corpses and then the heartbreaking scene of the
padding hundreds of thousands of families fleeing from Rwanda, it's very hard
to begin to talk about our anxieties and troubles.

And one thing I notice about President Clinton, which fills me with a kind of
baffled sympathy is the nervousness with which he seems these days to take up
any domestic problem, the way to his credit finds it difficult to put on the
politicians pep talk grin, because everyday he's told about Rwanda, as about
Bosnia and Haiti and Armenia and Somalia, and all the other countries we seem
to be impotent to help. And what is worse, the president is asked incessantly
about all these places, almost accusingly, as if he were the police
commissioner who has done nothing about a massacre in one part of his town.

Mr Clinton came to the White House only 15 months ago, it seems like an age a
ruddy young bounding optimist eager to follow and prove President Theodore
Roosevelt's contention that the presidency was a "bully pulpit". He was
elected, it's not news to anybody by now, to mend the broken domestic policies,
to move beyond the huge failure of welfare, to transform the stewing inner
cities, to try and make the streets safe. Most of all he said, he was going to
revolutionise the American system of medical care. Health doesn't need any
care. The medical system, which President Bush endlessly called the best in the
world, by which he meant that America had access to the very latest and most
expensive medical technology and could use it today not six months from now on
anybody under 65 who could afford it. People over 65, whether they could afford
it or not, were going to demand it and by the courtesy of Medicare were going
to get it; the ruinous bill goes to the federal government. So the awful fact
that caused Mr and Mrs Clinton to get so worked up in the presidential campaign
about a new medical care programme was the annual government bill for the
elderly.

Back there in the winter of 1992 and the cheerful dawn of 1993, this and the
other domestic troubles I touched on were what the Clinton presidency was going
to be all about. There's no, I think, no accurate gauge of how many people
voted for him because they were fed up with President Bush's preoccupation with
foreign affairs, but when I've put this question to knowledgeable people in
various states they mostly shake or nod their heads according to party
affiliation and say, "well plenty, or probably enough to swing this state".

I think the only really pressing foreign policy issue that had boiled up to
critical heat when Mr Clinton came in was the problem of Haitian refugees,
they'd come lurching in, in overcrowded boats across the Caribbean north to
Florida after yet another military coup. Military coups are more frequent in
Haiti than presidential elections.

We always see on the box a packed score or so in a miserable little patchwork
sailboat – hundreds, by the way, have drowned on the way over – and it's a sign
of the fear and desperation of the people that they can imagine and are willing
to face the prospect of losing their lives on the escape route to Florida. They
jump into boats and they take off – no visas, nothing legal about it, no proof
of political dissidence, no certain evidence that they could stay at home only
at the risk of torture or death, which is the one legitimate qualification for
being received into this country as refugees seeking political asylum.

Well between 1991 and 92, 35,000 of them were returned from the shore or
intercepted by the United States coastguard and returned to Haiti to the
accompaniment of storming protests from civil rights groups and any Democrat
who was running for office in 1992, including most conspicuously Mr Clinton. He
said at the time that President Bush's policy was wrong, cruel, lacking in
ordinary compassion.

Once Mr Clinton got in the White House, he began to see things much the way
President Bush had seen them. He saw that the camps in Florida and Texas in
places near the Gulf where other illegals were stuffed in. There were so many
hundreds of thousands of them, Mexicans, Colombians, Salvadorians, the camps
were bursting and many thousands of the incoming Haitians were so ill as to
require urgent and special medical attention, which would all be done to the
detriment of legal immigrants and the camped illegals. There were also
well-suppressed epidemics of disease brought in by the boat people. I'm sure
that President Bush was not off-hand when he decided the early waves of these
people could not stay, but one of the first positive acts of the Clinton
presidency was to adopt the Bush policy.

Well there's been another great exodus from Haiti and wouldn't you know last
weekend, the networks replayed the January 1993 President Clinton bemoaning and
denouncing the cruelty and the insensitivity of President Bush. Well the effect
of that somersault on the part of President Clinton was you can imagine dire on
the people of Haiti and the Haitians already in the United States. For a month
or two, Clinton was Saint Bill, now he was a traitor and last weekend to add to
the pile of his foreign woes, Haitians stomped and shouted and paraded outside
the White House chanting that the truly elected Father Aristide, a weak
president but the first democratically elected one ever, must be restored to
his country. The United States has been meaning to do this also since the
Clinton administration arrived, but Aristide was expelled by the reigning
military dictator and the awful likelihood that dare not speak it's name is the
Father Aristide would arrive and be assassinated.

I've gone into the little turbulent island of Haiti because of what may happen
or might have happened before you hear this talk and because Haiti is typical
of countries that won their independence from a colonial power and sooner or
later turned to America as the famous saviour of the poor and the persecuted.

Haiti has been a republic since 1804, it was proclaimed so by a man who
immediately proclaimed himself emperor, he was soon shot. The story of Haiti
throughout the 190 years since it became technically a republic is an appalling
alternation of dictatorships, riots, massacres, civil wars. There have been I
recently counted about 40 men, some of the old French mulattoes, pure Negros,
assorted peasant soldiers who, as the books say "ceased the government", but
never for more than a few years, when another assassination, another rebellion,
another peasants' revolt. The island was in such ferment towards the end of the
19th century, everybody was so busy fighting that its chief crop sugar simply
wilted and died for lack of farmers. For one comparatively blissful decade just
10 years, the high price of coffee made the island prosperous by its standards,
probably a third of the dense population was relatively healthy.

1915 is a crucial date and really why I got going on this pathetic theme. For
four years there was just about no government at all, but both Germany and
France had special interests there. French investors held the country's large
foreign debt. The United States in the person of President Woodrow Wilson
became worried about such foreign influence in a country so close to the Panama
Canal.

Now hear this, the true Wilsonian note, he considered and it made it plain in
very eloquent speeches that the United States, I quote, has the duty as a
neighbour to help all the Caribbean countries to achieve orderly democratic
government. Need I say they've been trying and failing ever since with and
without the occupation of the United States marines.

In a remarkable new book, Dr Henry Kissinger doing his own personal survey of
the history of diplomacy has put his finger on a nerve which has touched every
time the United States faces a foreign upheaval and wonders whether it ought or
ought not to intervene. It is the principle planted by Woodrow Wilson at the
Versailles Peace Conference that, henceforth, acts of regression around the
world would be dealt with by, quote, "the moral force of the public opinion of
the world" expressed through a league of mainly democratic states.

Well, apart from the big question of whether there is or ever could be a united
world moral judgement about anything, who is the aggressor in any war? Take a
poll and search for unity. It's the idea that the solution to every uprising,
every dictatorship, every war is the establishment of a democracy in the
embattled country.

America has taken this position since 1919 at the latest and it is a noble
ideal, if America denied it said from now on we're going to seek or foster in
Bosnia, Somalia, Haiti wherever a kind of government that might work best for
them or perhaps we'll impose it by invasion. There's no question, America would
then forfeit its main moral claim, which is that of a great nation that is
ready, maybe not able but wanting to champion freedom everywhere. It's the
chronic American dilemma and it faces President Clinton every morning in a
dozen parts of the earth in turmoil an overload of foreign troubles that have
half paralysed the energies of his administration, which we're going to be
exercised in the conquest of crime and poverty and racism and a medical care
system run a mock.

There has been since the Second World War no president so pitilessly weighed
down by foreign challenges and only one, President Johnson, by training and
experience anyway less capable of meeting them.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP