Balancing domestic and foreign policy - 05 November 1993

Everyone who reads a newspaper or watches a television news programme knows
that though the United States keeps telling itself it cannot be the world's
policeman, the fact is, it cannot help but be at least the police sergeant.

The new European fears of reborn isolationism, which arose from Mr Ross Perot's
massive vote in the last presidential election, these fears are groundless.
There is no party, no faction of any party with much support that dare propose
what one of America's most powerful publishers proclaimed as a rallying cry
during the dark days of the autumn of 1939, when Hitler had conquered Poland
within a month. The cry was, Fortress America, and the idea was to dig in
behind the fortified east coast of America and leave Europe once for all to its
fate.

Today, while the two once and possibly future superpowers are dismantling their
fearsome nuclear missiles, they do not find themselves looking at anything like
the world they imagined it would be a little more than two years ago. Once the
giant enemy of Communism was defeated by, amazingly, Mr Gorbachev scoring
through his own goal, we thought there would be a calmer world, hungry here,
troubled there, but the whole empire of the old enemy would, with our
encouragement and a lot of dollars and marks, work its way gradually into a
large confederation of democracies. What a dream it was and it turned out to be
no more.

Most of Eastern and Central Europe is a good deal less peaceful than it was.
What Mr Bush saw as the new order, which America would benevolently lead, has
turned into the new disorder with nobody sure who's in charge or who ought to
be. What no one, I believe, nobody in power in any of the big nations
anticipated was a work of many new conventional wars fought, not by nations or
ideologues, but by ancient warring tribes, by the religious factions of the
late 19th and early 20th century. Three years ago, the only people who had the
names Serbia, Bosnia-Herzegovina on their mind were schoolboys boning up on
European history of the early summer of 1914 and only in the last two years
have we learned the continental range, the fierce allegiances and enmities of
Muslims and Sunni Muslims and Kurds and Shi'a Muslims.

If we ordinary citizens are bewildered by our recent discovery of what you
might call an alternative world and a complicated, angry and turbulent one, we
shouldn't assume that the professional politicians of America, Britain, France,
Germany are all that much more familiar with it. I've noticed on television
discussion shows of the better kind, that whereas in former discussions of the
troubles and the future of Russia, Germany, Ulster and on this side of, say,
Cuba, Mexico, the expert guests brought in were old hands, greying wiseacres,
former secretaries of state or ambassadors. Now you want to find somebody who
can tell you the prospects in Bosnia, in Azerbaijan, in Kazakhstan and you have
to bring in your university lecturers, obscure assistants from the Central
European desk at the state department, usually immigrants, newspaper men and
women with unpronounceable names, who have never been on television in their
lives.

When it comes to the likely future of Armenia or Somalia, there are no Henry
Kissingers or Jean Monnet s or Anthony Edens. What this means is that the new
disorder is new to everybody, that the people in power in the West can't be
expected to know how to act decisively when there are no rules and you'll have
noticed when we apply the old rules, looking on Bosnia as another Vietnam for
instance, or saying that backing away from Somalia as another Munich, we get
nowhere.

I think what I'm saying is that the wobbling policies of America and Britain
and France, in Bosnia in particular, are not so much due to weakness or
irresolution. It's been just on 80 years since these kinds of problems came up,
small erupting kingdoms, religious wars, riots for independence and then we
handled them in a decisive, but an imperial way. We chose sides and moved in
and the lands we conquered, we annexed.

There was a piece in a Washington paper the other day, a clever, but I think a
mischievous piece in that it was exploiting tried and true foreign policy
reasoning. It said that President Clinton shifts the blame to his European
allies whenever he feels unsure of himself in foreign affairs, after all that
midnight oil - and there's been nobody like him in the White House for doing
his lessons, getting briefed from dawn to midnight on any issue, domestic or
foreign, that you care to bring up - all his homework, the piece was saying,
leaves him more baffled than enlightened.

Of course, more than any other Western leader, President Clinton is the one
most apt to appear to be doing nothing, precisely because he's seen, expected
to be the policeman on the block, everywhere - in Europe, the Middle East,
Asia. How bitterly he must look back on the day, if it ever comes to mind, when
he was campaigning against President Bush who'd been so widely praised for his
judgement in foreign affairs, but who was fatally judged by the people at large
to be bored by the burning issues at home. Mr, then Governor Clinton could say,
almost shout with confidence, it is time for this country to have a president
who knows the job is about taking care of these United States, not being chief
executive for the planet. Well that was the sort of thing to get him elected on
the promise that he would not be fiddling with Saddam while Los Angeles burned.

Now President Clinton has more foreign woes on his hands than any president
since the Second World War. His dilemma is cruel. The less he devises bold
policies, the fewer marks he gets from Europe and the more he works on them,
Bosnia, Somalia, Haiti, the fewer marks he's going to get here at home. He
would like to give all his time to his national healthcare plan and to getting
through Congress his much-prized North American Free Trade Agreement with
Mexico and Canada. On the health plan, even to get his bill read and digested
and greatly amended, as it surely will be, is going to take a year or more. In
its final form, the Clinton form, it's 1,330 odd pages.

As for the Free Trade Agreement, he faces a very odd, even a ribald paradox.
His party, the Democrats, have always been the party of free trade and the
Republicans have always been chronic protectionists. No more. About one third
of the president's own men have fallen for the Ross Perot line that once the
trade agreement bill is passed, you will hear a great sucking sound in south.
It will be American jobs being helplessly swallowed up by Mexico.

Strangely, most of the Republicans are for the bill. The excruciating irony is
that there are many fewer Republicans in the House than the men and women of
the president's own party and at this moment the president admits that he's
between 20 and 30 votes short of getting it passed by the House and defeat in
the House is total. And just to warm his toes at night, is the though that Mr
Chrétien, the new prime minister of Canada, wants to re-negotiate the agreement
and so in other quirky ways, does Canada's new opposition party, the Québécois,
dedicated to seceding from Canada and forming a new independent nation as soon
as possible.

During the past week, President Clinton - who really shows remarkable physical
and nervous endurance after his nights and early dawnings, going through the
European mess - has gone out by day to campaign here, there and everywhere for
his health plan and for the Free Trade Agreement and last week also he piled
into constituencies where a Democrat faced tough opposition in the local and
state elections we had last Tuesday.

How did he do? Well, if all his people, Democrats, had won, you could be sure
he would, quite rightly, have crowed. As it was, four of the biggest Democrats
lost, including Mr Dinkins, the first black mayor of New York and Governor
Florio of New Jersey, for both of whom, both President and Mrs Clinton came up
here and campaigned lustily. In the result, the president had a quick,
ingenious explanation. You see, he said, what did I tell you, people want
change, therefore they're throwing out the incumbents, even when they're
Democrats. Otherwise no political significance. Of course you couldn't expect
Senator Dole, leader of the Republicans to share that view. Solemnly, with an
ill-disguised twinkle, he intoned, a big, big defeat for the White House.

I don't believe any plausible national pattern can be drawn from all these
local results. There is, however, one bell that tolls a warning to Mr Clinton.
It is Governor Florio's loss in New Jersey. He came in four years ago,
promising no new taxes and then imposed over a billion dollars worth. Rage,
protest marches, calls for his impeachment, but New Jersey got over it and the
pity was that Mr Florio lost by a squeak, to a lady who campaigned on a Reagan
will-o'-the-wisp. She will cut taxes by 30%. A likely story. But it does
strongly suggest that Mr Clinton's promise not to add taxes to the middle
class, the first big promise he broke, will not be forgotten and more
depressingly, it suggests that Americans still want to have all the welfare
goodies and not have to pay for them.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP