1996 Russian presidential elections - 05 July 1996

For once, it's almost exactly true to use the blanket cliche, everybody is
saying, well everybody is saying, or writing, that America is shaking with
relief at the surprisingly solid victory of Mr Yeltsin over, in particular, Mr
Zyuganov. And then, wouldn't you know, everybody piped up very quickly to say,
but don't think the Russian future is going to be anything but rocky.

Here are the opening sentences of three commentaries, one, a newspaper leader,
the others from well-known columnists. One: "Unfortunately a sigh of relief at
Mr Zyuganov's defeat cannot be accompanied by confidence in Mr Yeltsin." Two:
"The bad guys lost in the Russian state's first presidential election, but does
it mean that the good guys won?" Now, the lead editorial from the most majestic
of America's dailies: "The forces of democracy and reform won a vital victory
in Russia, but Russia's reality does not justify euphoria today."

Always that but.

It reminds me of the story about the man who suspected his wife of infidelity,
hired a detective, and the detective came back and reported he'd seen nothing
suspicious. He spied on a flat, he saw a man enter a bedroom with the suspect
wife, he saw them take off their clothes, but then they turned the lights out,
and, moaned the husband, always this doubt. The truth is that nobody dares
predict anything for sure about the political and social future of Russia, in
spite of all the knowing speculation about the Russian economy, the role of the
International Monetary Fund, the dangers of resurgent and militant nationalism
if Mr Yeltsin were soon succeeded by General Lebed and so on. To me, the big
unanswered question is as old as government, as old as the Bible: can the
leopard change his spots?

Before I enlarge on what to me is the fundamental question about the alleged
collapse of communism, and the rise of something called democracy, I think we
ought to recognise with applause, the point made by a seasoned commentator, the
veteran Flora Lewis who writes for The New York Times out of Paris. She it was,
the only one I saw, who noted that the Russians voted for the first time by
direct universal suffrage.

Let us marvel at the historic fact that by so doing, so soon after a long
dictatorship, Russia beat the Western democracies – including Britain and the
United States – by a century or more. What we don't stress in our history
teaching is that it's only this century, only since I was a schoolboy, that any
democracy we know allowed direct universal suffrage. United States senators
were not elected till I think about 1913. Before that they were picked by the
state legislatures. And when finally the people elected them, the learned Henry
Adams wrote a book called The Degradation of the Democratic Dogma. What he
meant, I think, was degradation by democracy.

Come to that, I wonder how many American schoolchildren know that the founding
fathers had no intention of founding a democracy, after they heard no less a
grandee than George Washington himself, who was in the chair, say – at the very
beginning of their discussions on what sort of government do we mean to have –
he said, among civilised nations, no form of government is in such ill repute
as democracy, it leads to factions. Factions then meant political parties,
another novelty the delegates had no intention of introducing. What those
famous fathers meant to create was a republic, which they did. The word
democracy is nowhere to be found in the Constitution. But, as in Britain, as in
eventually even the German and Italian kingdoms, democracy raised its homely
head and asserted itself.

In the beginning of the United States, voting was restricted to white males who
were also men of property. And when in the middle of the 19th century America
proclaimed universal suffrage, the universe was presumed not to include any
person, male or female, of colour. Until indeed the very eve of the Second
World War most southern states had a poll tax, which effectively made it
impossible for coloured folk – as we said – to be able to afford to vote. And
mention of male and female reminds me that women couldn't vote in the United
States until 1920, the United Kingdom till 1919. Winston Churchill was not the
only famous statesman who thought there was something unnatural about a woman's
vote.

So voting by direct universal suffrage is something very new in the world, and
maybe even Britain and the United States should not take so cockily for
granted, as we do, the idea, as one writer put it, that democracy and
capitalism are God-given and foolproof.

And we still can't be sure about the future of any form of democracy in Russia
in the long-run, which, if Mr Yeltsin died and there was a reshuffling of
power, could be a very short run. When I suggested that the fundamental
question was can the leopard change his spots, what I might have said another
way is, can we be sure that the present rulers or competing rulers of Russia,
all of whom were brought up and thrived under communism, have really changed
the deepest beliefs and overcome their lifelong assumption that government of
the people is government over the people, imposed by a dictatorship?

General Lebed offers a puzzling answer. He has no political experience
whatsoever. He once made it clear he was not a Democrat, now he says he's a
semi-Democrat. The one foreign country he's visited is Afghanistan, as a
soldier, as an ultimately frustrated general. He has one passion, one religion
if you like: Russian nationalism. In other self-professing reformed
dictatorships, nationalism has very shortly overcome democracy. I don't think
in fact it's too much to say that anyone who believes in the doctrine of my
country right or wrong is an enemy of democracy.

Well now the question really is: can a middle aged Russian change his
character? And if that question sounds absurd or irrelevant as a political
problem, please explain the undying popularity since 1842, I think when it was
written, of Dickens's Christmas Carol. Scrooge is the most dramatic, the most
flagrant example of a man we'd all like to be, a man who changed his character
overnight for the better. It's an enviable, if outrageous story.

In this connection, the name and career of Mr Gorbachev comes to mind. Not
because there's a prayer of his ever coming to power again – he got something
like one per cent of the vote, and somebody noted significantly, most of his
vote came from very young people who believed against the man's life history,
that he was a true born again Western liberal. I myself was always perhaps
unreasonably suspicious of Mr Gorbachev, considered as the Russian Adlai
Stevenson. His long association with the KGB, that sticks in the throat. Any
man who held power during the seventy years of communism had to know that the
whole communist system was fortified by the existence of the secret police, the
midnight knock on the door, the labour camp, by prison and torture. These were
not aberrations of a strict, disciplined republic. They were its essential
props. George Orwell put his finger on the nerve of our Western liberal
ignorance or criminal indifference by writing the sin of the left in the 1930s
was to be anti-fascist without being anti-totalitarian, which is to say, in
that benighted decade, anti-Stalin.

In view of what we've come to learn in the past three decades – much of which
sensible people guessed at and many more victims knew – it's now impossible to
believe that anybody should have thought of Joseph Stalin as a very strict but
kindly Uncle Joe, Roosevelt liked to call him, and not as he was, the bloodiest
tyrant of this century, challenged for the title perhaps only by Pol Pot.

Well I've known two politicians who without self-righteousness did change their
characters dramatically in one regard. President Harry Truman was brought up in
Missouri, of a family which during the Civil War was on the confederate side.
He learned from his mother and schoolmates to talk about wretched niggers and
have no thought – as none of us did sixty years ago – about their rising from
third class citizenship to become something other than servant or labourer or
licensed clown.

Yet Harry Truman, once he got to Washington and mingled with other men from
other states, he abolished segregation in the United States armed forces; he
sponsored the first fair employment act, which nibbled away at segregation.
Even more unlikely, even more surprisingly, Lyndon Johnson, a Texan of rude
manners and, where race was concerned, certainly one of the good ol' boys, had
something of a revelation when one day he started calling up all his southern
friends and northern union leaders, everyone who'd guarded the white man's
supremacy in jobs, in politics, and he said, I talked like you folks, I acted
like you folks, but things have changed, have got to change. He, more than any
other American, was responsible for the civil rights acts and the black
revolution they brought about.

So I'm just wondering whether Mr Yeltsin has the belief and the strength to go
on with the turbulent experiment of direct universal suffrage, and I'm praying
that if the worst happens, General Lebed will not want to fulfil his earlier
ambition of a prouder, larger, more orderly Russian empire.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP