Clinton and the military - 10 June 1994

I doubt that any public person we can think off was more thankful for the end
of the D-Day celebrations than the president of the United States for there is
in all his dutiful appearances with the military a barely disguised touch of
embarrassment and in paying tribute to the men who died on the Normandy beaches
and even more visibly when he saluted the veterans like the paratroopers who
survived and stood there listening, that embarrassment was aggravated, was
almost palpable.

I'm pretty sure that Mr Clinton must dread every ceremony he attends, which has
to do with the armed forces. One of the offices he acquired when he became
president was as you know the title of commander-in-chief, but it's not a
courtesy title, it is the fact that he alone has the final word about the use
and disposition of the army, navy, air force and marine corps.

The embarrassment I'm talking about, which is itself almost an embarrassment to
bring up springs from an episode in his history that is never forgotten by
friends or foes or neutrals in-between to put it most charitably, he eluded
service in the Vietnam War. Many times during Mr Clinton's first year as
president he was booed at many national ceremonies, his first appearance before
an audience of veterans at the Vietnamese memorial in Washington, it must have
been the most painful for him. The placards waved furiously at the back of the
crowd "go home, shirker Bill" was the least offensive.

There' an interesting point here, only once to my knowledge gone into by a man
of Mr Clinton's age who also managed to elude the draft and it's this, the
actual men who declared that they would not fight who proclaimed themselves
draft dodgers were a minority but a principled minority, they went to jail or
they fled to Canada, they could be respected though most of them were not at
the time because they took a clear stand and paid a price for it. But now there
was a majority probably hundreds of thousands of men of Clinton's college age
who once conscription was announced went through any one of a series of well
practised routines to avoid military service.

I'm not thinking of the noisy visible rebels who marched and rioted on the
campuses of Berkeley and Columbia and elsewhere, I am thinking of the majority
who didn't want to make a public issue of it weren't going to expose themselves
to ridicule and public abuse also didn't care much to go to jail, they just
wanted to find a quiet way of sitting out a nasty war, so they suddenly
enlisted in the reserves, they discovered or contrived various ingenuities like
loosing weight, chewing quantities of tea before a medical examination. If they
had an uncle, a father, a congressman friend, someone who knew someone in the
military or on the local draft board, there were many ways of inviting pressure
to get them released.

Now all these stratagems have gone on surely in all wars, but there was
something new an enormous increase in the number of graduating college boys who
decided suddenly they had a passion for research and must move on to graduate
school. One of the decisions for which President Johnson was much criticised
after the war was over but very little during it was the order that graduate
students were to be excused from the draft. Now most of these tricks and
diversions we knew about at the time while having the good taste not to point
in the direction of any particular son of a particular friend, but a year or
two ago a book appeared by a man of the president's age James Fallows who first
told how he managed to fail his draft examination and then moved on to a study
of thousands of his peers. He maintains that about four out of five of his
type, his college generation were successful in one way or another in dodging
the draft. And then he makes the rude general point that most college educated
men stayed at home, that the Vietnam War was overwhelmingly a war fought by the
poor and the lower middle class, that it was, quote, "America's most blatant
class war since the American Civil War" when you may recall deferment was so
open and brazen that anyone with money to spare could buy himself a substitute
soldier from the poor, the unemployed, the blacks.

How does all this history touch President Clinton? The military, the Pentagon,
the graduating classes of the navy, the air force, the army have been
indoctrinated ever since they heard the name of Clinton as a presidential
candidate in the belief that President Clinton was a rare and unenviable bird
commonly known as the draft dodger. Nobody before James Fallows, I think, has
brought up the interesting fact that the Congress and the professions are
packed with men in their middle 40s who dodged the draft, no more and no less
than the president, but the general perception about Mr Clinton as a special
case has been there since the day he walked into the White House. He knows
this, he undoubtedly feels it himself and quite likely it has much to do with
his being, as the New York Times put it, "addled by any issue that involves
even the rumour of war".

Well this is an argument maybe you haven't heard before; it's only the latest
of the many increasingly strained theories about why American foreign policy
appears to be paralysed. It obviously cannot be applied to the problem of why
the foreign policy of Western Europe seems to be paralysed, though a recent
survey showing well over 50% of German youth to be pacifists may have something
to do with that.

However, whatever else explains the backing and filling, the indecisiveness of
this administrations foreign policy, I do believe that the Fallows revelations
about the behaviour towards Vietnam of Mr Clinton's fellow college students
could go far to explain the embarrassment the president barely but steadily
reveals whenever he is surrounded by military men, he's not had the protective
assurance given to former presidents by their military service, no cause even
to breathe the name of Eisenhower. But Truman was a tough infantry captain;
Kennedy a naval hero so was Bush, Carter a nuclear submariner or submariner,
how about Reagan?

Now he is a special case an interesting example of the power of appearances to
transcend reality. You'll have seen him in uniform in more pictures than
practically any other film actor, so he acquired the proper panache, he was
called to active service in 1942 excused for nearsightedness, but then drafted
into the first motion picture unit of the army air corps, which worked out of a
Hollywood studio and there throughout the war Mr Reagan made training films but
with enthusiasm, he adored the military. When he became president he saluted
more than any general as in several other roles in the presidency he looked the
part, but what I think he set him of from most others and certainly from
President Clinton as a commander-in-chief was the trait that Reagan possessed
and Clinton apparently does not, the feel, the attitude, the behaviour of
leadership. Roosevelt had it, Truman had it, Reagan had it, a few simple ideas
one or two strong convictions when it comes to foreign policy a capacity to act
and order, a capacity which may have little to do with right or wrong.

The one break from the D-Day ceremonies and what I've hinted could have been a
secret, but prolonged embarrassment for the president, the one break came at
the end when he went to Oxford to receive an honorary degree and be feted and
flattered in a jolly very non-military atmosphere. The Oxford visit was
originally scheduled on the eve of the D-Day commemoration, but somebody in the
White House felt that an appearance then and there would only revive more
vividly the memory of young Bill Clinton as an active Vietnam protester.

As it was when the marching and the bands and the wreath laying were all over
and outside the presence of any military at Oxford, the president actually
talked about his Oxford days on a television interview on which he was
surprised to be reminded of his having said way back there that he and his kind
combined a detestation of the Vietnam War with quote "loathing of the
military", he uncomfortably didn't remember this. This time he said that all
his generation, quote "was hurt by their ambivalence over Vietnam because we
loved the military so much". Let's hope he can make the second version stick or
at least begin to learn a new respect for the best of the military by absorbing
two truths. First, that no one loathes war more than an experienced soldier and
the other maxim, which all civilians in charge of the military in a democracy
should get by heart is the late CE Montague's memorable line,hell have no fury
like a non-combatant scorned.

It will be interesting to put it mildly to see what the president's European
visit did to his standing at home? Much ironically will probably turn not so
much on the European memories as on the fate of the Clinton health bill now
before two committees of Congress. If by a feat of populist campaigning around
the country, the president is able to get some compromise health bill through
the Congress, he will redeem much of the criticism and suspicion that's hung
over him these past few months. If as some congressional leaders were saying
this week, there would be no health bill passed this session this year, the
effect on the Democratic majority in the House and in November on the party's
actual hold on the Senate could be terrible to behold.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP