James Baker and Clinton's deficit - 26 February 1993

Who was it said "the obvious seldom gets noticed"? Aristotle, I think, or maybe
it was Bob Hope, either way I'm constantly surprised to find myself after 60
years of watching, sometimes scrutinising this country noticing something
simple that's been there glaring at you all the time.

It took me about 30 years to notice that, whereas Englishmen blow their noses,
Americans wipe them. I'd never have spotted that if it hadn't been for my
daughter, a tot at the time, who came running down a hall after I'd blown my
nose and shouted "what's going on here, what was that?" even though she'd lived
with me for all of her five, six years the trump of an Englishman blowing his
nose was alarming if not a martial sound.

And not too many years ago, I finally stopped asking in delicatessens and
grocer shops for a bottle of soda water. I should have known better because
asking for a drink in a club, especially in the Midwest where Germans had
prevailed as the cultural force in many things, asking for soda water produced
a blank look from the waiter, gently corrected by your host, you'd ask for
seltzer or charged water. But in shops everywhere the usual response to soda
water was "what flavour?" Well, in the end, I discovered what had been there
ever since I sailed into New York, club soda. By the time I started using this
regularly the custom had changed across the whole country, seltzer is now
preferred.

I think I'm sure that it was my old friend and mentor the late Sir Denis
Brogan - who knew more American history and more French history than all but a
fraction of Americans and Frenchmen - who said, "you can get to know a country
in some things better than the great majority of the natives, but the only
certain mistake you'll make will be elementary ones". Ah so, how true. Many of
you I'm sure are aware of how often down the years I've pointed out the
differences in power and procedure between a parliamentary system and the
American system.

There's one difference I've always known about at the back of my mind, but for
the first time it has come to the front. Whenever a new administration takes
over, I mean a new man from the out party, we have to get used to a whole large
cast of literally new faces, wouldn't that have been so if Mr Kinnock had
defeated Mr Major? No, for the simple reason that in the American system
there's no such thing as a shadow cabinet. In a parliamentary country, if the
party in power was defeated at the next election, you'd know practically all
the incoming cabinet members, you've seen them there speaking about this
speciality from the opposition benches, but in America the cabinet is not
recruited from the legislature but from the president's friendships and his
personal admirations. And America is comparatively careless of its talent and
talent that is on the presidential side.

The morning after the election of President Clinton, several hundred
knowledgeable people were out of a job. I think this hurts the country at the
highest level particularly, consider Mr James Baker was Mr Bush's campaign
manager but more important Reagan's secretary of the treasury, then chief of
staff and for the past four years secretary of state during which time he had a
front seat or rather a back-stage view of the collapse of European communism,
the fragmenting of the Soviet Republics, the breakdown of Yugoslavia, the
revival across Eastern Europe and the Middle East of ethnic, tribal and
religious old hatreds, the crisis of Desert Storm. He's the one man since Jimmy
Carter to get the Israelis and the Palestinians to sit down and talk, not for
long, but long enough to bring a flicker of hope to a perennially hopeless
feud.

Well on 3 November, Mr Baker had gone for good home to Wyoming to fish and rest
for the first time in 12 years; his expertise and judgement are dispensed with
overnight. I doubt he's had a phone call from anyone in the Clinton
administration. It's an optimistic system, the idea that a new man brings in a
new team of gung-ho eager beavers equipped with new energy, new ideas. Only
about six to nine months later do they discover that in foreign policy anyway,
there are no new ideas, haven't been since the Persian kings. Put it another
way, an old secretary of state long gone once confided to me that when you come
to power get there, get into your office in the state department or the Oval
Office in the White House, you see that the choices either of politics or
statesmanship are very little different from the ones that faced the outgoing
administration. In other words, he said "you have to spend about six months
liquidating your campaign rhetoric and then get down to the daily un-dramatic
business of trying to look different from your opponents".

In the meantime, the truly able members of the last administration are not
called on, have gone looking for a job, rejoined the old law firm, more often
than not become a consultant to some high sounding outfit called the James
Madison Institute for diplomatic and political initiative research. At worst,
they become a moderator of a television discussion programme.

I look back and think of the many cabinet officers who in the heyday of their
power learned a great deal about China or the Middle East or defence or
international trade, housing, whatever was their portfolio grew up out of
ignorance and then in one night were cashiered, banished to share their
knowledge and new-found insights with their friends or as I have good reason to
remember with any journalist who will listen to them. It's a pity but as it is,
as I say, we're still busy learning to recognise the faces and in the
barnstorming operation now underway to sell the president's budget the voices
of the new cabinet, only two of them were in the Congress, the secretary of the
treasury and the ailing secretary of defence. To have anybody from the Congress
is rare. A cabinet is made up of cronies of the president who have acquired
some public distinction elsewhere; his kitchen cabinet, the day and night
advisors he couldn't do without, the kitchen cabinet is nearly always made up
of old school friends, buddies from the old home town whose faces we rarely
see, but they are the people who really contrive policy for the president to
sell.

One feature of this last presidential succession that's quite new, Mr Clinton
did not wait six months to liquidate his campaign rhetoric or modify the big
promise that got him elected, he didn't wait six weeks. By the fourth week,
he'd said frankly with that rueful little smile and his bull-like shake of the
head "Gee fellas, sorry about the new big deal that promised a tax cut for the
whole middle class, things were worse all over than I'd guessed". So, whereas
also I said way back there in October that we were really going to soak the
rich and make old folks who are comfortably off pay a bigger percentage of
their medical costs, I now find sure we'll soak the rich but not enough to hurt
investment and I'm not sure it's such a great idea to slap a lump sum penalty
on the senior citizens, perhaps we'll have to means test them.

A means test - this is me speaking - a means test always sounds the fairest way
of determining who qualifies for government handouts. The curse of means
testing is the means of doing it, it requires if not a large new bureaucracy, a
huge extension of an existing bureaucracy to poke into every home of everyone
65 or over, check all the sources of their income, build up an Everest of
paperwork and then assess the proper allowance. It's true that at the moment,
the government's money that goes to the ailing rich is a preposterous
percentage of the budget.

I know an old man who recently had a major operation, he was in the hospital
five weeks, his private room just a spare and clinical as everyone else is, his
private room cost $1700 a night. Neither the government nor a union will pay
for a private room, semi-private, yes, that's only $1500 a night. So the old
man paid 200 a night, in all, his operation, surgeon, anaesthesiologist,
medical doctor assigned to him, drugs, procedures like X-rays, CAT scans, CCGs,
Doppler test etc etc, hospital room telephone, television, physical therapy,
the lot. His total bill came to between $55 and $60,000. If he'd been 64 and
not rich he'd have been ruined, but he was over 65 and he could easily have
afforded to pay half of that, in a pinch all of it. He paid just under $2,000.
Something has to be done of course.

But the grim gravelling fact when Mr Clinton is through with his sales campaign
and the Republicans have done with their automatic old grouch of spending
freeze right across the board, the oldest truth will emerge that Medicare for
the old, Medicaid for the very poor, social security for everybody and all the
attendant services for the veterans, welfare, food stamps, homeless shelters,
platforms and parking and what not for the disabled, children's care, the whole
cornucopia of services that have accumulated since the Second War, they
constitute close to 60% of any budget frozen in spite of the constant
Republican whine about cutting entitlements which is what most of those
services have come to be called, the fact is nobody dares, no administration.
Of course, the services are wonderful, wide ranging, imaginative, humane, long
overdue, but the federal government can't afford them. Nobody can, we keep them
all going by increasing the debt and the deficit.

About three months from now, we shall know what the stopgap solution is,
whether to start taxing more and spending more or, as the Republicans
constantly recommend, drastically cut spending, freeze all entitlements and sit
back and wait for the revolution.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP