Halloween, 1996 - 1 November 1996

A listener in South Africa likes the idea of starting this talk with a quiz. He
was staggered a week or two ago, to hear a recital of famous American names
he'd never heard and he thinks I ought to do it more often. Well at the risk of
turning the letter into that well-known quiz programme from New York, I might
try it once more by way of a come on, or cow catcher, as they used to call the
metal frame attached to the front of a locomotive.

Well then. What do these three things suggest in common? A knock on the door. A
flash of lightning. And pumpkin pie? Put it a more teasing way. Every Sunday
morning there's a ritual in our house, as in millions of others, which is to
open the 350 page package of the Sunday paper, search through it, find the
weekly television supplement, and then, starting at A, going through 10 pages
to Zee, to get a general idea of the films available to us during the coming
week on the 75 channels that we can presently choose from. This week there were
from Abba, a Swedish film, to Zorba the Greek, 449 movies. That's normal.

What was not normal, if you started to surf the channels, was the interminable
flashing succession of death's heads, lightning struck castles, moaning hounds,
bloodstained talons. And a whole bunch of actors, Fredric March, Michael Caine,
Peter Cushing, Lon Chaney, Jack Palance, growing alarming tumours on their
cheeks and foreheads and shaggy hair on the backs of their hands. To put it
bluntly, and incredibly, there were available, between Sunday morning and
Thursday midnight, a choice of 82 horror movies. Friday morning all was calm
and bright. And with the rising of the sun, no more, of course, vampires.

The children knocking on the door, the flash of lightning, the more inviting
thought of pumpkin pie are all symbols of Halloween. Not until I first came to
this country did I realise what an all-embracing, all-terrifying festival it
could be. I don't remember its being a big deal in England. But the other day I
called a Scottish friend, because Scotland, where its rituals and superstitions
held on longest and perhaps still do, and he told me that as for England, when
he lived in London a few years ago, next door to an American family, and when,
on the evening of October 31st, he heard a knock on the door, opened it, saw
two little children saying, "Trick or treat?" he hadn't the slightest idea what
they were about.

I take it then that the whole of Britain on the last day of October does not
give itself over to dressing up in grotesque or comical masks. A knock at one
door this week revealed a momentarily frightening image. A miniature,
ashen-faced Bob Dole. It was not, of course. It was a little rascal from
apartment 10b.

We usually on Halloween night, or All Hallows' Eve, leave outside the front
door a little bowl of candy, knowing by now, that if you go and say brutally
that you have no treat, no tot is going to perform a trick. They seemed to have
learned down the years that they're going to get the candy anyway. I wonder
when the decline set in, with the very elaborate celebrations on the last night
of October.

It was not only the eve of All Saints' Day, throughout Celtic and Anglo-Saxon
times it marked also the end of the summer and the eve of the New Year. It was
the big time of the year for returning herds from pasture and the day on which
laws, especially of land tenure, property rights and so on, were renewed. And
because November had become to be thought of, in what are facetiously called,
"temperate countries" as a bleak season, no sun, no birds, no warmth. November,
the last night of October, took on all sorts of sinister meanings. It was a
time when witches, hobgoblins, ghosts and demons roamed abroad.

I think we shouldn't assume that the attendant rituals and superstitions,
exorcising demons and so on, were the custom only among low, ignorant types.
Throughout the 17th century, educated people held a strong belief in witches,
throughout the early 19th century, in ghosts. In fact, only 60 years ago, the
BBC set up an experiment in a country house to prove or disprove the existence
of a ghost which one of its own staff swore to. For centuries in the so-called
civilised world, disease was attributed to your having offended the gods in one
way or another and it occurs to me that the witches' weird brew in Macbeth,
boiled toad, eye of newt, toe of frog, and so on, was not at all weird in
Elizabethan times. It was very much like the prescriptions any learned
pharmacist would write out for you.

Well sorry. Hadn't meant to go into our long-lasting stupidity about demons,
ghosts and vampires. How about vampires? They weren't, I discover, the
invention of sensible Scots who otherwise prescribed root of hemlock and gall
of goat, not to mention haggis, for a bad case of the flu. The vampire legend
seems to have grown up in Eastern Europe as a belief in the restless souls of
dead men, who leave their graves at night, suck the blood of the living and
beat it back to the coffin or the dust at daybreak.

The later twist, given to it in Mexico, was to transfer the legend to the
blood-eating bat. Which does exist. Desmodus rotundus, it's called, which,
however, is nothing like as large and fearsome as Bela Lugosi with his gown on.
It is, in fact, only three inches long, has reddish-brown fur and sharp incisor
teeth which pierce the skin of a sleeper and lap up his blood with the tongue,
without waking the man up. Not to worry though, they're rare. The bite is not
fatal. What you have to fear from many more species of bats, on Long Island for
instance, is the fact that they carry rabies.

In Western Europe and the United States, the vampire legend didn't really take
hold until the very end of the century, when Bram Stoker, Sir Henry Irving's
business manager, wrote, Dracula. And, throughout this Halloween horror week,
Dracula has reigned almost supreme. Rather his supremacy is shared with the
other great horror original created 80 years before Bram Stoker by Mary
Shelley, Frankenstein. Who most famously played Frankenstein in the movies?
Boris Karloff. Wrong! Colin Clive. Karloff was the Frankenstein monster. These
two have ridden the airwaves along with, as I said, dozens of variations, not
to mention documentary profiles and biographies of Edgar Allan Poe, Conan
Doyle, Stoker, Vincent Price, Wilkie Collins...Help!

I don't honestly know how many of the religious, legal and medical rituals and
superstitions ever got to this country. But from the late 19th century on, it
was Irish immigrants who gave a great fillip to the celebrations and
shenanigans of Halloween as a secular festival. Not least, as yet another
permissible occasion, for hitting the bottle. Mark Twain noticed the Irish gift
for inventing whisky festivals and expressed his admiration for their ability
to take it, in a memorable passage: "Give an Irishman lager for a month and
he's a dead man. An Irishman is lined with copper and the beer corrodes it. But
whisky polishes the copper and is the saving of him".

Several cities in several states used to have huge, all-day parades of clowns,
cowboys, demons, Indians, and allow small fry to paint their fancies on the
windows of public buildings. These festivals have gone, I believe, with the
wind, and the telly. But what remains everywhere is the dedication of the
evening to small children, to their dressing up in grotesque costumes, to going
from house to house, or apartment to apartment, to claim a trick or treat and
to go home to a supper which ought to end with pumpkin pie.

Pumpkin is a more recent form of pumpion. Known and grown and cooked since the
earliest colonial days, pumpkin farmers do a roaring business in the weeks
before Halloween. The fields adjoining our village were packed lately with
roaming families picking their own pumpkins and staggering off to the car with
them. Apart from the pie, their special function on Halloween night is a
hollowed out pumpkin set up outside houses, in windows, halls, shops, with eyes
carved out, a leering mouth, a candle stuck inside, the whole representing a
Jack-o'-lantern, the figure, that is, of a night watchman.

Well, Halloween provided, as you might guess, a very welcome escape from the
presidential campaign, though it appears most minds had managed to turn off the
election anyway. The conventional wisdom is that such is the general apathy or
cynicism about politics and politicians that the smallest turnout in years is
predicted next Tuesday. As for the campaign, Mr Dole, having for two months
made saintly efforts to be statesmanlike and affable, suddenly came to believe
what many of his party chiefs quietly told him, that he was positively going to
lose. Mr Dole turned angry and mean, and resurrected the character that lost
him the New Hampshire primary four years ago.

We've been saying all along that only some shocking scandal could stop Mr
Clinton's re-election. Believe it or not, there have been shocking scandals. Of
private life, of the scoundrelism of several of his aides, of flagrant
violation of the campaign financing laws, of sexual misbehaviour. Mr Clinton's
response is to have no response. To hear no evil, confess none. Appear
everywhere with a pink, smarmy, nodding smile, like a low-key Pompeii returning
in triumph to Rome.

It means, I suppose, he has no doubt about the outcome. Nor do any of us. In
spite of, was it Mr Micawber's warning that: "Accidents can happen in the best
regulated families".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP