Allied troops leave Berlin in 1994 - 2 September 1994

We're coming, I hope, to the end of the parade of memories and recreation of
great events that have marked the 50th anniversary of D-Day and its tremendous
consequences. I talked a few weeks ago about the coming departure from Berlin
of the British, American, French and Russian troops after 49 years of
occupation, something I believe most of us who hadn't visited Berlin had
forgotten all about. It was assumed by people who'd anticipated this event that
the four armies would leave on the same day. Of course, they reckoned without
the Germans. The Russian occupation has left bitter memories and Chancellor
Kohl was only doing what was expected of him when he decreed that the Russians
should have a day to themselves and tactfully not appear in the grand farewell
parade of the British, American and French soldiers that will take place next
week.

This divided ceremony is a hangover from the famous conflict, 50 years ago this
past spring, between Prime Minister Churchill and the allied Supreme Commander
General Eisenhower. Simply put this was what it was all about, why the American
and British Armies made a sudden big lunge east to get to Berlin and occupy it
before the Russians got there. It's a question that's been debated ever since
that will be argued about till the end of time.

Churchill believed before any other allied leader that once Hitler's armies
were defeated, the necessarily friendly relations between Soviet Russia and the
Anglo-American allies would change drastically, he believed that the Soviets
would become, as he put it, and soon, a mortal danger to the free world. To
Churchill, the swift occupation of Berlin by our side was to be the chief
political objective of the victory, to hold it, to be seen to hold it and to
give notice to the old Russian allies that we would stay there and if not
preside, at least be an equal partner in the administration of the defeated
enemy.

I interviewed Eisenhower about this in the late '60s, about a year before he
died and this is what he said, "my plan never did make Berlin in itself an
objective, my plan was to destroy the armed forces of the enemy". My own
feeling was this: political decisions had already divided Germany for
occupational purposes.

There was no possibility of the Western allies capturing Berlin and staying
there and, in fact, after the fighting stopped we had to retreat from Leipzig
125 miles to get back to our own zone. The Russians, ready to attack, were only
30 miles off Berlin eastward, but with a bridgehead already west of the Oder
river, it didn't seem to be good sense to try both of us to throw forces in
towards Berlin and get mixed up. Two armies that couldn't talk the same
language, couldn't even communicate, it would have been a terrible mess. Today,
people have said, "well, we'd have acquired prestige". I want to know whether
this matter of prestige was worth let's say 10,000 American and British lives.
General Bradley put it much higher.

Churchill argued that the Russian armies would anyway overrun all of Austria
and enter Vienna, which they did. If they also took Berlin, quote, "would it
not leave the impression that they'd been the overwhelming contributor to our
common victory, for the capture of Berlin will be the supreme signal of defeat
to the German people" and so on and so forth.

Eisenhower was unmoved, "all my training in war," he said, "is the geographical
objectives are not the proper objectives. The enemy is, that's what you go
after," but considering how often in the wake of numerable great wars,
geography – who will keep what – becomes the main squabbling point of the peace
conferences. Mr Churchill kept his doubts till the day he died; he lost, of
course, and the Russians established in Europe anyway and for the longest time
the general belief that they were the successors to Hitler as the conquerors of
the continent until only the other day, all Soviet histories said so.

And so last Wednesday, stirring memories of this great feud and reviving
arguments about the wisdom of the outcome, we saw the elaborate ceremony of the
last day of August, Chancellor Kohl and President Yeltsin bowing to,
congratulating, each other publicly declaring what is surely true in Mr Kohl's
words, "10 years ago or even six years ago, the division of Germany of Europe
seemed to be fixed in concrete".

Since 1991, the Russians have removed from Germany more than half a million
troops. It was remarked at one solemn moment of the day, a remark that can't
help but recall Eisenhower's warning that tens of thousands of Soviet soldiers
fell in Berlin – 2,500 in the final day battle for the Reichstag – as a tart
memory of Churchill's warning there's the fact that once the Soviet troops
occupied Eastern Germany, it soon emerged as a separate communist nation.

Three years later in 1948, the Russians to make their occupation neat and
complete tried to strangle West Berlin by cutting off all access to it. And as
many of us will vividly remember, it took just under a year of food and
supplies and the necessities of life being flown in by allied aircraft before
the Soviet gave up on that one. 1948-49 was probably the worst, the most bitter
period of Western-Soviet distrust and enmity.

These things and many more harsh memories must have stirred again in the crowds
that watched the stiff, late departure of the Russian soldiers. There was of
course the more palpable grievance, Chancellor Kohl's decision to have the
Soviet troops leave first and separately and take no part in the big farewell
parade of the other occupying powers the British, American and French troops.
Mr Yeltsin, referred to this coming and grander ceremony and said he wished it
well despite the fact that we have not been invited.

Well as I say, I believe next week's Anglo-American-Franco ceremony will be the
last of the anniversaries we've been so lavishly celebrating and I may say in
one or two incidences so sentimentally celebrating. The culprit in America in a
way was the celebration of the liberation of Paris, which was taken as a symbol
of the certain triumph of the Normandy invasion, quite right. Paris 1944, as
composed for its television celebration, was the perfect Hollywood stereotype.
I have expected Gene Kelly and Lesley Caron to come tripping and holding hands
through these shuttered side-streets gazing at the bateaux mouches gliding
along the Seine, going up the Eiffel Tower, lolling at a cafe on the
Champs-Élysées watching the girls go by and listening to the inevitable
soundtrack, the inevitable accordion.

However, this though hackneyed, there's a forgivable triviality. It was in the
general trend of the commentaries not only from anchormen or routine news
reporters but from some distinguished writers that it seemed to me a dangerous
sentimentality was broadcast, the idea that finally in France there came
together the shock of two great armies, one trained by totalitarian fanaticism
and discipline, the other a product of democratic liberalism. I'm quoting from
a distinguished author: Hitler gambled that his Nazi trained armies would show
themselves as fighting men superior to the Western allied armies because they
represented democratic liberalism and softness. Then comes the final and
apparently logical comment, and Hitler lost.

Well in a film, a television documentary recalling the emotions as well as the
facts of battle, this commentary is surely an acceptable passing judgement. I
think not. I think it spawns a dangerously false theory, namely that the
courage of soldiers drafted from a democracy are pretty well bound to triumph
over the courage of soldiers bred by a dictatorship. A very pointed examination
of this theory has been made by an American journalist in a commentary on the
Normandy invasion and the tone of its anniversary celebration, here I quote,
"the invasion's success was not an aspect of the democratic background of our
military".

If Rommel had been on the scene 12 hours earlier, the invasion might have been
repelled. The forces against, which we contended included Nazi veterans, but
also German kids and conscripts from various parts of Europe, notwithstanding
they held back a mighty juggernaut for six weeks. Hitler's rockets matured at
just about D-Day and if they'd been trained on the beaches rather than on
London suburbs, Hitler might have won the day. And now he comes to the, at
first glance persuasive, nub of the theory, the 20-year-old German soldier
directed by Hitler's lieutenant, the 20-year-old Russian soldier directed by
Stalin's lieutenants, the 20-year-old Japanese soldier directed by Tojo's
lieutenants is going to cross stretches of sand, scale escarpments and knock
out machine-gun nests even as 20-year-old Americans did. It is our confidence
in enduring truths that tells us that the soldiers in Normandy who attacked
were serving great ends while the soldiers who defended were serving ignoble
ends, but the evidence is not there that the machinery of injustice yields to
the machinery of justice.

I've left the name of the author of this piece to the end, because down the
years I've found that even the most neutral fair-minded people immediately
wake-up their prejudices when an author is announced ahead of his text. This
shrewd and telling refutation of a fairly general sentimentality was written
then by the American journalist Mr William F Buckley.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP