Vermont, snowboarders, and Nancy Cruzan - 28 December 1990

Do you remember the Japanese soldier who was found, not more than ten years
ago, in the jungle of an island that American marines had successfully invaded
in early 1945?

He was found by some anthropologists, I believe, looking for a tribe that no
white man, or for that matter, any other coloured stranger, had ever seen.
Evidently it came out, the Japanese soldier trapped there, had been received by
the tribe as a wonderful oddity, a charming visitor from another planet. He'd
had no intention of settling there, he was in hiding till the war was over.

The anthropologist told him, in 1980, that the war had been over for 35 years.
He was much relieved and was shipped home and received, as I recall, a medal
and a hero's welcome.

I suppose we all, at some time, feel the itch to, as the phrase used to go, to
get away from it all, but the problem, as any good modern travel writer will
confirm, is where is it possible today to get away from it?

A colleague on my old paper has spent the last few years encircling the entire
rim of what we now call the Pacific Basin or indeed, Pacific Rim. A man with
the curiosity and the muscle to penetrate into any bush, jungle, mountain
fastness or whatever, that is famously described as impenetrable.

But he finds people of every colour and sort using word processors in every
jungle clearing and deep in an unreachable valley, fortified by immense walls
of unscalable mountains, he found that 20 years ago, American hippies had
settled there in ragged clothes, with grubby children and bewildered dogs.

They were discovered by officials, game wardens, forest rangers or such of the
government of Hawaii, which was outraged and immediately ousted them under a
swiftly-passed law which forbade and still forbids, strangers to stay in the
valley for more than five days.

Well I myself, I have to confess, I've never had the urge to get away from it
all, partly because the only times I've tried it, the beautiful simplicity of a
primitive life, devoid of all the trappings of civilisation, sets up in me a
great immediate yearning for the conveniences I was supposed to be despising. I
guess I'm just a corrupt type of 20th-Century civilisation.

But, as old listeners to these talks may have noted, comes the approach of
Christmas and I go off into the only retreat I care for, up into New England,
into the mountain snows and the dazzling light and the cold, cold zero days of
the state of Vermont. It is possible up here to get away from it all by locking
yourself in a bedroom, study, stable and make a point of watching no
television, hearing no radio, seeing no newspapers. This seems to me to be just
plain silly. You can do it anywhere. In a flat overlooking Piccadilly Circus,
just don't overlook.

But this time I remained fairly ignorant, what with one thing and another
having to do with Christmas, mainly the bubbling or loping kids. The ones that
bubble are five, eight and 10, the lopers are lean monsters of respectively 15
and 18 years, and except at mealtimes we don't see much of them.

Indoors they sit in a spectral green light, facing the screen and tapping the
fearsome keyboard of their Macintosh Apple. Outdoors, they are gone with their
skis, the younger one, much to the derision of his father and the skiing uncle,
with his snowboard. Skiers deplore snowboarders, as true golfers deplore carts
you ride in.

Indeed, it's only been a year or two since snowboarding was legally forbidden
at most of New England's skiing resorts and slopes. The management was afraid
of accidents. After all, just look at them, they stand on a single board six
feet long and 10 inches wide and they stand strapped in, sideways. All the
weight changes re obviously from side to side and they require strong and
supple thighs and pretty fluid hips.

The manuals, there are already manuals, say that much more than in skiing,
what's required to steer yourself swiftly and safely over the snow is much body
English, a phrase still in use in all sports, to describe some small, ingenious
or extra movement which, while not strictly illegal, is a crafty way of
persuading the board to turn, the ball to go over the net or into the hole. If
you hadn't already guessed, you'll gather that it embodies a still current view
in this country of the English as being just a touch shifty or should I say,
artful, in all sports. Please, no letters. I jest, partly.

Well I should say that if there is a local issue up here in Vermont, I mean one
divorced from politics or the environment, it's the art or sin of shredding,
another word for snowboarding. The purists are the regular skiers, young and
old. but all the purists can do, like puritanical golfers who carry their own
bags and walk with great healthful strides, all they can do is sneer.

All the resorts up here offer special weekend packages for snowboarders. At
Look Mountain, in neighbouring New Hampshire, there's a beginners' special,
$35, 50-minute lesson, rental of board and boots, use of the lower lifts.

To the horror of the old skiers, the town actually promotes a development
programme for the young and instruction in all the classical and freestyle
manoeuvres or skills, but now done on snowboards. It begins to look as if the
ski were going the way of the wooden tennis racquet and the hickory-shafted
golf club.

I'm afraid that's as far as I can go with my getting away from it all effort.
Though I've seen no television, heard no radio, I did buy a newspaper, the
Burlington Free Press and here is the news on the front page. The top
four-column heading is "Gorbachev wins new powers". Beneath it, a three-column
story, "Environmental enforcers clean up Vermont", a story which, I imagine,
could be paralleled in hundreds of local newspapers across the country.

This one's about a man being ordered to pay a fine of £37,000 for dumping
contaminated ground water on to a cemetery. The big story at the bottom of the
page is the only truly local story, unlikely to be carried anywhere outside the
state, "Kunin carries torch for Vermont women".

Madeleine Kunin, the retiring governor of Vermont, she's been re-elected three
times but the term of service is only two years, so in all she's been governor
for six years and the story is by way of paying tribute to what she's done for
women.

She increased the number of women appointees in government from 24 to 40%,
appointed the first female state Supreme Court justice. In the state
legislature, during her time, the number of females has gone from 34 to 60,
which is a record for any of the 50 states and so on. The only dissenters are,
naturally, in the Republican opposition.

They say that she brought so many women into government that her policy
amounted to reverse discrimination, an inevitable charge, and it's one that
we're hearing more and more; that more blacks are appointed to fill posts or
jobs in management or a skilled trade, which could have been filled by a white.

However, there is one more story on the front page and I'm pretty certain
that's where it is on every front page in the country. It says simply, "Nancy
Cruzan dies". A line that must have brought sad relief to perhaps millions of
parents or spouses or other close relatives of some hospital patient who has
laid for months or years, showing no sign of life, but not dying.

Nancy Cruzan was a 33-year-old woman from Missouri, who almost seven years ago
was so badly injured in a car accident that she's been ever since in what the
doctors call an irreversible vegetative state. A month after the accident, a
feeding tube was put in her stomach.

Three years ago her parents, contending that she would have wanted to die a
dignified death, went to court, to ask permission to have the tube removed and
a county judge so ordered. But the state of Missouri itself leapt in at once
and overturned the judge's ruling, and meanwhile a vigorous opposing lobby had
grown up, opponents of abortion and/or euthanasia and argued up and down the
state, that even a vegetable life has some meaning.

Eight times these people went to court but in the end were declared to have no
legal standing. But all this time the forbidding judgment of the states of
Missouri has stood. Well eventually, the parents took the case to the United
States Supreme Court. That was in June and in its first right-to-die case, the
court ruled that the state of Missouri did constitutionally have the right to
prevent the parents withholding food and water, but the court added a proviso,
which has sent a wave of relief through the medical and legal professions.

Missouri could prevail, the court said, unless there was clear and convincing
evidence that the daughter would have wanted to die. Accordingly, in August,
the parents went back to the original judge and put before him testimony from
co-workers in the daughter's factory and the opinion of her doctor. The judge
was convinced and on 14 December, ordered the tube to be removed. It was so
done, Miss Cruzan died early in the morning of Boxing Day.

Riffling once more through the snowboarding story, I came on a familiar name in
what you must grant, is an outlandish or should I say, unlikely context.
Without comment, it says here, the director of snowboarding at the New
Hampshire Loon Lake resort is an old Alpine skier turned shredder. His name,
Winston Churchill.

A freakish coincidence? Not at all. I haven't been in touch with him, but he
has got to be the grandson, maybe great-grandson of the famous American
novelist, who lived all his life in New Hampshire.

Famous enough anyway at the end of the 19th Century, so that some time in the
1890s, a young Englishman, a soldier, who'd written a book, wrote to the
eminent novelist in New Hampshire, to assure him that he, the young man, had no
intention of battening on the great man's fame and would consequently, in any
further books he wrote, sign himself Winston S Churchill.

  • 
    Vermont, snowboarders, and Nancy Cruzan