US foreign policy in Bosnia - 2 July 1993

Do you remember two summers ago, the brief flare-up of passion and
misunderstanding over the name and the patriotism of a tennis player. He'd
always been listed in his short career as a Yugoslav but now suddenly
Yugoslavia was yet another exploded Communist country that was disintegrating
into its forgotten little nations.

Forgotten by us, that is, by us big boys who'd been more or less running the
world for a couple of hundred years. But never forgotten by the nationals
themselves, who resented being incorporated, first into a so-called kingdom,
when the Austro-Hungarian empire was dissolved.

By the way, a vivid reminder of how easily we ran the old world is a scene that
thrilled me as a boy and one I've never forgotten. That morning in, was it
1919, I'm an ocean away from the books, when a Welshman, name of David Lloyd
George, born in poverty in a two-room cottage, woke up and went to work in a
French palace and simply announced, the Austro-Hungarian empire no longer
exists. It was the end and it was the end of all the pomp and the grandeur and
the luxury and the vast, extended political power over many small nations of
the emperors and the grand dukes and the people with names like Ferdinand and
Josef, one of whom started the whole decline and fall by getting himself
assassinated in the gorgeous summer of 1914 by a Serb.

Now there, if you feel a little dizzy, let me say we've come full circle back
to the tennis player, who raised a little dust two summers ago by refusing to
be listed on the tennis tour as I said, first as a Yugoslav, but then most
certainly he was not a Serb. To him the Serbs were the new villains. As one of
them, a frantic nationalist named Gavrilo Princip had been the original villain
who shot the Archduke Franz Ferdinand in his carriage as he was riding and
receiving the applause of the people of one of his vassal states, Bosnia, as he
rode through the capital, Sarajevo. I recall the hackneyed incident now because
I doubt there's anyone listening who is in the least disturbed by names like
Bosnia, Sarajevo and Serbia. Yet I swear to you that two, three years ago,
you'd have wondered where and what I was talking about. I had not heard of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Croatia, since as a toddler I heard the
grown-ups bantering these weird names about in the early, boisterous days of
the First World War.

Well, I've just mentioned the word that gave us and the tennis player such
trouble two years ago – Croatia. When his nationality was to be listed for the
spring tournaments of 1991, he exploded first on the Yugoslav mistake and then
exploded again, he's a high-strung type, at the worse insult of being listed as
a Serb. At that moment the Serbs were launching their assault on the ancient
enemy, the Croats. Goran Ivaniševíc declared heatedly and for all to hear, that
he was a Croat and must be so designated from now on. Poor old young
Ivaniševíc, he came to Wimbledon this year as a threat to everybody. He was the
runner-up last year to the Las Vegas lollipop, Agassi. But after fighting his
way on three separate days through 14 sets of slamming tennis, he more or less
threw in the towel in the last set and shook his head and went off to his
grievous homeland.

One of the two American commentators on the men's matches is John McEnroe. It's
very odd seeing him up there in a blazer, a shirt and club tie, like a prodigal
son of George Bush. It was odder still, after we'd seen pictures of Ivaniševíc
at the funeral of his closest friend, who had been killed and then watched him
leaving the court, wringing his head like a dog emerging from a breaking wave.
It was McEnroe, of all unlikely sympathisers, who said, it was too much to
expect Goran to have tennis on his mind and how broken up he'd been by the
slaughter in his own country and how, mused the Reverend McEnroe, it was a
lesson to us all. Tennis, he was daring to say, was not the whole of life, a
thought which leaves the genuine tennis buff deeply puzzled. I once urged a
dinner of famous young golfers, amateur champions, to resist the appeal of a
million dollars, not to turn pro, to stay amateurs; golf, I said, is not the
whole of life. They hadn't the remotest idea what else I could possibly have in
mind.

Well, you'll see that my own rapt pleasure in sitting there in front of the
magical green turf at Wimbledon was enrapt this year by the fact that the
Westerners in and out of the United Nations will frankly confess in private,
our policy in Bosnia has been, as Churchill said of the greatly-praised Munich
Agreement, an unmitigated disaster. I think the American people are not alone
in feeling rather guilty, ashamed, as we used to say, of our waffling impotence
over Bosnia. I think the guilt stems from one of the unnoticed legacies of the
Reagan era, which is the Hollywood view of American intervention anywhere.
Namely that for legitimate propaganda purposes, for the purpose of giving the
world due warning, the United States must be seen to be standing tall, at the
ready, uniforms crisp, medals shining, hand on the sword's hilt. We shall go in
on the understanding that nobody gets killed. This deep general fear has lately
been melded or confused with a recalled saying of General Eisenhower that you
don't go into a war without seeing the possibility of a way out. He couldn't,
in the beginning, see the end of the Vietnam tunnel and neither could General
MacArthur, which is why both of them went quietly to the White House and urged
President Johnson not to get into a land war, any land war in Asia. And I
wonder how they would have felt about Bosnia. No question about Saddam and
Desert Storm.

Well, just as we were squabbling in an increasingly sordid and useless way, in
the media, about Bosnia, came the rousing word about the missile attack on
Baghdad. I myself was, for once, out of touch with any goings on beyond a
school graduation ceremony, deep in the green mountains and rolling valleys of
Vermont, which is surely the most beautiful of all the eastern states. Not
least of all having something unique in the 50 states, something very easy to
overlook because it's a virtue that consists in being free from a vice. As the
man said, you can't see what isn't there. Billboards – no other state in the
union prohibits billboards, so it's like an enormous mountain garden in the
jungle of advertising.

My family was too busy plucking and arranging and transporting huge pots of
flowers for the outdoor stage, too busy with working and cooking and living to
bother with such trivialities as taking in the New York Times or watching that
gadget again, what's it called, television. So it was far off, under a
mountainside, in the total stillness of a blazing noonday and somebody came out
and said, by the way, we've made a missile attack on Baghdad. That was a
shocker and I have to confess that my immediate response was one of, if not
joy, then of relief. About time, was my first thought. Only about an hour later
did my son-in-law arrive to say that the attack was in retaliation for the
Iraqi plot to assassinate former President Bush, when he visited Kuwait a month
or two ago. To me that was a puzzle, a disappointment at least.

I'd assumed that the United States had acted on United Nations authority, to
punish Saddam for his steady and intolerable resistance to the UN nuclear
inspection teams. For two years now they've been trying to make him fulfil the
armistice terms by destroying all nuclear fuel and the facilities that can turn
it into weapons. In the beginning, in the euphoria of the Desert Storm triumph,
we were told, among other certainties, that all of Saddam's capacity to make a
nuclear weapon had been destroyed. A few months later the Pentagon was ready to
admit that Iraq is a large country and that much of it is blank desert, which
does not give out magnetic or ultrasound signals of the presence, in
underground caves, of plutonium or assembly rods.

The UN inspection teams have been unflagging in their skill and patience but
the fact has been rather shamefacedly admitted in United Nations memos to the
Security Council, that Saddam has been maddeningly effective in preserving much
of his nuclear capacity and is building more and by now is openly defiant of
the UN teams and their mission to identify and destroy all fissionable
material.

Sooner or later, I believe, he is going to have to be stopped and I thought the
other weekend the time had come. But the pretext of punishing a tyrant for a
proved plot to assassinate a former head of state is surely a bizarre
precedent. On the secret testimony of the CIA, MI6, many other intelligence
services, we could start letting off a whole firework display of missiles
around the world, as retrospective punishment for plots that were spotted and
failed. As Americans think again about the Baghdad missile attack, I know that
European politicians immediately asked, did he do it to boost his prestige at
home. I don't know, If he did, it didn't work.

The latest national polls showed a mild rise in his popularity and then a swift
dip back to normal or rather sub-normal. General approval of Mr Clinton is now
below 50%, particular approval for the Baghdad attack has slumped and turned
around. I may be wrong but I can't help feeling that, in the battle for
worldwide sympathy, Saddam got the better of the exchange of hype. His
television scenes of ruined buildings, broken old women, dead children, may be
quite irrelevant to the superior ends that Mr Clinton had in mind, but the
cruel means left their mark.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP