Canada and other democracies - 10 July 1992

Talk about coming down to earth. I was just about to go on about the sorrows of
Mr Bush, how since the election is getting closer all the time, how he has to
grit his teeth and swallow hard and pretend that the economy is really coming
awake like a late sleeping giant. When he gets the word that unemployment has
risen to an eight-year high, the stock market drops 44 points, interest rates
keep falling and falling and where is the brisk new investment and where are
all the happy people spending more but also saving more.

When Mr Yeltsin arrives in Munich to break bread with the seven benefactors and
discloses that the inflation rate in the new liberated Russia is and has been
for the past four months 640%. No wonder they had to make a place at the table
for Mr Yeltsin and feed him pumpernickel and Bavarian beer, nobody perhaps
including Mr Yeltsin seemed to know who was going to pay his $400 a night hotel
bill, which is three times his monthly salary. In other words, in theory on
paper, a stay of four nights would cost him or somebody his annual earnings.
How do you explain all this? Whenever I ask a politician how the United States
can go on thinking and spending and living like the world's credited nation,
which it was not too long ago when it is now the world's principle debtor
nation, I always get the same treatment a kindly tolerant smile such that you'd
give to a seven-year-old who asked you if its true what they say about the
birds and the bees.

What was the point of the Munich meeting? Well nothing new, this is the 17th
year they have been meeting, mainly like a team of doctors pooling their great
wisdom to say usually how to restore the world's economy to health? I don't
remember a time when they ever left a meeting saying to the patient "you're
doing just fine, keep on taking one aspirin a day and lots of liquids". This
time, the doctors disagreed more than usual. Oddly enough, the one thing they
could agree on was to help Mr Yeltsin reschedule his debt and they did agree on
something else – something that had nothing to do with their main purpose –
which was to agree to use air and naval power if that's what it takes to get
food and medicine into Bosnia, if the Serbs try to block the United Nations
airlift.

Incidentally, we've been seeing most evenings for the past week or two pictures
of even short interviews with General Mackenzie, the Commanding Officer of the
United Nations Forces, which as always are called peacekeeping but this time
are equipped to become a fighting rather a defensive force if the worst
happens.

My by the way was meant to comment on the fact that General Mackenzie is a
Canadian as is the main body of United Nations troops called on for this
dangerous mission. It occurs to me, I must say a little late in the day that
for most of the 45 years that United Nations peacekeeping forces have been
mustered, the Canadians have provided a greatly disproportionate number of men.
I can't recall now whether they volunteered a force for the first United
Nations intervention, which was to persuade, shall we say, the Soviet Union to
withdraw its troops from Iran so far back as 1946, but I do know that during
the '50s and '60s, Canadian forces under UN direction served in the Gaza Strip,
in Cyprus, in India, Pakistan.

I think you can make a good case for saying that more than any other country,
Canada has carried out the promise, which 50-odd nations gave at San Francisco
in 1945, the promise to make available troops, material, weapons to the
Security Council whenever it called for them. That promise which I've mentioned
before as the tragically failed promise of the United Nations was set down in
Article 43 of the UN Charter. That Article was to be ratified by each member
nation as soon as possible unquote. After all the delegates left the founding
conference of the United Nations in June 1945 soon as possible meant never.
Nations came to pick and choose where and when to help if at all when there was
an outbreak of what the Security Council could define as aggression, most did
nothing. Of course, career wise you could say the first United Nations War, a
fact that seems to have been mislaid when Americans write or mention that war.

Alert watchers of the immortal M*A*S*H will spot the occasional introduction of
an Australian or a Swede, but the usual assumption in this country, one either
deplored or rejoiced in, is that the defence of South Korea was an exclusively
American effort. Of course, Canada was there with large forces, which reminds
me of a question, the answer to which astonishes most people and is hardly
credited at all by Americans. Of all the nations that voluntarily entered the
First World War, the Second World War, Korea and Vietnam, which was the one
that suffered most casualties in all of them, meaning the highest percentage of
its male population lost, and the answer is New Zealand. Many New Zealander's
don't know it, just as I've never heard a Canadian mention his country's being
ever ready to dispatch peacekeeping forces on the UN's corps.

Canada indeed has set a splendid record and American ignorance of it is yet
another symptom of the affliction of insularity, which seems to me to have
become in the past decade or so more pronounced than ever, at least among
American public men. I suppose that insularity, chauvinism, is a recognisable
characteristic of any big power top dog. Certainly Englishmen between the wars
were famously obnoxious when they went abroad, they owned more than a quarter
of the earth, they knew it, they hoped you knew it and would behave
deferentially accordingly.

This I hope I'm right has gone with the wind and the empire, but now America
and American politicians most of all are becoming almost suspiciously shrill in
their assertion of American superiority in most things, could they have doubts
about it? How strange that President Bush in a speech the other day grew
positively choleric, the veins in his neck swelling like snakes when he shouted
at his audience they should never forget they belonged to the greatest goddamn
country on the face of this earth, what does it mean the greatest country,
greatest for what?

Well we've noticed before that there is a contradiction that afflicts every
nation at the stage of its history when it's beginning to loose its best
reputation, it grows nervous therefore it begins to protest too much.

America in the 1950s was the first power of the earth, there was no dispute
about it. Therefore, America could be generous pouring out its billions as the
American secretary of state said "to restore the fabric of European life", it
could open its doors and factories to so called productivity teams coming over
from Europe to learn the magic of American inventiveness and give for
converting good imitations of luxuries for the few into conveniences for the
many the dollar watch, America could relax in being top dog.

But it no longer knows it in its bone, but in its rhetoric, its public
declarations and you're going to get a load of it at the Democratic's dull
coronation ceremony during the coming week – they must stress over and over
that America is great, is unique, is best. This is a strain and it is a strain
more noticeable to me than at any previous time and I don't think its an
accident that going along with this lonely assertion of being best is a
disinclination to consult or quote the experience of other countries, let me
try and make that clear.

I have wished more and more in the past few years that American universities
would set up for that matter European universities too would set up chairs of
comparative democracy. These would be for the study of how things were done in
the country or countries not your own, maybe they exist I'd be delighted to
hear that they do. For example, there's a continuing strenuous public hassle,
it started academically in 1938, but has been gathering steam and violence for
20 years since the war, its about having a free national health system, such a
thing exists in at least 20, 30 other countries, but in all the discussions the
only other country who system is quoted and studied is that of Canada, but for
reasons we can't go into now, the United Kingdom system was never seriously
considered as a role model.

And if you read or pick up any American news you must surely that the republic
has been tormented, racked, deranged, plagued for about a quarter of a century
by opposing armies in the matter of abortion. The warrior forces squared off
long ago to diametric extremes, Pro Choice for abortion for everybody on
demand, Right to Lifers against abortion under all circumstances. Night after
night, day after day we have parades, scuffles with police, small riots,
clinics bombed, interminable discussions, spitting arguments, it goes on and
on. And about twice a year, the Supreme Court tries to compromise, which is
tough for little bit of abortionists is about as hard to define as a little bit
pregnant, so the court hands down decisions that count the number of angels
that might fall off a needle and nobody is satisfied. And so on our best
nightly news discussion programme the other evening, a man opposed to abortion
said that "the United States has the loosest, the most permissive law on
abortion of any country", can it be true? Nobody took him up on it; it would
have been a welcome shock to hear someone say "well in France, the law says, in
Holland this is what happens, in the United Kingdom it never happens".

By the way, after I talked the other week about the rapid decline in sport of
what we used to call manners, I came on and did an hilarious account of a
little boy picked up with other slum children to be taught in a day-care centre
the elements of laying a table, knife on the right, fork on the left, desert
spoon and fork in opposite directions above the plate and so on and so forth.
At the end, the boy was asked what he thought of the lesson. He said "weird,
sort of interesting though". Did he mean to go home and teach it to his
buddies? He gasped. "No way, you've got to be kidding."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP