Tax fraud - 17 April 1992

The 15th of April is an ominous date on the American calendar. It's the
deadline for filing your income tax on the earnings of the previous year. I
think I ought to say income taxes, plural would be better, but we'll come to
that. Everybody, every American citizen pays federal, that is national tax, and
everybody includes Americans living abroad for any reason, so you may have
noticed that American actors who live in Italy or Spain or some other place in
Europe, are doing it because they are gainfully employed there – unlike some of
my former good friends, British actors – they are not in Switzerland to avoid
British taxes.

For Americans there is no tax haven, in Switzerland or Timbuktu or any other
place. I believe the United States is only one of two countries that are so
heartless in this matter. I said income tax had better be called income taxes,
plural, because most states also levy a state – that is a California, a
Michigan, a New York state – tax. I'm not talking about rates, what we call
property tax, but income tax. If you live in New York City, alas, there is
still a third, the city income tax which is a set fraction of the state tax.
It's as if you were a Londoner and paid first a national income tax, then a
Middlesex income tax, then a City of London income tax. It's too painful and I
won't go on.

This 15 April however will be memorable and go down in the books, certainly in
the books of social history because of the sin – the guilt of a single taxpayer
or tax delinquent. A woman, a very rich woman, a very attractive, funny,
powerful woman. Her name is Leona Helmsley. She was, she is the owner of the
majority stock in a small chain of what are known as luxury hotels, the most
famous of which is there just off Madison Avenue, in the 50s, the Helmsley. By
lavish and florid advertising, Mrs Helmsley managed in the space of about half
a dozen years, to establish her name in the public mind and her likeness in the
public view and her view of herself as a sort of radiant monarch. She called
herself the Queen of the Helmsley empire and she had enough style and good
looks to manage it without seeming too ridiculous.

Something over four years ago, I believe at the end of 1987, a grand jury began
to sit in the matter of Mrs Helmsley's income taxes. On 14 April 1988, on the
very eve of tax day, Mrs Helmsley was indicted for tax fraud. The main charge
was of furnishing a mansion in Connecticut for her personal use and charging
off hundreds of thousands of dollars in expenses to her hotel chain, making her
and her husband tax delinquents to the tune of $1.7 million. She was brought to
trial the following year. The wheels of American justice grind exceeding small
and slow.

In 1989 and on the 30 August she was convicted. She at once hired a new batch
of lawyers and began the equally laborious and serpentine business of an
appeal. However sentencing was set for December 1989 and in that month she was
sentenced to four years in prison. Now in most countries I think the sentencing
is followed, as in a Perry Mason film, by the bustling of the defendant into
custody and there an end. But in this country, when you have a politically
powerful and/or very rich defendant, the sentencing is practically the firing
of the starting gun and the long-distance race to a reversal of the verdict.

Pending her elaborate and voluminously stated appeal, Mrs Helmsley was set free
on millions of dollars bail. Throughout 1990 and 1991, her case went to a State
Appeals Court, was dismissed, finally on to the United States Supreme Court
which saw no reason to overturn the verdict. Appeals to the Supreme Court must
always relate to, not the wrongdoing of a person or a firm or the superiority
of federal law over state law, it's always about the denial or violation of the
rights of an individual, as set down in the Constitution, What possible
Constitutional ground could Mrs Helmsley appeal on?

Well, she declared in detailed affidavits that she had heart trouble, that
prison would endanger, perhaps ruin, her health, So what's the Constitution say
about that? Well, Article 8 of the Bill of Rights says that a court may not
impose excessive bail, excessive fines nor may it inflict, here's the key
phrase, cruel and unusual punishment. The Supreme Court refused to hear the
case, in effect upholding the conviction. Outside the court, her constitutional
lawyer wryly remarked that the punishment might be cruel but it was not
unusual. Then after exactly four years from the indictments being handed down,
four years of, as you can guess, emotional turmoil and the expenditure of
millions of dollars in lawyers' fees, the last judge, demonstrating a fine
sense of irony, some people said sadism, set last Wednesday, income tax day,
for the surrender of Leona Helmsley, since her conviction known to the tabloids
as the Queen of Mean.

Even then, in the week between the drop of the last gavel and her being taken
away, she tried a final appeal. We, we the public, gathered that she simply
couldn't credit the reality that she, Leona Helmsley, was actually going to go
to jail. She offered to hand over all her hotel holdings, the entire empire, to
the city of New York, to house the homeless. That would have made the world's
media. Her lawyers announced, quite gravely, she has offered to solve the
city's problem of the homeless single-handedly. The mayor's office was asked
about this and his press officer said it had been broached before this week,
but never went anywhere because the assumption was it was between the judge and
Mrs Helmsley. Later on however, a lawyer of spokesman for Mrs Helmsley said
that she had never made a firm offer. It was, he said, more of a metaphor in
bargaining, than a concrete proposal, thus giving a final ludicrous twist to
the current buzzword, metaphor, which incidentally rarely means metaphor – it
usually means fable, symptom, sign, symbol. I guess an older spokesman have
said that Mrs Helmsley was making the offer in a Pickwickian sense.

So, even on Tuesday, four years to the day of her indictment, her lawyer made
what had to be the desperate, positively final plea, He went before the United
States Court of Appeal for the Second District. You may wonder whom can you
possibly appeal to under the law once the United States Supreme Court has
spoken. Well the series of first appeals winding up in the Supreme Court, were
against the conviction. When she'd lost there, the lawyers settled down to
appeal the sentence and the last word of the last judge had been to order her
to surrender on the 15th to a Federal Medical Centre in Lexington, Kentucky.
Why so far afield and why a medical prison? Well Mrs Helmsley's pleas about her
frail health had weighed sufficiently to have her sent to a federal prison
designed to provide medical hospital care for females who are known to be, in
one way or another, physically sick – 40% of the women at this prison need
special care.

Yet, even when this order had been issued, Mrs Helmsley's lawyer argued on
Tuesday most poignantly, that she was in a deteriorating cardio-vascular
condition, that her imprisonment would amount to a death sentence, not only for
her, but for her old husband, who was convicted along with her of tax fraud,
but was at the time found to be incompetent for trial. Mrs Helmsley is plainly
devoted to him and has been taking care of him ever since he became chronically
ill, which was before the grand jury sat down, more than four years ago. Her
lawyer also told the Appeals Court that Mrs Helmsley has received death threats
from a pseudo-Nazi, so-called Aryan brotherhood – Mrs Helmsley is Jewish – to
be carried out once she was imprisoned.

It's difficult to imagine what other compassionate, even persuasive lengths Mrs
Helmsley's lawyers could have gone to. The lawyers made one last gasp. Could
not Mrs Helmsley be confined, either in a Connecticut prison or one in Phoenix,
Arizona, where her ailing husband could live close by? But it was all to no
avail. The pleas concerning Mrs Helmsley's health had already been taken up and
allowed for the federal authorities mainly, in sending her to the only federal
prison that has extraordinary medical provisions for invalid women. So, before
dawn on Wednesday, Mrs Helmsley left New York in her private jet, flew to
Kentucky, drove to Lexington Gaol, what we now call a correctional facility,
took on her prison blue shirt and trousers, retained only her gold wedding
ring. For a week or so she will have an exhaustive medical and psychological
examination, then she will settle to her routine, become one inmate of a 32-bed
dormitory. The lady warden remarked simply that Mrs Helmsley's considerable
experience in running the Helmsley hotels "might qualify her to mop floors and
wash bed sheets". As always in this country, the sentence does not define the
actual length of confinement. Though she's supposed to be there for four years,
she could be paroled in August of next year.

Out of the whole four years of her indictment, trial, appeals, from the vast
literature of the affidavits the depositions, the court's transcripts, one
sentence alone has survived in the popular memory, I can't say that the jury
was more impressed by this sentence than another but everybody on the outside
was and it's now an item of American folklore. The fatal sentence, spoken by
Mrs Helmsley to a maid or housekeeper and reported by the woman at the trial,
the fatal sentence, which I believe more than millions of words of testimony,
doomed her, was: taxes, only little people pay taxes.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP