The Helmes-Burton bill - 19 July 1996

When I left the United States three weeks ago, President Clinton appeared, for
the first time in his re-election campaign, to be slipping seriously in his
high ranking in the polls, because of three scandals which, just then, were
monopolising the public media, if not the public interest.

Those scandals which I will simply name without again going into are the
muddle, and perhaps worse, over the Clintons' land deal in Whitewater in
Arkansas. The alarmingly graphic account, wonderfully imaginative, if untrue,
of Mrs Paula Jones about a meeting with the then Governor Clinton, years ago in
a hotel suite, and the gross sexual approaches she alleged he made to her. Mr.
Clinton's masculine image, incidentally, was never Simon Pure, as President
Kennedy's was, when he went into the White House. It was only years after the
assassination that the whole nation learned that he, Kennedy, was, in the words
of a former ambassador to Britain, sensitive, ruthless and very highly sexed.

Well by now, at this stage of Anglo-American history, I think the public, in
both America and Britain, have grown to be more tolerant, or perhaps just more
resigned to sexual shenanigans among their rulers. But it was the third scandal
that seemed to affect more directly Mr. Clinton's popular standing. The
revelation that the White House, somebody in the White House, and the president
is always held responsible for anybody in the White House, had quietly got,
from the FBI, confidential files on about 600 people who formerly had had the
privilege of a pass to enter the White House. Of course, among them were
hundreds of Republicans, season ticket holders so to speak, from the Reagan and
Bush days. The White House has no authority to do this. And you don't need a
vivid imagination to realise what any administration could do with a file on
the private life of anybody with political clout.

Well, that was three weeks ago. When I got to England, I found that not only
Britain but the whole of Western Europe was absorbed by something quite
different. Was up in arms about a bill that had gone through Congress which I'm
sure the average American voter had never heard of. It is the Helms-Burton
bill, which astonishingly penalises all foreign companies doing business with
Cuba and which, more astonishingly still, President Clinton has signed.

The chief author of the bill is a famous Republican, Senator Jesse Helms. Does
the name strike a chord? We've talked about him several times down the years
and he's an interesting and engaging man. A courtly southerner whose personal
manner, his humour and courtesy, belies his public belligerence as an
inveterate old-time southerner, whose great hold on his state of North Carolina
- he's been in the Senate since 1972 - is his unapologetic devotion to the
hundreds of thousands of North Carolinians whose livelihood depends on the
state's main crop. Tobacco. Few industries in the United States have taken such
a battering as tobacco in the past few years. The news is never good for its
trade association, the Tobacco Institute which soldiers on through many
congressional hearings trying to arrest the flood of overwhelming evidence,
from many nations, about tobacco's ill effects on the human.

It all started 30-odd years ago with the Surgeon General's first report, which
led to medical warnings on cigarette packages. And then the banning of tobacco
advertising on television and radio. Then suits, legal suits, by flight
attendants on airlines about how chokingly at risk they were being cooped up
all day in those smoke-filled flying coffins. Which led the airlines, this
country's airlines, all of them, to ban smoking anywhere in, above, the
continental United States. This complaint spread to wives, business associates,
factory workers who didn't like smoke. And that spawned a widespread concern
about what was called "passive smoking." Statistics, not frankly immensely
impressive about the numbers of people who had contracted emphysema or lung
cancer from living in the same house, eating in the same restaurant with a
smoker.

Congress held yet more rounds of hearings and scientists were called on both
sides to determine exactly how lethal was this passive smoking, which is not
smoking at all, but being in the vicinity of a whiff of the stuff, which I
remember the late, the very late, King James I, 392 years ago, called: "This
filthy and noxious novelty." On passive smoking, by the way, King James said:
"Shall not the husband be ashamed to reduce thereby his delicate, wholesome and
clean complexioned wife to that extremity that she must also corrupt her sweet
breath or else resolve to live in a perpetual stinking torment." It was a
rhetorical question but it gets a lot of indignant answers today from wives,
fellow workers and, of course, lawyers.

And now evidence for the prosecution without end. A serious scientific study
has just been published which concludes that what makes cigarette smoking at
least as addictive as cocaine or heroin is exactly the same chemical element.
Does Senator Helms recant and bow his head? Not on your life. He doesn't
apologise, he never explains. He recently received some Vietnamese merchants -
he, the lifelong communist hater – to promote a handsome tobacco deal. Now so
far as Britain and the European nations and Canada and Mexico are concerned,
the most significant, some say the most sinister fact to remember about Senator
Helms is that he's the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. It
is a very powerful position. The chairman can stop, and in the person of
Senator Helms, has stopped, the Senate confirming ambassadors that the
president wants to appoint. You know the Constitution says that judges and
ambassadors nominated by the president may take up their appointment only with
the advice and the consent of the Senate.

As late as this year, there were I don't know how many countries which have
lacked an American ambassador since Mr. Clinton's election. Because Senator
Helms didn't like the nominees for one reason or another. So he just never
called hearings of the proper Senate committee.

Now what's his bonnet bee about Cuba? He knows of course the president supports
legislation about discouraging youngsters from smoking. And yet is eager to get
as many votes as possible from the South which once used to be the Democratic
stronghold but which since Eisenhower and Nixon has become the solid Republican
South. Mr. Clinton, most of whose energies and insights are given over these
days to the electoral count in November, has two regional preoccupations. He
knows that if he is going to win, he must take the state with easily the
largest gift of electoral votes, California. So that's why, since he was
elected, he has visited California, I think close to 30 times. The other
anxiety's the South.

There's one state whose inhabitants are, over the long haul of say 70 years,
the one state that is said to be in the South but not of it. And that's
Florida. It could be a mighty help to Mr. Clinton's re-election. Now what is
the prevailing concern of Florida politics? There are two. First, old folks.
Florida, for 60 more years, has been the favourite state to retire to. The
headquarters of the American Association of Retired Persons is in Florida. It
is one of the largest and heavily funded lobbies in the country. It's naturally
against any reduction, any shaving gesture towards Medicare, the gorgeous, for
old folks, system whereby every device of high-tech medicine and low-tech care
is available to anyone over 65. At a very slight cost, Mr. Clinton has taken
care of their vote by declaring that he will never reduce Medicare, unlike the
cruel Republicans, who, in truth, intend to increase the budget for Medicare
but by not quite so much as the Democrats.

The other preoccupation amounting to an obsession is in southern Florida where
most of the Hispanics, the immigrant Latin-Americans, live, and that is to
bring down the Cuban regime of Fidel Castro, the dictator, who, hailed as a
splendid liberal 36 years ago, promised early elections which have never been
held. So just as Europeans play up the remarkable achievements Castro has made
in public education and health and don't mention, shall we say the regime's
disciplinary system, so Americans play down health and education and play up
the banning of dissent, the imprisonment and torture of political opponents and
the rest. And Senator Helms is, of course, a ferocious anti-Castro-ite.

The most politically active of Hispanics of southern Florida are refugees from
Cuba. Or sons and daughters, by now grandchildren, of men who fought against
Castro and escaped to Florida. It's a powerful and very vocal group and it
votes. I'm sure Senator Helms knew that he was giving a helping hand to the
limping Senator Dole when he dreamed up this amazing bill, The Helms-Burton
bill, which would punish all the foreign countries that do business with Cuba
and proposes to forbid entry to the United States of certain companies and
their members that use formerly American property that was confiscated by
Castro. That proposal has outraged Europeans, and Canadians and Mexicans, more
than anything. So what is the president to do?

He once denounced this bill and then signed it, when I suspect the effect on
Florida's Hispanic voters was pointed out. I don't think the president
anticipated the noise of the outcry in Europe. So what to do? How to get the
best of both worlds?

He's decided to postpone enactment of the confiscated property clause for six
months. By which time the election will be over. And if he gets back in, he can
then, I guess, veto the whole bill. However, for journalists looking for real,
deep motives, I wonder if Senator Helms thought up his bill after he heard that
Fidel Castro has given up cigars.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP