The 1996 New Hampshire primary - 2 February 1996

I look out my window to a blue Arctic sky above, a lake, frozen a brilliant
white. It's not a lake but New York's Central Park reservoir. It's edged by a
forest of trees, as bare of foliage as a stack of whisk brooms. I turn indoors
and am looking, on the tube, at a similar scene. An icy lake, fringed with a
forest of bare trees, the camera pans to a man moving a random crowd of men,
women, children, bundled up to the ears with parkas, muffs, woollen caps. The
people are all smiling at the man and as he walks briskly past them, they reach
out to him and he extends to them his left hand, while his right hand is
clenched and held close to his body, a reminder of the Italian campaign in the
Second War, during which, just before its end, this man was almost blown apart.

He survived with a paralysed right arm. He's medium height, clean shaven, a
straight tip-tilted nose, well-balanced features, mischievous brown eyes. Note
the word mischievous. He's well aware of that expression as a personal
characteristic and for the past year or more, ever since he decided to run for
the presidency, he's been watching out for it. It could be his nemesis, his
Achilles' heel.

We're looking at Senator Robert Dole, campaigning as he and the other hopefuls
have been doing for ever in New Hampshire. He's rather scholarly looking, not a
type you'd tend to associate with the Kansas prairie and the rock-ribbed
Republican middle western farmers. He's 72 years old and at another time,
indeed any time before Ronald Reagan, age would have been his biggest
liability, he most likely would never have dreamed of running.

But up there in New Hampshire, what 16 years ago, Ronald Reagan killed for ever
the bogeyman of age. When he was traipsing through the New England snows,
Reagan in the first week of that February had just gone into his 70th year.
Nobody that old had ever run for president. Eisenhower was just that age when
he left the White House after two terms. Why didn't people in the 1980 campaign
bring up Reagan's age against him? Because he was smart enough to bring it up
first.

On his 69th birthday he was up in New Hampshire, the first primary which by the
way is coming up on the 20th of February, and it was governor then. Governor
Reagan's idea to throw himself a little birthday party and let television
publicise it far and wide. He and his aides contrived several little set
speeches and he'd use one or other of them at every crossroads, general store,
petrol station, schoolhouse he stopped at. All the little speeches were
humorous, self-mocking. Give me this one chance to be president, he'd sigh, I
may not be here next time. He would quote Thomas Jefferson or Lincoln and
assure the little crowds that he could vouch personally for the quotations. I
was there at the time. His chief opponent, one George Bush, believed that he
had a comfortable lead in the New Hampshire polls but Reagan took 51 percent of
the vote to Bush's 22 and the old man who quipped about his happy evenings with
Jefferson was on his way to the White House.

I've noticed at the end of many campaigns that just such small human events as
this, Reagan's kidding his own age, robs the opposition of a useful weapon and
can, more than all the statistics and parade of issues, political, social,
economic, can mark a decisive turn in a man's chances.

I still believe, 20 years before Reagan, that Richard Nixon's fate was sealed
in his first go at the presidency when he appeared with Kennedy at the first
television debate. It was the first between them, it was the first in history
and it came out afterwards that Mr Nixon had refused to use make-up, and
everybody remarked on what was then known as a five o'clock shadow and now
might be called designer stubble. Anyway for months after that debate, most
people had forgotten what was the bone of contention in the debate, what stuck
in the memory was Nixon, dour and apparently unshaven up against this young,
handsome man with a face as smooth as a choirboy's and getting off a surprising
amount of information.

You may have wondered before now, why the men who want to be president make up
their minds to run before the New Hampshire primary. Why indeed that primary is
so vital to anyone's chances to stay in the race. Consider New Hampshire as a
barometer of national political opinion, feeling. It's a tiny New England state
of mountains and small winding valleys and an Atlantic coastline. Its first
so-called industry in the books is tourism, followed at a distance by
agriculture, trade and electrical products. It has just over one million people
which makes it 41st of the 50 states. Nighty eight per cent whites, one
Hispanic in every hundred, six blacks in every thousand. Offhand it would be
hard to think of a state less socially typical of anywhere except New Hampshire
and as for population and racial mixture, Vermont, Wyoming maybe.

But how about New Hampshire's vote in the electoral college, which is based on
the number of congressmen and women a state is allowed and that's based on
population. Well New Hampshire comes out almost a cipher. It has two
congressmen against New York's 31, Texas's 30, California's 52. About half the
registered voters vote in the national election, in the primary maybe a
quarter. So what you have here is about 70 thousand people calling the turn of
a national election that will involve say 65 million votes.

Well the answer is brief and maybe sounds stupid. New Hampshire counts because
it's the first of the primaries, the trial runs and in the public's opinion, it
counts because it always has counted. This is what drives everyone with a
presidential ambition to declare himself by the previous Christmas at the
latest, and in the worst of the winter, go up there and day after day, slog
through the snows and as Lyndon Johnson put it, press the flesh. Pressing the
flesh has always been a vital performance in any democratic country. Do you
remember Winston Churchill's melancholy comment on a Tory statesman who hated
to shake hands, yet who lusted long and unsuccessfully to become prime
minister: "Alas, he never conquered but then he never stooped."

But also apart from the ridiculous popular belief that New Hampshire is a
crucial test of national opinion, there are two figures, statistics, that come
looming up in the winter once every four years to haunt all the runners. One is
that in the presidential election itself, in November, New Hampshire has,
without a twist or hesitating turn, always voted for the man who came to be
president. In other words, the instinct of this tiny state, by what baffling
magic, has been correct, in 16 successive presidential elections over 64 years.

The other figure, which is even more telling for the candidates, is that while
a win in the New Hampshire primary does not necessarily mean a win throughout
the country in November, to lose a New Hampshire primary is always, I think,
practically always, the perfect way to lose your party's nomination.

In 1988, Senator Dole was in the thick of primary campaigning in New Hampshire
and looked to many people as if he'd win there. His main opponent was George
Bush. By now everybody I believe has forgotten the political issues they fought
on, what everybody remembers was one short sentence of Senator Dole's. Asked by
a reporter on the eve of the balloting, what did he think should be a priority
for Mr Bush, his opponent, the senator said: "Stop telling lies about me and my
record." To the good-natured crowds who listened, to everybody along the
snowbound way, this was like a jab in the eye.

Afterwards the campaign aide to Senator Dole said, right there, you lost the
primary. And ever since 1988 ordinary voters who haven't bothered to learn much
about Senator Dole, they say almost by rote, but you know, he has a mean
streak. Well maybe he has, I can't think of another remark as bitter as the one
he made about Bush. But what he does have and is watchful, even wary about, is
a witty streak. So that's a liability? You bet. The fact that in a democracy,
most people confuse wit with sarcasm and think ill of it had never crossed my
mind until, on a weekend in Pennsylvania on the retired President Eisenhower's
farm, the great man confided in a memorable moment, that there was one man in
public life he couldn't stand. I could have confidently guessed at a hundred
names and got it wrong. To my astonishment he said: Adlai Stevenson, the
Democrats' candidate against him in 1952 and 56. Stevenson, the genial,
courteous, lovable, roly-poly man who too had a gift of wit and it was for his
wit that Eisenhower disliked, you might almost say distrusted him. "In a word,"
said the General "he was a smart guy." Amazing.

Then I think back to a Senate hearing at which Senator Dole's bewitching wife
was to be confirmed or rejected as a cabinet officer, Secretary of
Transportation. A Democratic senator on the committee turned to Senator Dole
and said: "Senator, don't you recognise here a conflict of interest?" At once
Dole replied, "No conflict, much interest." Too quick, too good, he was warned.
So one of the saddest sights in New Hampshire in the next two weekends will be
Senator Dole facing a question from some dumb reporter, suddenly twinkling with
a spontaneous droll response but swallowing hard and buttoning his lip. Watch
it, senator, rather be president than witty.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP