Hair Force One - 28 May 1993

Oh dear, how I wish that I could talk about some big, impressive topic, worthy
of the world's only superpower, a descriptive phrase, a tag that proud
Americans are learning to rue, because it means that everything that's going
awry, anywhere in the world, has some ambassador scurrying to the White House
and saying, what are you going to do about it?

Well, I hesitated – just in time – to pick some big theme that a professor
might choose because I remembered that time and again, in the history of this
country anyway, what makes or breaks an administration, or rather what causes
the first crack, is only rarely the grand error of policy that historians
fasten on and record in stone. It's rather seemingly trivial episodes, like
Lyndon Johnson pulling his dog up by its ears, leaving a vivid but quite false
impression of cruelty. It's Jimmy Carter addressing the nation in a cardigan,
in the hope of seeming folksy. Long ago, it was Richard Nixon, outfitting the
White House security men in costumes right out of the Prisoner of Zenda. It was
an impressive presidential candidate, the governor of Utah, who went into the
White House to talk to President Johnson about his policy on Vietnam. The man
came out and said, he brainwashed me. That was the end of his presidential
campaign. Who wants a brainwashed president?

And so, if you were to ask me, how come Mr Clinton, who only a couple of months
ago was thought to be doing a fine job by well over 60% of the people, why has
he tobogganed so swiftly down a slippery slope and now finds 46% of Americans
against him, with 44% still holding. I should say it's not some great policy
blunder, not even the backing and filling, mostly backing, on Bosnia. It's
something that sounds like an episode of the Perry Mason series, the case of
the $200 haircut. A simple story. Mr Clinton had been in Los Angeles, on his
countrywide campaign, to sell to the people his budget plan. He's in trouble
with it, not only with the Republicans, but with quite a few of his own party,
Democrats, who helped get him elected. His downright promise is that his plan
will call for one dollar to be saved from spending for every dollar imposed for
taxes. But the congressional accounting office, which is the most non-partisan,
disinterested authority you can find in such matters, says not so. It has
looked over the president's figures and says the ratio is more like for every
dollar cut from spending, just over three dollars will go for new taxes.

Well, Mr Clinton had given his all, speechifying to a sympathetic crowd and
pressing the eager flesh in Los Angeles and then he was on his way home,
sitting in his plane, Air Force One, as the presidential plane is always
called, on the tarmac at Los Angeles airport. Now I'd better say that wherever
the president's plane is to land, the control tower holds all other landings
for half an hour before Air Force One touches down and when the presidential
plane is about to leave, all other plane departures are held back and incoming
planes are stacked till he's airborne. Mr Clinton surely learned about this
rule his first week in office, but inside his plane, purring away on the
tarmac, Mr Clinton decided, or perhaps he'd previously made a date, to have his
hair cut. I'd better say there is an official barber always in residence in the
White House. However, three thousand miles away, the president had a great
disposition come over him to have his wonderful head of steel wool hair
trimmed.

He summoned a barber from Beverly Hills, a very upscale performer, who would
probably wince at being called anything less grand than a hair stylist. His
name, the fatal touch this, is Kristoff. Not Kristoff Columbus or Christopher
Smith, just Kristoff. The president rewarded him with a $200 fee, $50 more than
Kristoff charges a first-time customer. When he was finished, the controllers
could alert the planes that had been circling an the planes on the ground
waiting to take off that their time had come. No doubt the captains apologised
to their passengers, both idling on the ground and whining in circles in the
air. In all, the delays amounted to 45 minutes or more for everybody, which
doesn't sound too long, but aviation fuel, being the most luxurious item
around, and turnaround fees being what they are and salaries figured on time
aloft, all in all, it would be kinder not to calculate the accumulated cost for
a president obsessed with a thrifty budget.

This thumping gaffe was manna from heaven for reporters bored with the
regulation Clinton speech, urging the people once again to back the people's
candidate, Bill Clinton and that struck the sour note. If Ronald Reagan had
spent $200 on a haircut, there's have been a little sniffing and head-shaking
from the Democrats and the press, lamenting the remaining Hollywood strain in
him. But Bill Clinton came to us as a modestly self-advertised boy from
Arkansas, the common man, no Eastern prep school, country club, Yaley like
George Herbert Walker Bush, who by the way, would no more have his hair styled
than he would colour his fingernails. But the good old, or rather good young
boy, who drops into McDonalds in a T-shirt, Reeboks, a baseball cap, worn
indoors even when he helps the ordinary folk on their daily tours of the White
House. And now this state of the art Huckleberry Finn, he holds up the huge
traffic of the nation's third-busiest airport and summons a fancy Hollywood
stylist with one name, to give him a rinse, clip and set for $200.

You could have guessed that the first man in the United States to be televised
in a barber's chair was Ross Perot. He could have had one here, rasped the
Texas sparrow, for $12. It took less than 24 hours for the papers and the telly
to say all this and more. I've noticed that the people's response, reaction, is
a better word, depends a good deal on their party allegiance. Old Democrats
tend to say, it's a trivial matter, silly mistake, not worth going on about.
If, by the way, it had been Nixon, they would have been outraged. Republicans
responded, as you'd guess, with glee and they didn't have time to play up their
mock horror. Next day there was another, bigger airplane gaffe.

Suddenly it was announced the White House had fired an entire staff. The people
who make the travel arrangements for the press, the media, who accompany the
President on every trip, everywhere. Naturally the press wanted to know why
their personal, so to speak, travel agency had been sacked. They'd hardly put
the question before the White House announced that the regular agency had been
replaced with a new one and, just to compound the blunder, the new team was
composed of old Clinton cronies, including a relative, who'd wanted the job
ever since the inauguration, which they helped to stage. This connection was of
course aired at once. Whereupon a blushing White House spokesman hastily
explained the first firing. There was evidence, he said, not only of
incompetence, but quite possibly wrongdoing. So the FBI had been called in by
the White House and was beginning "a criminal investigation".

Here he goes again. The White House, by inviolable custom, if not by rule, does
not ever call in the FBI. If it has any trouble of this sort, the president
calls the attorney general, who is the boss of the FBI and the attorney general
dispatches to its duty the FBI, which is the enforcement arm of the Department
of Justice, which sometimes is busy investigating the White House.The attorney
general was furious. Incidentally, this is as good a place as any, to remind
you that the FBI is not a national police force, there isn't one. It can
operate only when crimes or criminals cross state borders and even then, must
often give precedence to the local or the state police.

Anyway this stumblebum chapter in the White House week has not closed as I
talk. The cronyism charge was true enough to have the president repent almost
immediately, of appointing his old pals. They were fired and five of the old
gang brought back. Stay tuned. Comes midweek and it emerges that last week the
chairman of the Democratic party had faxed invitations all over town offering,
to lobbyists mainly, a weekend retreat with high administration officials,
climaxed by breakfast with the president. Price tag $15,000 for two. This was a
fundraising gimmick and one that campaigner Clinton had condemned as a shabby
practice when the Republicans did it. Result, hurried conversations with the
president and a quick White House statement, breakfast with the President would
not take place, so as "to avoid any appearance of impropriety".

At the end of this horrendous week one new thing struck me. Last year, we were
told by journalists who knew Mr Clinton and by old aides of his, that ideology
and promises aside, he was a superb politician.

What is a good politician? He's a man who knows what he wants, he has a keen
intuition of how much Congress will let him have, he knows when to introduce a
policy, a change and when not, he has a fine sense of timing, he knows when to
compromise and when not, he senses in advance how his public behaviour will
appear next day. All this private cunning, all these qualities were typical of
the best American politician of the past 50, or say post-Roosevelt years –
Lyndon B Johnson. This week the surprising reflection was that Bill Clinton,
apart from his ideals, his ferocious hard work, his sincerity, which have
nothing to do with political skill, he appears as an inept politician. And when
the breakfast and the travel hassle and perhaps Bosnia, are forgotten, I'm
afraid the battered image of the honest Arkansas boy gone Hollywood will
remain. Just for a blow-dried hairdo, he left us, just for a Hollywood rinse,
to show off.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP