Astronaut John Glenn - 28 February 1997

Let’s follow once again the poet WH Auden’s advice after he’d waded through a
raft of obituary tributes. “Let us,” he said, “celebrate instead the vertical
man.”

So let’s think of a former United States marine colonel, a vertical man indeed
who became world famous literally overnight by lying on his back and (by some
miracle) avoided being burned alive in, the experts figured, one second.

Thirty-five years to the day after that appalling experience, which the whole
world followed and dreaded, the hero of it stood in the assembly hall of a
small midwestern college most people have never heard of to announce that
today, at 75, but still taut and straight-backed, he is going to retire after
22 years in the United States Senate.

This ageing hero from Muskingum College, Ohio, was born in 1921, and 20 years
later, once out of college, he immediately became a naval aviation cadet. At
the end of the second war, he found himself out in the Pacific with the marine
aircraft wing in the Marshall Islands campaign. And after the war was over, he
was on the North China aircraft patrol. He fought in Korea as a fighter pilot.

And then, when that was over, he joined NASA, the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration, which to ambitious young aviators in those days held the
romantic appeal the Foreign Legion used to have for me. Well, frankly, not for
me, but for some of my more muscular buddies.

The space programme cast a magical spell even before anybody had gone into
space. And now, after many men and women of several nationalities have worked
in space, spent months living there, even so the one space hero everybody
remembers to this day is that same retiring 75-five year old from Ohio.

The name, of course, is John Glenn. And anyone who wasn’t there 35 years ago
but checks the record of space flight may well wonder at Glenn’s peculiar fame
since the year before him, a Russian, Yuri Gagarin, had been the first human to
orbit the earth in space and four months later another Russian orbited the
earth 17 times. So what’s so special about John Glenn’s three orbits in
February 1962?

First, and most obviously, we only heard about the Russians. We took their
government’s word that it had happened. We saw and heard Glenn throughout the
whole riveting audio, which had whole populations, indoors and out, glued to
television screens in their homes, in railway stations, in public square on
four continents.

Let me try and recover the time and the feel of that unforgettable episode.

The show began with a mock-up of the inside of the capsule with the astronaut’s
head and helmet in the foreground looking at the panels that John Glenn was
controlling. At the base of the panel was a slot for the hours, minutes and
seconds he’d be aloft. The numbers ticked away for the whole four hours and 56
minutes and induced a hypnosis all their own.

Whenever there was a conversation between Glenn and a tracking station
somewhere in Spain, Africa, wherever, or a lump of space jargon came up that
might mystify us, they’d wing us out to a lab in St Louis for instruction
through a specially-constructed model, the core of the capsule.

One of the great things about the coverage, a note that testified to its
honesty, is that it wasn’t slick. Mercury Control played back all its exchanges
with Glenn however stumbling, misunderstood, ragged, and the dialogue was
fairly continuous.

At the end of the first orbit, we heard that trouble of some sort had
developed, and after a seeming age of checking the catechism of cabin and
oxygen pressure and respiration and temperature of the capsule and the rest, it
was an immense relief to hear Glenn cry out, “Boy, oh boy!” at the beauty of
unidentified particles of light that swam past his window like fireflies.

And this was followed by a warming shout of thanks from Glenn to the people of
Perth in Australia for having turned on all the city lights by night and spread
sheets and blankets on rooftops as reflectors.

There was never for long a calm period. We’d all get fired up that he’d done
two orbits and then we’d hear about another warning light showing he was using
his gases too fast, so he had to fire the gases electrically and steer the ship
by hand control. This happened as he was coming over the California coast on
the second orbit and the question was whether to let him go for a third. He
judged; he was in command. OK, they said, so off he went.

But on that orbit to those ranks of men sitting before computers in Houston,
there was worse to come. During the first orbit, a warning light went on that
seemed to signal loosening of the heat shield. Now this is a six foot in
diameter dish fastened to the front end of the mushroom-shaped capsule. And
below the shield was a linen bag that expands like a concertina to cushion the
shock when the capsule hits the water, and below the bag are packages of
rockets that break his speed and fire him out of orbit back into the earth’s
atmosphere.

Binding the package were metal bands which burn away when the rockets are
fired. There remained the plastic shield, which is the astronaut’s barrier
against a fiery death indeed, for the shield is constructed to withstand a
3,000-degree heat which flares up when the capsule rips back into our
atmosphere.

Mercury Control thought through two and a half orbits that the shield had come
loose. They chose not to tell him, but they’d have to when the time came to
fire the rockets. And when it came, they gave an order that he thought strange:
retain the package that holds the rockets – a possible second line of defence
to the vanished or vanishing heat shield. While he was puzzling this, they
ordered the fire.

Now Glenn all this while thought the shield was secure. He thought the switch
just happened to be on the blink. After the order, there was a crackle of
static and the heavy swish of a carrier wave and nothing from Glenn.
Understandable, we learn, because as soon as the capsule enters the ionosphere,
there’s so much ionisation that no radio frequencies can get through anyway.
But there was nothing for two and a half minutes, and then two words came
squawking in, “Friendship 7”. Never did the word "friendship" have a more
blessed sound.

When Glenn was back on earth, we learned he’d had his doubts too. When the
capsule was tearing earthwards, he saw chunks of flame going by his window. He
thought it was the heat shield burning up. It was in fact the rocket package
burning up. He said he became suddenly “super sensitive along my backside.” It
had given him, he mused, a moment of some concern.

The fame that engulfed Glenn after this is difficult to imagine. He joined the
editorial board of an encyclopedia to which I also belonged. The chosen board
consisted of experts on foreign affairs, domestic affairs, economics, sport, so
on. There was Isaac Asimov for science, the Belgian statesman Paul-Henri Spaak
for foreign affairs; a distinguished lot. Glenn was appointed to the new post
of space consultant.

Now once a year, we went to an agreeable resort for four days for an annual
meeting. Glenn’s first year, we were in Bermuda and it was impossible to go
with him anywhere – to lunch, for a walk – without crowds magnetising from
nowhere. We slipped one evening into a nightclub and upset the show and the
diners to such an extent, we had to leave to resounding cheers.

About a year later, he’d gone from the world’s hero to being stopped on the
street by, “Excuse me. Weren’t you John Glenn, the astronaut?”

By then, John Glenn had retired from the marines and the space programme and
became the president of a soft drink company, a move that certainly helped to
put the soft pedal on his fame.

A year or two later, our board’s annual meeting was in France, on the coast
hard by Monte Carlo. And one day my oldest friend in the newspaper game, James
Reston of the New York Times, and I were off to play golf at a crazy course on
top of the mountains: a crumple of hills and wobbling, little valleys that only
a lunatic or a Scot would have laid out. It was in fact done by Scottish
officers waiting to be demobilised in 1919 right after the First World War.

To our surprise, John Glenn, who was not a golfer, asked if he might walk along
with us. Of course. He had an ulterior motive – very odd and (we thought) very
touching. He was thinking of running for Congress and, ambling along the
fairways, wondered how you went about it.

We’d line up a shot, swing, resume the walk and toss out a line or two. “Must
know your hometown union leaders, bankers, the police, construction companies,
get out often and press the flesh.” Then there were insurance people, the
conservation people, the cloth, many cloths – Catholic, Baptist according to
their numbers. All sorts of mad advice. Some shrewd, I’ve forgotten now.
Nothing came of it.

But I don’t know how much later, however in the elections of 1974, a tidal wave
of Democrats swept into both houses in the wake of the Nixon abdication and
John Glenn was suddenly the junior senator from Ohio. He kept getting
re-elected.

He’s been there 22 years on the Foreign Affairs Committe, most notably of
course on the space committee. But, to the administration’s discomfort, he at
first deplored the excessive millions being spent on the space programme. He
said the only good thing to come out of it was the non-stick frying pan. He
changed his mind about that.

Throughout his time, he was a moderate Democrat. In Tom Wolfe’s vivid
semi-novel/semi-documentary about the astronauts, The Right Stuff, Glenn comes
out somewhat puritanical. It was in him nothing but a decent resistance to the
unbuttoned counter-culture of the '60s. He has indeed one or two distinguishing
qualities, which seem to get rarer and rarer in public men: he has been
untouched by scandal and is still with the wife he married 53 years ago.

My old friend James Scotty Reston is gone now, but if he were here, I’m sure
he’d agree with me that in the matter of politics and being a politician, John
Glenn could teach us a thing or two.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY. Letter from America audio
recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas,
RLLP