Personality in politics - 19 November 1993

Some years ago, an American magazine offered its readers an intriguing little
puzzle which, after the first go, it decided never to try again for a simple
reason that tugs at the root of the relationship between a paper and its
readers.

It must enlighten them of course, it may even go so far as to instruct them in
what it takes to be their duty as citizens. But it must never humiliate them.
The magazine published a full page of close-up photographs of a dozen men and
at the bottom of the page it printed a scrambled list of their separate
professions, trades, occupations. You had to match each face with its true
occupation. You turned, so to speak, into your own castling director.

In the, in the long ago, on occasional visits to Hollywood, I like to get in on
the casting of a film, just to watch the casting director shuffling through
eight by ten glossy photographs and saying, "Well, he's plainly OK for a
psychiatrist and this fella should be a gangster's hit man". Often the choices
were so automatic that they didn't take long to fill the entire cast. What I,
Mr Pedantic Fusspot, would from time to time point out with some glee was that
Norman Mailer, say, didn't look like a novelist at all but more like a retired
middleweight boxing champion, which may of course have been his idea all along.
Or looking at the gaunt, sculptured dignity of some actor they'd just cast as
the British ambassador, I'd point out that the British ambassador to the United
States at that point was a jolly, roly-poly bald-head.

I've often thought that the casting director is the most under-rated person in
the whole movie-making business and can, sometimes, decisively change an
actor's role and create a new star. Before that old classic The Thin Man,
William Powell was a rather mangy, boiled-owl type of villain with what we used
to call a cricketer's moustache, nine on one side, eight on the other. And
Myrna Loy, they changed her surname to reinforce her appearance as a slit-eyed
Oriental seductress, even murderous. One time, in a hilarious movie I can't see
too often, she murdered, by just being close by and concentrating, she murdered
13 women. But then some bright, unorthodox casting director thought of William
Powell as a genial, honest detective with a wry sense of humour and a tendency
to mix lethal martinis. Myrna Loy was transformed at a stroke into an adorable
wife, tolerating her waggish mate with a sigh and a wisecrack and hey, we had a
wholly new idea, new to the movies then, of a happy married couple that stayed
happy from beginning to end. Neither of them ever looked back into the shadows
of their murky past.

Well now to the game, if you can reach back so far as to recall my magazine
that printed the faces of 12 men, printed a scrambled bunch of professions,
trades, occupations and asked you to match the face and the occupation. It came
out, when the results were in, that the majority were about 50% wrong. But
since the people with a 50% mark chose quite different answers, it's almost as
if everyone were 100% wrong. At least you could say practically nobody agreed
on anybody. Sort of thing you had in the result was, say, a majority chose a
scruffy, wide-eyed character as an unemployed labourer or a felon and he was,
in life, a Nobel prize-winner in physics. A rather splendid face with a
rock-like jaw and wise eyes was generally dubbed to be a judge or the president
of a national corporation. He was a serial killer. When the competition was all
over and the results published, the editor said, never again. Too many people
were made to look foolish. I suppose many more people felt they'd been tricked
than felt they'd been nudged into the point the magazine was trying to make,
which is that we see in a face what we bring to it.

Now, I believe something very similar goes on with the debating of great
political issues. More than most of us will admit, I think we are unduly
swayed, less by the issues and more by our personal view of the debaters. How
many people do you know whose favourite commentator or politician is an
opponent of their own political views? A great deal comes down to the looks,
the manner, the voice, the way, as the song says, the way you wear your hair.
And sometimes, don't you wish that your party favourite were better looking
proponent of his and your views. Throughout Jimmy Carter's presidency, devout
Democrats prayed that the Lord might touch him with a smidgeon of charm. Loyal
Republicans often had to fight their way through the barbed wire of President
Eisenhower's syntax to believe he was saying what they hoped he was saying, but
Eisenhower had charm and force and on critical issues, they carried the day
over the more literate or reasonable pleas of his opponents.

Well, last week President Clinton did something that provoked a rumble of
groans across the republic. He picked Vice President Al Gore to debate Mr Ross
Perot on the burning issue of the North American Free Trade Agreement, which we
ought to remember was originally President Bush's production and which was
going this week to the House of Representatives for approval or rejection. The
groans were a fair comment on what most people thought was a fatal mistake of
judgement on the president's part. The vice president is likeable, he's very
good-looking in a pasteurised sort of way. He's an earnest advocate on
environmental protection, sometimes at all costs. He is indeed earnest on many
matters. He appears to have no humour at all. He can be very sincere, very
dogged and very boring. His opponent, Mr Perot, I need hardly tell you is a
sassy, mischievous, funny, quick-witted, slippery character, at his best
immensely entertaining in the frontier tradition of Bret Harte, Mark Twain,
Will Rogers.

Many of us thought setting up Mr Gore against Mr Perot violated the
Constitution in subjecting the vice president to cruel and unusual punishment.
Well, we were all wrong. By a national majority of two to one, people in the
polls not only decided that Mr Gore won the debate, but that Mr Perot had
turned mean, bad-tempered and on one crucial issue, proved a liar. Mr Gore
accused him of lobbying the House Ways and Means Committee to see that a
company run by his son got a free trade zone in and around a Texas airport of
the family's construction. The facts are beyond cavil and all Mr Perot could do
was to come over all mean and squinty-eyed, like a bad guy in an old Western
and himself snarl, you lie, you lie. The vice president kept his cool and his
accusation and I believe that right there Mr Perot swung many wobbling votes
over to the NAFTA Clinton side.

I suppose no one will ever know really whether the final vote in the House was
between the president and the unions. The president has maintained all along
that to open America to Mexican buying and Mexico to American exports is the
open door to free trade with many other nations beginning with Latin America
and going on to the Far East. Organised labour, once the most dependable ally
of any Democratic president and on this issue his bitterest opponent, has never
budged from seeing NAFTA in Mr Perot's terms as a thief of American labour, a
shameless sanctuary for American corporations to retreat to from high-paid
American labour to Mexicans slaving a seventh of the northerners' wages.

In the weeks before the vote, few presidents since Lyndon Johnson have gone in
for such a sustained night and day bout of arm-twisting, pleading, begging,
wheeling and dealing. The humblest congressman known to be against the
agreement was telephoned by Mr Clinton and assured that he or she could be one
of the saviours of the republic. Many reluctant votes came at a high price,
side deals had to be cut, promises of emergency protection later on to all
sorts of congressmen and women, whose constituency has a special livelihood,
from beef or textiles, peanut butter, wheat, orange juice, furniture, wine,
beer. The president swore to many laggards and to all Republicans who voted for
him, that he would defend later on, on other issues, if their voters chose to
punish them.

On the other hand, the leaders of the most powerful of all American labour
unions swore that labour would never forget the votes of congressmen and women
who had voted for the agreement. Labour would do its punishing. Right up to the
last moment on Wednesday evening, as the vote was being tallied, the question
remained whether the Congress would be more moved by Mr Perot's dread of a
great job exodus to the south or by the president's warning that to reject the
agreement would leave the United States as the weakest of the big powers in all
future free trade discussions. But a morning-after check of the Congressional
voters' motives revealed that the memory had not faded of Mr Perot being
re-cast in the role of a meanie, nor of Mr Gore's decency and his surprising
revelation of Mr Perot's personal free trade zone in Texas. A California
congressman, totting up the vote and the rather amazing 34 majority for the
president, summed it up – the Perot-Gore debate was the moment the dam burst.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP