The Missouri Abortion Case - 28 April 1989

Any listener to these talks who’s been in the United States during the past
week or two and has now gone home will have no trouble guessing at what this
talk is to be about – about two issues that have divided the country in the
past few years which have lately generated great heat and which only now have
come to the boil.

Of course I’m talking first about the question of whether or not Mr North, the
former marine colonel, ran his own underground foreign policy to aid the
Nicaraguan rebels at a time when Congress had passed a law against all such
military aid.

The other issue erupted the other weekend into a protest march of 300,000
people in Washington, the biggest demonstration anyone could remember. Those
were the marches on behalf of a woman’s right to an abortion, a protest matched
in many states by equally passionate protesters who deny any such right and
argue that abortion is an intolerable form of infanticide.

All the public feeling has been mobilised into one or other of these extreme
positions, though the issue as it now comes before the Supreme Court of the
United States is a little more – a lot more – complex than that. I want to say
at the start that I am not going to talk just now about Colonel North though I
expect that by the time this talk reaches some of you the verdict will be in,
but as I talk now the jury has been out for five days.

At any rate on a matter so serious and one likely to have a warning effect for
a long time to come on the behaviour of presidential advisers it’s too early to
rush into a commentary when we don’t know the history of the jury’s
deliberations, what factors made them lean this way or that.

I don’t know how it is in your country but in the past 40 years or more in this
country there has been no prohibition, the moment a trial is over and the
verdict is in, against talking to the jury and reporting the ups and downs of
its deliberations. This used to be a procedure which automatically earned for a
reporter a citation for contempt of court, but it seems to have vanished.

On the huge burning issue of abortion all the fire of the debate has been
stoked since the winter by both sides in anticipation of the case which finally
came before the Supreme Court this week for the arguments pro and con.

This case, which comes out of the state of Missouri, is only one of at least
five others having to do with abortion which the court will be considering in
the next year or perhaps two.

You could say, roughly, that all of them address the question of a woman’s
right to abortion but that’s a very rough blanket label. Each of these cases
considers abortion under different conditions. At what time of pregnancy? Is it
a voluntary pregnancy? Is it case of rape of incest? Cases in which the
mother’s health is at risk. Is the abortion to be paid for with federal funds
or state funds or city funds, and so on and so forth.

The Missouri case seeks to uphold that state's law restricting the use of
public money – federal, state or city – for abortions and forbidding medical
counselling of women about abortion. It has been challenged by a Missouri
health service as unconstitutional and so it comes before the highest court.

What makes this case so important, so crucial to the battling armies of
Pro-hoice and Pro-Life is that if the court supported Missouri it would be, in
some measure great or small, going back on what everybody regards as the first
great landmark ruling of the court on abortion, the so-called Roe v Wade case
when, for the first time, abortion was upheld as a woman’s right and one which
could be paid for by public – federal, state, city – funds.

Although the Missouri case came to the court this week the ruling on it is not
expected until some time in June. For now I will say that there is one
simplicity, one fundamental question, which is common to all the cases that
will be brought.

It’s the question of when does life begin, or rather when does a foetus turn
into a human being, an organism able to survive outside the womb? In 1973 the
court ruled that this became so through the second trimester of pregnancy, as
early as the 24th week, but no later than the 28th, so that, agreeing with the
main contention of the abortion lobby, it implied that before that time an
abortion was not a method of killing a human.

The Pro-Life or right-to-life lobby holds, on the contrary, that life begins at
the very moment of conception. One of the most eloquent leaders of the Pro-Life
movement refuses to use the word "abortion". She refers to Roe v Wade as a
ruling that decriminalised baby killing.

I’m afraid that the popular conflict, the public demonstrations, the
interminable television debates, are conducted at these extremes and with so
much passion and bad temper on both sides that they never each this central
point on which they could agree to differ, namely the question which is very
differently answered by different nations, different courts, different
religions, the question of does human life begin at conception or later and, if
so, how much later.

Certainly in the current Missouri case the court is going to have to address
this question, however drastically or gently it modifies the 1973 judgment. So
the real time to talk about the case is the time when the court will have
overturned, or not overturned, Roe v Wade, or modified it or bypassed it.

For the time being we can only say that on the large, unsubtle question of
whether a woman has a right to abortion the country in all the polls and
surveys is so deeply split down the middle that whatever the court decides, a
victory for one side or the other will only spur the loser on to a fiercer
crusade.

By the way, I ought finally to add that if the court upheld Missouri the
immediate effect would be to deny federal funds to women seeking an abortion
and this would throw the whole question back to the separate states, so that
you could have a situation with, say, 29 states prohibiting abortion under
certain circumstances or under none or under all, another 10 states allowing it
under certain circumstances, five allowing it under all circumstances, and six
treading water and waiting for a strong case either way to come before the
state courts.

In any event the issue is so aflame, so charged – so over-charged – with
emotion that I’m afraid the prospect in the short run through the summer and
the fall is we’ll be quoting Othello and saying “Chaos is come again”.

There’s a peculiar, a novel, frustration about the publicising of this court
case. So often big inflammable public issues here are seen to burn away in
public through the televising of a Senate or a house committee, through the
investigations which, since Watergate and through the Iran-Contras scandal,
have presented day after day to riveted millions what amounts in form, in
suspense, to a public trial.

The public cannot enjoy this involvement in cases before the Supreme Court. All
we could do this week was to read the transcript of the arguments presented by
the lawyers to the court in Thursday morning’s paper, because the federal
courts prohibit radio or television.

So the best we could see on the evening news was quick watercolour sketches of
the court and the lawyers done by ten artists who were allowed to join the
about 100 reporters covering the hearing.

This prohibition applies to all federal courts. Congress, which prohibited
radio, introduced television at first into the House of Representatives and
then, only three years ago, into the Senate, and fully into congressional
investigation hearings of both houses.

But the Supreme Court’s prohibition which, as I say, applies to all federal
courts goes back to the mid-1930s when Bruno Hauptmann was brought to trial for
the kidnapping of the Lindbergh baby.

The press and the radio went berserk during that trial and staged a bellowing
circus that disgusted the country. The American Bar Association met soon
afterwards and put into its code of judicial conduct a ban on radio in the
courtroom.

By the 1970s the campaign to allow television into courtrooms was hot and heavy
and in 1982 the Bar Association cancelled the prohibition. Accordingly,
television stations and their reporters started to invade the state courts and
the right to telecast court proceedings came before the Supreme Court on the
initiative of a Florida television station. It was allowed. Today 44 of the 50
states allow television.

The effort to intrude into the federal courts has never halted, it still goes
on. There is one national television network which broadcasts almost nothing
but sessions of the house, the Senate and open committee hearings. It would
like to add the United States Supreme Court but five years ago the question
came up before a judicial conference which sets policy and the code of conduct
to be observed in Federal courts. The conference maintained the old ban.

It feared that the fair administration of justice would be prejudiced by
inhibition on the part of the witnesses and histrionics on the part of the
lawyers. So it stands, and to this day the proceedings in any federal court can
be seen only by the press, so it will be in June or whenever during the summer
the Supreme Court hands down its judgment on the Missouri abortion case.

We’ve lately been recording a couple of centenary celebrations – in Hitler’s
case, a general lament. There is another 100th anniversary this week which we
ought not to let go unnoticed.

One hundred years ago this week the wife of a man in Hartford, Connecticut was
taken suddenly and gravely ill. The man, one William Gray, had no telephone. He
ran off to the electrical factory he worked in and asked to use the phone. He
was not allowed. He did get her to the hospital, in a pretty ragged state. His
wife survived, but he had an idea and he came to see it realised.

So let us now praise a not very famous man, Willie Gray, who one hundred years
ago precisely invented the public pay telephone.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP