Atlanta Olympics 1996 - 9 August 1996

Within our time, the Olympic Games have left indelible memories, some splendid,
like the black man Jesse Owens outrunning everybody, to the visible inner rage
of the games' host, Adolf Hitler, some memories horrific – the sudden slaughter
of those Israeli athletes.

What, I wonder, will we have left in our memory banks for the Olympics of 1996?

I've been wincing my way through the American press – and I do mean the
newspapers and magazines – to find a general agreement about the Games. There
is one, and the only thing that's surprising about it, is that it should be
Americans themselves, who are almost to a voice, disgusted by the commercialism
of the scene itself and damningly critical of the television network that
bought it, and has put up billions, literally, to go on covering the summer
games from now through 2008.

If they maintain their monopoly, I can only say I positively relish the thought
that I shall not be here in 2008 unless a very cruel Almighty decides to keep
me lingering on into my hundredth year.

Some years ago in the heyday of John McEnroe when some inspired English
reporter dubbed him "Superbrat" I wrote a sad piece about the transformation of
tennis from a gallant game into a money game. It was written when a famous
woman player objected to a linesman's call – you see how long ago it was,
before we were compelled to say linesperson – she objected, gathered her
collection of racquets and marched off, while the crowd – once known as the
spectators – booed not the player but the chair umpire. The prima donna stayed
away long enough for the umpire and the referee to go begging her to come back,
which she did to the cheers of the audience, which, it struck me then, had come
there partly to see and enjoy such tantrums.

The money by then had grown so big that nobody dared throw McEnroe out of any
game, no matter how atrocious his behaviour, how foul his language. He'd been
at it by then, I believe, eight or nine years, till it took the Australians to
tell him that he'd forfeited a match. I can still recall, with a glow of
Schadenfreude delight in somebody else's pain – I can still recall the look on
McEnroe's face, the blank, eye-bulging disbelief as if some junior officer had
told Napoleon to go to his room until he was sent for.

Well we've all lamented for years now, the commercialism that has overtaken
just about every sport there is. My first awareness that it could ever come
within purchasing distance of golf, came on my first visit to an English golf
tournament thirty years ago in which the course was marked, or blotched, here
and there by big billboards advertising the cigarette made by the tournament
sponsor. A bizarre intrusion, I thought, on a beautiful stretch of landscape.

It's something I'm relieved to say that has never been copied in America. Just
as we've never succumbed to the custom, which must be at least thirty years old
in Europe, of having to watch ten minutes of motion picture advertising when
you go to the cinema. I can't think why the Americans have never taken it up.
Same with advertising posters on buses. New York gave into that about fifty
years after Britain.

I mention particularly those offences which were not committed by Americans
because as a little boy, I picked up the universal prejudice that all forms of
commercialism – the more vulgar the better – came from America. Well now, let
me say, not for myself, but to report the verdict of nine-tenths of the
American press, of the men and women who were sports writers all the time, and
of columnists who took on Atlanta as a special assignment. The first, loudest
complaint was about the appearance of the Centennial Park. The mildest
criticism from a highly old-fashioned paper went like this:

"The Games's five-ring circle which should have dominated the place, was
represented on the floor of the walk-in fountain the children used as a respite
from the heat, while the names displayed on high, were those of the
corporations that had antied up for the purpose. The physical structures were
so undistinguished, one had to conclude that they were meant to be that way, so
as not to compete with the commercial attractions".

That's a comparatively calm, merely regretful note. Most workaday sports
writers were appalled the first time they walked down the so-called
"international boulevard" where one reporter wrote; "You could spend your
pocket money on beer, giros and schlocky souvenirs, make a date with a
stripper, watch bleached blondes in bikini tops chaperoned by tattooed men in
muscle shirts".

This young writer, whom I'd never heard of before, one Erica Goode, captured
what she called "the best and the worst of America" in a running splatter of
prose as good as anything that came out of Atlanta. Quote: "American gymnast
performs. Wild cheers. Ukrainian gymnast performs. Scattered applause. We have
crassness – a 165 foot Coke-bottled shaped tower, media hubris – get that so
and so television camera out of my face". She ends: "To paraphrase Popeye, we
are what we are. Terrorists, we've got 'em. Chrome-plated pickup trucks filled
with cheerleaders, those too. Bad coffee – plenty of it. Commercialism that
threatens to overwhelm any remaining vestige of sportsmanship? Yup. Also a
young couple standing near the shrine of flowers at the site of the bombing.
They'd been there the night it happened. Why did they return? To say we're not
afraid. We have that too, and Michael Johnson".

So the consensus of the press is that Atlanta symbolised the triumph of
commercialism over a sport, a whole raft of sports, beyond anything the
greediest sponsor had ever dared to dream.

There were two single incidents which seemed to say that the so-called "spirit
of the Games" is either a fiction or a genteel relic of a vanished time. The
day the Irish swimmer won her second gold medal, the beaten American girl
called a press conference and dropped the strong hint that no doubt the winner
was on forbidden drugs. Another girl refused to wear the Olympic logo, keeping
her sponsor's togs on. Happily, she was disqualified. A man, a runner, a
nationality I'm afraid too obvious, jumped the starting gun twice and was
disqualified but refused to leave the blocks.

Where were these people trained, brought up? A question that will never be
answered because I believe by the turn of the century, there will have grown up
a generation so used to a 165 foot Coke-bottle tower, they'll miss it if it
isn't there. And if you say you went to the Derby, they'll naturally want to
know whose Derby. In golf today, I have to look at the fine print under the
title, the name of a tournament, to see where it's being played. We used to
watch the Southern Open, the San Diego Open. Now they're likely to be billed as
the Quickie Mint Julep Open and the Tailored Slate Open. The day we arrive at
Augusta to watch the Cadillac Masters, I won't be one of the arrivals.

Of the actual television coverage in this country, you could see barely five
minutes of any continuous sport. One writer clocked in an hour nineteen minutes
of performance and forty-one minutes of chatter. Typical is a couple of games
of the tennis final with Agassi slashing the puzzled Bruguera, and then they
say, he won the second set easily and here he is taking his gold. The
star-spangled banner thumped in, Andre looked up to heaven, he bit his lip, he
slowly closed his eyes, something glinted, rolling down his cheek. Could it be
a tear? The Wall Street Journal reporter thought Agassi was not far enough
along in his acting lessons to make it a tear. He thought it was sweat.

Same with other sports. You never got anything like enough of your favourite
game unless it was gymnastics. Prime time in the evenings seemed to be given
over to every form of them. The New York Times man said: "Throw out
synchronised swimming and rhythmic gymnastics. Any event that needs background
music isn't a sport".

Incidentally, one unpleasant memory I'm afraid will stay with a lot of viewers,
is the nasty reflection we had on the training of very young girls for those
same gymnastics. The serious contenders must start at the age of nine or ten.
Many are shipped from home to a gruelling forty-hour week in a training centre
under coaches about as gentle as Bela Lugosi. Such a one, just before Kerri
Strug was about to do her final vault, heard her – we heard her – complain that
she couldn't feel her leg. The coach grinned: "We gotta go one more time. Shake
it out." She did, injured herself, had to be carried to the podium. This was
hailed in some quarters as an inspiring example of youthful heroism. In others
as a form of child abuse.

The respectable writer I quoted earlier said, after pondering the training
routine of these gymnastic tots: "If these kids were making sneakers in
Honduras under these conditions, we'd be outraged." Well I don't suppose
there's anything we can do about the impressment of nine year old girls into
gymnastics, any more than we can stop parents shoving ten, eleven year old
girls into the money world of tennis, which includes today, along with good,
clean fun, putting adolescents under the spell – to put it tactfully – of
voracious, manly coaches.

But about the presentation of the Games something should be done, and the
rousing word from Sydney, which gets them in 2000, is that some decent house
cleaning will be done. The Sydney Organising Committee has already given a
pledge that the central plaza, square or whatever will be free from any
sponsor's enclave, hospitality tents and the like.

A happy and crucial point is that the new buildings, all the new construction
required for the Games will be financed not by private companies, television
rights and big time sponsors. It will be financed by the New South Wales
Government.

So there'll be no need to put up, or put up with, a 165 foot tower in the shape
of a Coke bottle. One interested dead-pan party said: "We'll be celebrating,
well frankly the Olympic Games".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP