UN economic sanctions - 16 August 1991

I had to dinner the other evening, a very beautiful young woman with, alas, her
husband. I'm sorry, the "alas" I immediately realise was thrown in as a cheap
journalistic trick to catch your attention. Her husband is in fact, a splendid
chap and an entertaining one. They're in their 40s. I call them my favourite
youngsters. She is a remarkable citizen who heads up a society concerned not
with general plans to improve the whole of New York City but to do something
useful, in her own neighbourhood, for people in several sorts of need. And to
do it now. Every day.

She also runs the tenants association in our building, listens with astonishing
serenity to the complaints and grievances of, say, 70-odd tenants, tries to
have their troubles fixed, successfully ran a rent strike, or boycott., and
wound up with the landlord... not exactly eating out of her hand, but willing
and able to renovate everything from a leaky roof and a hiccupping lift to a
rundown entrance lobby. She ran the strike, or boycott, with tenacity, but
without meanness, and when it was over, the standing of this beautiful lady, in
the eyes of the tenants, was somewhere between Florence Nightingale and Mother
Teresa.

Now, apart from her beauty, though it's difficult to think of any of her
qualities apart from her beauty, especially when she's in the room, she's the
last person you'd think of as what we used to call a "cause' person, an
ideologue. I can't guess what her politics may be. If she's a feminist, I'm
sure she's a steady and determined one, but she flaunts none of her beliefs or
principles. She simply seems to act on them with quiet, un-showy success.
Imagine then the shock, the first time you dine at her apartment, of finding
her cooking the beef, the lamb chops, the pot roast, and serving it to her
hungry hubby, but eating none of it herself. She is on principle, a vegetarian.

We fell to talking about the seeming indestructibility of Saddam Hussein and
that led us on to a growing body of opinions which holds that economic
sanctions were not tried long enough, and that the desert war came to inflict
suffering close to famine on thousands of innocent children and invalids. The
coincidence of this talk with this couple, of sitting in a room with a
vegetarian and the leader of a successful boycott, set me to thinking about
boycotts in general and in particular, that's to say about national boycotts in
the form of sanctions, and personal boycotts, in the form of consumers – you
and me – refusing to buy certain products for one humanitarian or political or
ecological reason or another.

Sooner or later in the life of every nation and of every human, to boycott or
not to boycott pricks the conscience. For myself, I only once became acutely
aware of being the object of a boycott, of being made to feel something like a
tyrant, or at least the willing subject of one. It was not long after the
Second War, 1947, I think, when the British were attempting the impossible: to
end their mandate in Palestine, to maintain their ancient friendship with the
Arabs, and somehow fulfil the promise of the Balfour Declaration and give the
Jews the independent state they wanted. Few diplomats entrusted with this
unenviable juggling act could have been less diplomatic, more ruthless in his
dealing with the Jews than the British Foreign Secretary, Mr Ernest Bevin.

At any rate, in New York City which has a fair claim to be considered the
offshore Jewish capital of the world – it has over two million of the six
million Jews in the entire United States – in New York City, Mr Bevin's name
was mud. When I went to dinner with friends, and in New York City most of your
friends are Jewish, I was told I could have any cocktail, except Scotch, a
product of the then detested British.

I noticed at the time but was not dumb enough to mention it, that in homes
where Scotch was absolutely verboten, sherry, a product of the detested
dictator Franco, was readily available, and so, in houses that hadn't thought
it over, was port, product of the detested Salazar. I don't know if this New
York City boycott had a measurable depressive effect on the export of Scotch
whisky. I doubt it. The Second War had compelled Americans well disposed to the
malt, to turn to other forms of firewater, and by 1947 most of them were eager
to get back to the original.

But I do remember that an enterprising American distiller, during the latter
years of the war, leapt to fill in the gap by producing a mainly barley
distillate and calling it on his labels "Scotch-type whisky." This led pretty
soon to a court case, in which, I'm happy to say, my wife's uncle successfully
defended the Scots against these impostors and the courts ruled that there was
no such thing as "Scotch-type" brewed outside Scotland.

Now as for the argument that the United Nations' economic sanctions would have
crippled Saddam Hussein without the need to wage war on him, that's something
we can never be sure of. Like saying that Barry Goldwater would have made a
fine president. Since he never made it to the White House we shall never know.
Sanctions must be as old as trade between nations. We can go back as far as the
Bible to see that the denial of a simple primitive necessity, water, timber,
could be a cause of war. In our time in this century, sanctions became the
League of Nations' first and favourite form of collective punishment. But they
didn't stop Italy going into Ethiopia, or Japan going into Manchuria. In the
United Nations, a general wish to invoke sanctions as a punishment for
aggression has most of the time been paralysed by the veto power which could be
used by the power doing the aggressing.

Looking back on the times that we've seen sanctions imposed against one country
or another, on China, on Cuba, on South Africa, I can't help recalling a bitter
truth first announced, or perhaps I should say publicised, by General Marshall,
when he was the Secretary of State. He was talking about the bane of foreign
aid, but it applies I think equally to sanctions. You can never be sure that
the aid is getting to the people it's intended for or that the sanctions will
not be successfully bypassed. As Marshall put it: "The curse of foreign aid is
trans-shipment." The ship may be loaded, the manifest in order, the destination
plainly marked, but one of several disasters is common. The food, the medical
supplies, arrive but are swiped by, as in Ethiopia, the reigning tyranny. With
sanctions, the forbidden weapons, goods, medicines, whatever, are delivered to
a neutral port, then by prior secret arrangement, re-loaded onto a ship, or
train, or plane, for the country that is officially forbidden them. In the
desert war, there were very persuasive rumours that many forbidden supplies
were getting into Iraq from Jordan.

When we come to the individual, I think of two ways of cushioning the
conscience in these matters. One is contributing to a charity, and the other is
the personal boycott. I must say that much of the time when I'm writing out a
cheque to a favourite charity, I have a misgiving, which once upon a time could
be placated. How much of your contribution goes to the intended victim? The
blind child, the disabled Vietnam veteran, the cancer institute. And how much
to the staff that thinks up the appeals, inhabits the offices, answers the
telephones, prints up the forms, posts the envelopes.

Some 20-odd years ago, a now defunct newspaper, the New York World Telegram,
performed a public service by publishing once a month a long list of the going
charities together with the ratio of expenses to the monies actually turned
over to the victims. And they produced some shocking figures. Some of the most
prominent charities using more than half their contributions to pay, to employ
the staff doing the appeals. That good old paper put several charities,
so-called, out of business. We have no such guide today.

Now, the personal boycott, what, in various quarters, is called "being a
socially responsible consumer." And, more recently, a "politically correct"
consumer. I don't think I know anyone who doesn't have some favourite peeve or
scapegoat. I have women friends who will not wear fur. And so many people for
so long have protested about the lavish use of pesticides in farming and
preservatives in packaged food that this country, like most other Western
countries, has a widespread cottage industry in such things as vegetarian
pâtés, organic jams, and something I haven't yet dared to try, called "non
dairy cheesecake." There are young liberal housewives who won't buy a microwave
oven because of the manufacturers' presumed connection with the nuclear power
industry.

In this matter of seeing that what you eat, wear, read, use, does not palpably
bruise your conscience, there is a man, a champion consumer of almost
unimaginable purity. His name is Todd Putnam, he's 29, he lives in Seattle in
the far western state of Washington, he is the founder editor of a monthly, The
National Boycott News. It is at once a paper of record. Who's not buying what
and why? And a guide to noble consumption. Needless to say he's a vegetarian.
He will not wear either leather or wool, both involve in their preparation, he
believes, cruelty to animals. He scans the papers for hints of poor management
or bad labour deals. And in consequence has changed his bank and his brand of
beer. He likes Chinese food but is, so to speak, in a pickle. The memory of
Tiananmen Square forbids. He also won't use chopsticks or hardwood furniture
because of the heedless and endless erosion of the rainforests. Mr Putnam has a
tough monkish life of it.

But, to me, the real heroes are not heroes but heroines. They're those young
mothers with a concern for ecology – and in this country there are legions of
them – young mothers who have chosen to dispense with those blissfully
dispensable nappies, diapers. And who bite the bullet and grimly return to the
old washables.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP