Colonel North's orders - 12 May 1989

At the end of an American criminal trial it used to be almost a routine for the
judge to thank the jury, say they had rendered a just verdict, discharge them,
and then tell them to speak to no one and go to their homes.

I don’t know when this final injunction was abandoned or fell into disuse but
so long as 40 years ago, at the end of the first trial of Alger Hiss, the state
department officer accused of denying he had passed documents to a Communist
agent, the verdict was no sooner in than I wrote for my paper “now we were down
in the press room where, to the naive astonishment of the softer Europeans,
three or four of the jury were sounding off as freely as a revival meeting.
Since there is apparently no rule against advertising the holy secrets of the
jury room they can be put down in this report”.

Well the custom is evidently long gone and in the case of Oliver North, the
former marine colonel, I must say I’m glad of it, because once that trial
started and it became known that the first qualification of the jury was to
have read nothing, seen nothing, heard nothing about the Iran-Contra scandal
many people expressed disbelief verging on outrage that the only jury thought
fit to serve was one that somehow had remained deaf and blind to a case that
for over two years had rocked this nation and many others.

In much commentary that went on in the papers and on radio and on television
the jury of twelve blacks, nine women and three men, was discreetly presumed to
be incompetent, if only from its declared ignorance. "Civic illiterates" they
were dubbed, civic vegetables. By nightfall of the day the verdict was brought
in, those of us who had said such things were obliged to eat our words.

All but three of the jury were eager to talk about their problems and their
view of the case and the other three did not hold out on principle – they were
just not talkative types. They were quite willing to have the others speak for
the whole 12 and what came out of it was a revelation of a jury that had
sweated away for over 60 hours, not – as we were inclined to guess because they
were baffled and bewildered – but because they did not shirk grappling with the
evidence in each of 363 documents.

They started each session with a prayer. They then discussed the relative force
of the evidence given by witnesses and the evidence recorded in the documents,
the orders from Mr North’s superiors, the innumerable memoranda shuffling
between the higher members of the National Security Council and Mr North, the
reports of meetings with the representatives of several nations, the records of
fund-raising occasions with individuals, the bills and orders for arms to Iran,
the secret bank accounts, the tally of monies promised or sent to the Contras.

As everybody except the jury must have known, the main charge against Mr North
was that he had knowingly helped in selling arms to Iran and diverting some of
the profits to the use of the Contras, the Nicaraguan rebels at a time when any
aid to the Contras was forbidden by act of Congress.

The jury decided early on to discount, for the time being, most of the
testimony of the witnesses other than Mr North as being contradictory,
self-serving, full of hearsay. They then divided the documents between them,
six of them poring over the prosecution documents, the others over the defence
documents.

They soon found that this didn’t work – they were arguing from different texts
and often had nothing in common to agree or disagree about. So they abandoned
that system and chose the more laborious job of rearranging the whole pile of
documents according to each of the 12 counts of the indictment. At the end,
they found Mr North not guilty on the nine counts that involved lying to
Congress and/or to federal agents. The government’s main argument was that Mr
North was consciously breaking the law and acting on his own. The jury soundly
disagreed.

They decided, in effect, that Mr North was not running his own foreign policy,
was not – as the saying went – "a loose cannon" but was a cannon fired on
orders from on high. How high?

It came out in talks with the jury afterwards that they soon developed a
suspicion, hardening into a conviction, that Mr North was, as they put it, a
scapegoat, he wasn’t the boss.

The forewoman said “They put him out in the cold and closed the door on him.” A
young woman who was a civilian clerk with the army put it as succinctly as
anyone, “he was just the low man on the totem pole”.

The jurors did not identify the men on high who called the tune. They had no
need to, the daily testimony was riddled with the names of Mr William Casey,
head of the CIA, now dead who, alive, would most certainly have been in the
dock, for the evidence is overwhelming that he was running the whole exercise
in diverting the arms sale funds to the Contras.

There is Admiral Poindexter who is the next of four other men to come on trial.
He was the one who, in a Machiavellian moment before the Congressional
committee, admitted telling Mr North that he had been chosen as the
"deniability link", a phrase that may go down in the history books along with
Winston Churchill’s "terminological inexactitude".

It means the same thing – to be appointed a deniability link meant that you’d
been picked as the man to lie if any of these goings-on came out. And who was
Admiral Poindexter acting for or did he, as he said, take on the main
responsibility of a policy for which he did not want the president to be
blamed?

Three of the jury were at one stage in favour of quashing all the counts,
declaring Mr North innocent of everything on the ground that it is Mr Reagan,
not Mr North, who ought to have been on trial.

The rest never went so far and in the end the three recanted and settled with
the other nine at finding Mr North guilty on three counts to which Mr North
himself had not pleaded guilty but had confessed to mistakes or stupidity.

The jury called the three charges evidence of guilt. They were that he had
accepted an illegal gratuity of over $13,000 in order – at a time when he felt
conspirators were threatening his family – in order to install a home security
system. He knew this was wrong, he had backdated letters in a clumsy attempt to
cover up the deal.

The second count found him guilty of working up a false chronology of events in
order to deceive the congressional investigators. Thirdly, when the scandal
broke open he began to shred or destroy incriminating documents, an act his
lawyer said showed a natural instinct of anybody running a covert operation.

Certainly, it’s an instinctive procedure for any spy, intelligence agent, when
he suspects that the enemy has picked up the trail but this covert operation
was not directed at a foreign government. It was being done by an American in
violation of a law of Congress and the people who had picked up the culprit’s
trail and were on their way to Mr North’s office were the FBI. So he was found
guilty on these three counts only.

On the other nine – which embody the whole charge of running a foreign policy
in violation of the law – he was found not guilty. That unanimous decision
alone showed a remarkable act of independence on the jury’s part, for in his
final instructions the judge had anticipated the argument that Mr North was
only carrying out the orders of his superiors. Whoever gave the orders, the
judge said, if indeed they had been given, was also breaking the law and Mr
North’s obedience was no excuse. Nevertheless, the jury said not guilty.

This affair, you may groan to be informed, is by no means over. Admiral
Poindexter is coming up for trial. There were documents introduced into this
trial which the congressional investigation never saw and some congressmen want
to know why.

There is, too, the nasty pending question of President Bush’s role when he was
vice president on a trip to Honduras, the chief purpose of which was to offer
that country $70million in aid as an incentive to funnelling some of it to the
Nicaraguan Contras.

But for the time being the man who must take least comfort from the verdict is
Mr Reagan. At least nine of the jury said later that he’s the one who is most
accountable for the Iran-Contra mess.

In a national poll taken after the trial a question was put that was answered
so long ago as the spring of 1987 – do you think Ronald Reagan was more
involved in the Iran-Contra affair than he has said or not? Two years ago 59
Americans in 100 said yes, today, 82 in 100.

Long ago the late, great Mr Justice Holmes said about juries, “In my experience
I have not found juries specially inspired for the discovery of truth. I have
not found them freer from prejudice than an ordinary judge would be”.

But juries, he believed, served a social function which might be considered a
grave defect from the point of view of their theoretical function – that they
will introduce into their verdict a certain amount, a very large amount so far
as I’ve observed, of popular prejudice and thus keep the administration of the
law in accord with the wishes and feelings of the community.

Well, nine jurors out of 12 indicated that they thought the most accountable
higher-up in the Iran-Contra affair was Ronald Reagan and now 82% of the people
feel the same, just about the same proportion – so the North jury, which we
once feared was so ignorant, so unsophisticated, so unrepresentative – can
justly claim that it has kept the administration of the law in accord with the
wishes and feelings of the community.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP