Gorbachev Coup - 23 August 1991

They called the Russian Revolution of 1917, the 10 days that shook the world.
This counter revolution took only 60 hours to shake the world because the whole
world saw every minute of it from the start. In other words, it failed, I think
mainly because of something new that the eight plotters had not taken into
account – satellite broadcasting. If that sounds glib or vague, let us go back
to the beginning and recall not so much how we felt as it went along, but why
we ordinary people by the millions of five continents were able to make their
feelings known.

Monday morning, the pull of a knob and we're on to the source, which for the
next three days will be the ever-present source of the news for the great and
the presidents and the PMs and the tyrants and the not so great in 80-odd
countries. Atlanta, Georgia's 24-hour cable news service, CNN. The first vivid
image in our 60-hour picture show was of six men sitting in a row, I must say
they did look boringly like one of those old group pictures of the Politburo –
grave, grey bulky in in their cardboard Sunday suits. We didn't need to be told
that they were hard-liners. So these were the baddies? Not necessarily so.

Mr Yanayev, who was evidently in charge speaking for the new emergency
government … wasn't he the one for whom Mr Gobachev pleaded with the party, he
wanted him more than anybody for his vice president – the same man. Well, one
of the first things Mr Yanayev said was that, "Soviet policies were unchanged,
profound reforms would continue and in particular the business investments that
foreigners, the West mostly, had made would be honoured. The camera roamed
slowly across the faces of the new men and they turned out to be all good
friends, great allies of Mr Gorbachev.

Even so, these emergency governors turned suspect when Mr Yanayev reverted to
the oldest, the most discredited gag in the Communist Party book of etiquette.
When you arrest somebody or liquidate him you announce that he's ill, so Mr
Gobachev was under medical care, very tired, it would take some time before
he'd recover and be able, possibly, said Mr Yanayev with a grey, poker face,
possibly return to assume his office. Mr Yanyev was noticeably a very nervous
head of state and no wonder, for unlike the newspaper readers of 1917, who a
day late heard from St Petersburg or Moscow only what the revolutionaries
wanted them to read.

We didn't have to stay listening to Mr Yanayev's pompous assertions of general
calm and smallest transition. There all of a sudden, we saw Boris Yeltsin
standing on a tank before an immense crowd already barricading his parliament
building with their modesties just guessed that there were 100, 150,000 of them
all milling around cheering, chatting while the tanks moved closer. This could
have been the first downward step, by which I mean the failure of the junta to
arrest Mr Yeltsin the night before, to move in hundreds of tanks and soldiers
and then announce the coup later.

At any rate, a sign that this rebellion was going to be like no other was the
small fact that while the tanks were rumbling into the city in formation,
private motor cars were going by and on the fringes of the crowd, we saw people
shopping or having shopped on their way home or off to the square to see the
show. This was a new thing in a crowd in a communist country; they were open,
relaxed, not afraid.

Yeltsin's loud declaration that this was an outlaw government, a junta that he
would defy was the cue for the leaders of the Western world to rush to declare
their support of Mr Yeltsin and for the new leaders of the Baltic Republics who
have craved independence to proclaim it. And of course, we saw them all, the
plotters had neglected also to smother CNN, so Mr Bush and Mr Major, Monsieur
Mitterrand, Mrs Thatcher, we saw huge protesting crowds in Leningrad and the
Baltic capitals.

And the next morning, my goodness, even in Prague and Belgrade, if any of the
eight plotters had taken time out to look at television and see and hear the
thunder of condemnation that rattled around the world, they must have guessed
that the game was up. Why had they been so inept, so naive was the question
that began to preoccupy the reporters and experts from all over and so to
engage us. Not only had they not arrested and silenced Yeltsin, TASS, the
government's own paper, had printed his appeal for resistance and the plea of
the patriarch of the Russian Orthodox Church – a figure restored in the new
Soviet Union to his old immense prestige – his plea to the soldiers everywhere
to restrain themselves … which brought up the military experts and reporters
who had been told that the military based near Moscow would be greatly
supplemented by thousands of Muzaks(?) and Asian troops who would have no
compunction about shooting Russians, but the Asian troops never appeared.

What we saw was the advanced guard, about three divisions – they could have
flown in 20 more out of 200. And mostly it seemed from the many close-ups we
saw very green troops. CNN showed them joking, arguing, singing with the troops
and Soviet television came on to say "this was a sign that the people welcomed
the troops just the way the Viennese welcomed Hitler and that they were not
there to assault anybody ridiculous, but to protect the normal traffic of
life". Well, it was an early sign to us that these young troops were the ones
least likely to fire on their fellow countrymen.

Tuesday on the tube was fascinating. CNN spent hours showing scenes and people
around the city all leading to the evening conclusion that things were calm. On
the contrary at least, one of our networks coming to the evening of the
prospect of a brilliant coverage of this dramatic story found that calmness is
hard to dramatise in pictures, so they showed the one tank that was set on
fire, the one army transport that was being bounced and said in a tense
voiceover that things were tense. Before the evening though, there was a rash
of fact and rumour and hoped-for fact. The fact, another junta blunder that
Yeltsin's defiant statement had been sent to all the 16 republics on fax.

The comical rumour of the day, was that now four of the eight conspirators were
ill, but in the end immense relief for all of us. Mr Yeltsin had connected with
Mr Bush and told him "that the military threat was not scotched but waning
rapidly", he also declared that the eight conspirators, or by now loonies in a
Frank Capra movie, would very likely face criminal proceedings. The courage of
Yeltsin, the simple truth that his stand unhesitatingly from the first moment
had broken the coup was now parroted by all the western leaders and by any
other politician who could get in on the tribute in front of a camera.

Shortly after noon on Wednesday, Mr Bush at last talked with Mr Gorbachev who
said "he was now in complete control and on his way back to Moscow".

I must say that Mr Gorbachev's Moscow press conference was an ordeal I doubt
he'd like to suffer again. The new confidence of the crowd defending Yeltsin,
the freedom from fear, had passed over to the press, noticeably to the Soviet
reporters and they found themselves for the first time I suppose in the 70-year
history of the Soviet press, free to ask tough challenging embarrassing
questions. Nobody mentioned that before the coup, Mr Gorbachev's popularity in
the polls throughout the union was between, wait for it, six and 10%, which
might well have given the junta its confidence to strike, but he was asked why
he'd chosen these eight men as allies? He'd made a mistake, he would learn from
it. And what had he to say to the greatly respected Mr Shevardnadze’s
astonishing remark that he hoped Mr Gorbachev was a victim of the plot and not
an instigator. Mr Gorbachev could not respond correctly in the presence of
ladies.

At the end of it, there was little doubt that Mr Gorbachev was a victim, but
also that the coup had been unwittingly encouraged by his ideological backing
and filling, his refusal to quit the Communist Party but hope merely to reform
it from within. And among the body of the party undoubtedly there was the
memory, which my television never recalled of that day last March when Mr
Gobachev ordered 50,000 troops and armoured units into Moscow to try and stop a
public rally for Boris Yeltsin, it failed, a prevision of the August failure.
Mr Yeltsin won't forget that nor will the Muscovites.

The consensus on Thursday seemed to be that the Gorbachev era is over and that,
if he's lucky, he will dwindle into a sort on constitutional monarch. When the
ecstasy is over, the Soviet's foreign debt with still be appalling, inflation
will still be well over 100%. The treaty of union between the republics that is
just going to be signed will still be a recipe for fiscal chaos with the
republics raising the monies and the central government distributing them.
Imagine Middlesex and Yorkshire having to raise the budget for parliament. The
huge ethnic minority problems of the republics will still seethe; Russia still
cannot eat without the Ukraine. Most of all and over that vast land there will
still be too little bread and soap; it seems to me that the possibility of a
civil war is still very real.

But, in the meantime, we have to admit that we have been present at one of the
most momentous episodes in the political history of the world and we must
rejoice that the fearful institution of the KGB and its military, which through
70 years could effectively cower an entire nation was mocked and defeated by
the new found gall, the chutzpah, the nerve, the cheek of the common people of
Moscow, qualities of openness that they were encouraged to feel and express by
nobody but Mr Gorbachev.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP