The Wall Street crash and Crown Prince Humbert - 15 September 1989

I have never had cause to envy... Let me put it this way. I have admired, and
do admire, many practitioners of my trade, but I have never had cause to envy
another journalist. This week I came close to it.

An old friend and I have just emerged from two weeks' absorption with the
United States Open Tennis Championships. I, as an amateur, a fan. He, as a
professional sports writer who spent his whole life, 50 years anyway, since his
university days, as a reporter and an historian, mainly of golf and tennis.

When we get together for dinner, we naturally start with a little small talk
about one or other of the two games we share a passion for. This past week we
speculated about the likely effect on women's tennis of the imminent arrival on
the scene of a bounding tot, the 13-year-old Jennifer Capriati and her
terrifying talent.

My friend tells me that this year she's been busy making mincemeat of the
junior girls tennis players of the world, all the way up to the top girl, or
seed.

All I knew about her was what I learned from her father who appeared in a
television interview, a warm, affable Italian immigrant who was there to assure
us that he's well aware of the fate that can overtake a child prodigy and was
determined not to let it happen to his daughter.

He was going to see that she had a normal life and education and, I assumed,
let her mature properly into womanhood before exposing her to the blazing,
harsh world of competitive tennis. Bully for him, I thought.

However, in the next breath he said, yes, he was going to hold her back until
she reached the age at which young amateurs can legally turn pro – that age is?
She'll be 14 next March. "March", he said, "will be soon enough".

Once my friend and I observed this genial custom of talking first about his
trade, he usually takes another swig of his drink, gives the punctuation of a
cough which indicates we're about to change the subject and then performs a
regular courtesy, which is to drop his expertise and turn to me as the tutor.

How about, he will say, Yasser Arafat and the Occupied Territories. Or, tell me
about the president's drug plan! We then watch the news for half an hour or
more and at the end of it he wonders, and I echo his wonderment, if there has
ever been a time when the news of this country or affecting this country was so
bristling with alarms and incurable problems.

Israel and the Palestinians. Crime, widespread across the nation. Municipal
corruption. Always investigations of campaign money contributed under the
counter by businessmen interested in particular legislation. A scandal in the
colleges – there was a survey out this week which reported that of the students
that get to college on athletic scholarships, only one in five manages to
graduate.

There are bribery trials of state politicians who want to kill investigations
into their own department. And always a Hollywood absurdity, like Zsa Zsa Gabor
going on trial for slapping a policeman and showing up at the courthouse in a
specially-designed creation whose conspicuous feature was elegant prison
stripes.

Well, my friend can briefly deplore or chuckle over these things but he has
more pressing things to think about. Once he's written up his piece about the
tennis championships, he must buckle down to an intense stretch of work,
fitting into his nights and days, the baseball games of the five or six clubs
which now seem to be in the running for the play-offs in the World Series, the
national baseball championship, to which most of October is dedicated.

I, on the other hand, have returned to what we now call "the real world" and
all its attendant woes. You can see now why, for a guilty moment or two, I
envied the cheeriness, the chronic blitheness of my old friend.

But I was yanked out of this melancholy mood by seeing, on one of those
revolving picture-postcard stands at an airport, a postcard. I bought it. It's
a miniature reproduction, which you can read with the aid of a magnifying
glass, a miniature of the front page of a New York newspaper. The newspaper, a
very good one, well and crisply written was the Brooklyn Daily Eagle – long,
alas, defunct.

In the banner slot at the top, it gave the date, New York City, Thursday,
October 24th 1929. The banner headline, printed in bold, black capitals,
something the conservative Brooklyn Eagle rarely did, read "WALL STREET IN
PANIC AS STOCKS CRASH".

It was indeed what has ever since been known as Black Thursday – as distinct
from, you may recall, Black Monday, 19 October 1987. Of course nobody knew then
that that Thursday would become historic or start the economic landslide into
the Great Depression.

Hence, though the Eagle was certainly not playing down the story, it took up
only a single column. The lead sentence was this, "Wall Street was in a panic
today with no one to guide it out. Stocks crashed 10 to 50 points to outrageous
levels". Imagine what sort of an apocalyptic sentence they would have written
if they'd had to report that stocks had dropped 508 points.

But what interested me now, looking at that front page of 60 years ago, was the
news that was written up in the other seven columns. A sub-heading, almost as
prominent as the main headline read, "Attempt made to kill Italy's Crown
Prince. Assassin caught in Brussels mob."

For the record, that was about a shot deflected from Crown Prince Humbert as he
was about to lay a wreath on the tomb of Belgium's Unknown Warrior. That story
rang the length of the left-hand column.

What else? Well, next to it, "Carnegie charge of paid athletes rouses
colleges". The Carnegie Foundation, it seems, had done an investigation into
the growing practice among colleges and universities of shopping among high
schools for good athletes and then luring them with athletic scholarships.
Never mind their intellectual ability, if any.

The foundation said the practice was rife. Columbia University and New York
University hotly – it's always "hotly" – denied the practice and said that
their sports were clean as a hound's tooth. Columbia admitted that four men on
the varsity team had athletic scholarships, but their marks were up to scratch.
Other athletic scholars had forfeited their scholarships when they failed in
their studies.

The president of a small college in Pennsylvania said, "All colleges do it.
They have to." , the implication being that the varsity football team would be
in a sorry way if it had to depend on good students who could also play good
football.

Well, well! I didn't know that the practice was so time-honoured. Today, the
report I mentioned, stunningly confirms the suspicion that a first-rate college
football team has to depend, in most places, on four intellectual morons out of
five students.

The next column, in quite small capitals, reports, "Hoover's train halted by
auto placed on rails". That Hoover was none other than President Herbert Hoover
and this was, at first glance, an attempt to wreck the train he was travelling
on in Indiana. He was the same president who very soon would have to confront
the wreckage of the American economy.

But later two Negroes were arrested who confessed that they had put the motor
car on the line in a plot to collect damages for its destruction. They weren't
very good plotters. They were soon traced from the licence plates which they
had neglected to remove.

And whose is the picture on the front page captioned "Joseph R Grundy". Well,
he was a manufacturer who appeared before the Senate lobby committee (no such
single body exists today), to admit he had raised in 1924 $700,000 for
President Coolidge's presidential campaign and that most of it came from people
interested in seeking from Congress higher tariffs.

Cheek by jowl with the picture of Mr Grundy is a piece about the bribery trial
of a former New York state banking superintendent. The highlight of the day's
testimony, it says here, was provided by Miss Margaret Kennedy, a pretty state
bank examiner with flashing eyes and a musical voice. And she testified that
her former boss had asked her to prepare, quietly, a passport application for
him. Governor Franklin Roosevelt had ordered an inquiry into the looting of a
city trust. The former boss of the lady with the flashing eyes was about to
skip the country. I'm afraid that my miniature doesn't extend to the inside
pages, so we'll never know if he made it.

There's a small item at the bottom of the same column which now has a quaint
historical interest. Two men were arrested in Brooklyn 24 hours after they had
opened a speakeasy, an alleged speakeasy, in full view of the office of the
prohibition enforcement agency.

Now this, I should remind you, was at a time when most respectable families who
were not teetotallers had their own perambulating bootlegger and when liquor
was confidently served in restaurants and bars that had paid protection, either
to shippers, ie bootleggers shake-down men, or, in many cities, to the cops
themselves. Evident that the two Brooklyn boys had been derelict in their
payments.

An even smaller item, one sentence long, was filed from Jerusalem. "10 Arabs
were sent to life imprisonment today by the courts at Haifa for participating
in the recent disorders at Safed in which many Jews were killed".

And, finally, to match, if not outstrip, the Zsa Zsa Gabor item, Mae Murray, a
film star of dazzling fame in the 1920s had appeared at a motion picture
theatre in New York to boost her coming movie. She slipped and hurt a bone in
her foot. She was suing the Fox Theatre Corporation and its theatre circuit for
injuring also, she said, her earning powers. She wanted $250,000.

What do the French say about the more things change...?

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP