The Christian right in politics - 7 April 1995

Somewhere in the ludicrous, funny works of the late and much lamented Stephen
Potter, is a section on how to maintain your dignity, when you get caught up in
a discussion with experts on a topic which you know absolutely nothing about.

He found himself, he says, in Italy in a northern city, I think possibly Milan,
and he's having a very pleasant, not to say absorbing time, with two or three
distinguished Italians, one of whom is a priest.

The talk is about some tricky but widespread problem of Italian church
politics. Potter, so far, has said nothing, which is fair enough since he knows
nothing. But hearing the priest say: "And it's true throughout the entire
country," he looks up modestly and says, more as a question than a statement,
"But not, I think, in the south." The priest says, "You're absolutely right!"
and the company from then on is greatly impressed by this quiet, but evidently
perceptive Englishman. And Potter recommends that if you find yourself in a
similarly embarrassing condition of ignorance, remember the phrase and work it
in at some point, but not I think, in the south. It reminded me this week, of a
line of argument, a bogeyman rather, that haunts all discussion of life in
America and that I've tended to brush off as a sort of daily household
nuisance, a hovering wasp, but is seized on as a sign of shrewdness by people
who are only very hazy about American politics.

It's that line about the political power in American society of the extreme
Christian right, and how its power is so far-ranging, that two recent
presidents, Reagan and Bush, didn't dare to fight its beliefs. Well I think
President Reagan could have fought or ignored practically any sect or faction
in America and won, though perhaps they have a point in what you might call the
jibbing of President Bush before the extreme Christian Right. What do we mean
by it? We mean usually the evangelical Protestant Christians, mainly in the
South – quite right, mainly in the South – who play a frankly open part in
politics, find their best allies among conservative Republicans, annoy great
numbers of Americans and outrage more, by constantly saying that this is or
ought to be a Christian nation.

This is a most peculiar assertion for any American to maintain. It's an
elementary, if tremendous truth, that once the American nation was invented,
for the first time in the history of Christendom since the Reformation, you had
a croup of civil states, set up to have no state religion. Right there in the
Bill of Rights is a prohibition unthinkable in the Europe they'd left, where,
because there was always a state church, church membership was a matter of
course, maybe a belief, just really almost an automatic part of citizenship.
But the American Constitution, whose 18th century language makes it read today
as such a stately and polite document, is full of revolutionary ideas and few
so revolutionary as that commandment laid down in the fist 10 words of the Bill
of Rights: Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion.

If you were to challenge all the people who resent or fear the power of the
Christian evangelicals and ask them, what does that power reside in, I think
the answer would be their campaign against abortion. Now as you know, the
Supreme Court upheld the general right of a woman to have an abortion, tempered
here and there by all sorts of qualifications, but it is a constitutional
right, established in the famous case of Roe versus Wade 21 years ago. The
debate, the war rather, between the pros and cons, the so-called pro-choicers
and the so-called right-to-lifers, had been intensifying for a decade or more
and most Americans believed that once the Supreme Court had spoken, it would be
settled as the law – no more friction and public brawling. Not so. It has
become worse and worse and I don't suppose there's an abortion clinic in the
United States whose doctors and nurses don't go every day in fear of their
lives. There have been so many, and so many widespread incidents of physical
attacks, bombings and actual murder of physicians.

The militancy of the extreme Christian right, the evangelicals, in the matter
of abortion is what keeps them, more than anything, so glaringly in the public
eye. But the preaching storming evangelicals are nothing new, they're one of
the oldest American stories from the 18th century on. Early this century they
were far more powerful politically than any third party before or since. The
most influential newspaperman of his time, Baltimore's H. L. Mencken, called
the whole evangelical South the Bible Belt and wrote devastating denunciations
of its primitivism and bigotry.

They, the Baptists mainly, represented a powerful political force, especially
when allied with the Ku Klux Klan against all Jews and negroes, as we then
said, and Catholics. The Klan was started immediately after the Civil War as a
pathetic, but powerful, attempt to reassert the social prestige of the ordinary
white Protestant citizens of the South against the radicals from the North
who'd come down, when the war was over, and organised new state governments,
including – which is forgotten and untaught today – one of two Southern
legislators, entirely nominated by newly-enfranchised negroes. The K.K.K. began
therefore as a protest army against the blacks. 50 years later, in 1920, two
early publicity agents, a man and a woman, decided to revive the Klan as a
national group for, and I quote, "native white Protestant supremacy." The early
1920s were a very morally shabby time for the United States. A revulsion
against the First War and the emergence of the Soviet Union, panicked the
country into an era of extreme conservatism and a Red scare, the like of which
has never been matched. Thousand, hundreds of thousands of people were arrested
and gaoled on the slimmest evidence of radicalism, under the goad of a dreadful
attorney general, who had the blessing of his President, Woodrow Wilson.

The Klan expanded across the whole continent, and crosses were burned outside
the houses and offices of negroes, Jews, Catholics, Communists, liberals,
anyone who taught Darwin's theory of evolution. There was in Tennessee, the
trial of a schoolteacher who taught evolution. He was found guilty. The Klan
was so gross and public with its floggings and burnings and shrill propaganda
that it eventually overreached itself. Newspapermen and congressional
committees woke up and horrified the nation with reports of its dreadful goings
on. But before it drastically declined, the Klan and the evangelical preachers
of the Bible Belt had together launched America on an era of extreme, almost
primitive, conservatism which did not end until the Wall Street crash, until
the Great Depression made the country do the swiftest 180 degree political turn
in American history.

Throughout the bleak 1930s, the Bible Belt fumed and thundered as ever but had
no longer much effect on the voting habits of the many. Hunger and poverty did
not encourage philosophical cures, Desperate people and that meant about a
quarter of the population, clutched instead at various quick remedies, offered
by a variety of eloquent quacks, among whom the most political powerful was an
Irish priest in Detroit. Father Coughlin, who had a weekly radio sermon,
started in 1926 and 10 years later he had 30 million people listening to him.
His message – which was not even a caricature of his faith – was the powerfully
negative one of hate and bigotry, devoted to the scary proposition that America
was run by Jews, and that in league with godless Bolshevism, they would deliver
the United States into the hands of the tyrant of Moscow. Father Coughlin
seemed, for a time, as much of a threat to Roosevelt as say, Ross Perot seemed
to George Bush, but in the result, all the evangelicals and the Coughlin bigots
and the Louisiana and California quick fixers scared up no more than about five
million votes. Roosevelt, in 1936, took 27 millions and won every state except
two.

So what I'm saying is that the political power today of the preachers of the
Bible Belt, the Reverend Pat Robertson and the Christian right is, I believe,
greatly exaggerated, chiefly because of their threat to oppose the candidacy of
any politician who is in favour of voluntary abortion. The power to bring
candidates down on that issue alone, undoubtedly exists, but all the Baptists
and other evangelical sects throughout the South and South-west put together
amount to about 16 millions, whereas just about one American in four is a Roman
Catholic. 60 million Catholics in 260 million people.

And though in some things a large proportion of American Catholics defy the
Vatican's ruling – in birth control for instance – Catholics are overwhelmingly
against abortion, and this past week the voice they most fear, or respect,
spoke out in the most profound and explicit encyclical of his priesthood. The
Pope listed certain practices: abortion, mercy killing of the aged or infirm,
the use of human embryos for medical research and capital punishment. Abortion
is at the head of the list, which symbolise what he calls the culture of death.
I think this powerful document alone will guarantee that in this country the
public battle between pro-choicers and right-to-lifers will go on and on, and
if there is one faction, institution, likely to do continuing damage to the
Democratic party, it is not the extreme Christian right, as we define it today,
not the protestant Bible Belt, but the votes of very many of those 60 million
American Catholics.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP