40th anniversary of the United Nations - 20 September 1985

I caught myself just in time. I was going to begin, without explanation, with a
phrase which was a steady favourite of Mr Gromyko in his nearly 40 years of
speech-making before the United Nations.

It may well be a Russian idiom to which we have no counterpart. The phrase is
this, “As is well known...”. It always preceded a downright statement which was
meant to be taken as a statement of fact but was actually an outrageous
statement of non-fact.

For instance, using the same technique I could say “As is well known, Adolf
Hitler was a British spy.” I shall vary this opening and say, "As is well
known, the most populous and famous of the five boroughs that compose New York
City is Manhattan and Manhattan is an island". The only difference here is that
it’s true. I mentioned it in case anyone listening anywhere is unaware of
Manhattan Island.

Well, the lengthy island is bordered by two highways, one running alongside the
Hudson River on the west and on the east side, a highway officially called
Franklin D Roosevelt Drive but known to all inhabitants as the East River
Drive.

If you enter the city from the north and have business on the east side you
inevitably take the East River Drive to the exit nearest your business. Down in
the lower forties and fronting on the East River are the buildings of the
United Nations. About three weeks ago a big sign went up arching the highway
somewhere up around 100th Street. It said “All commercial vehicles, including
vans, are prohibited south of the 96th street exit.”

The explanation given by cab drivers was that the city was trying to work on a
stretch of highway that’s showing signs of wear and tear or bursting in the
heat and cracking in the cold since it’s been there for nearly 50 years.
However in following that driveway down to 42nd Street, I have seen no
construction crews at work.

This week another, more plausible, reason emerged and the word "van" is a clue
to it. In New York City there is a local definition. A van is a small truck
with no windows on the side and that is cause for arrest in a van driver who,
going north say out of the city, stays on the East River Drive as it turns into
the Grand Central Parkway.

Now a parkway is a motorway on which commercial vehicles are not allowed, as
distinct from an expressway or a freeway on which every sort of vehicle can
run. Well, the sudden prohibition of vans along the main stretch of the East
River Drive is a sinister reminder that a van with no side windows might
enclose more things than furniture or horses, as witness the van that drove
through the United States marine compound in Lebanon.

In short, it seems most likely that the van ban was decided on because this
week the United Nations opens its doors to the representatives of its 159
member nations. The underground entrance to the United Nations garage is
immediately off the East River Drive and the policing of that garage and all
its entrances and exits was this week only the most conspicuous act in a
security exercise the like of which New York City’s police have never before
attempted.

The United Nations, having more or less ignored the 40th anniversary of the
opening of the founding conference in April 1945 in San Francisco and the June
signing of the charter there is making up for it by an elaborate commemoration
of its 40th birthday in the annual convening of the General Assembly.

It opened on Tuesday and during the general debate of the next three weeks
close to 100 heads of government are expected to appear and speechify,
including those heads of government who are also heads of state like King
Hussein or, for that matter, President Reagan.

Well, back to the East River and the tremendous to-do that is being made of the
40th General Assembly. With, as I say, nearly 100 heads of state and/or
government coming here, including such characters as Colonel Gaddafi and Fidel
Castro and Prince Sihanouk of Cambodia, the security precautions are inflicting
a thundering headache on the New York police.

There are certainly a score or more, perhaps as many as 50 heads of government,
who while being routinely controversial at home in the sense that they face an
opposition party in daily debate are actually, once they appear in New York,
controversial in the sense that some group, some ethnic or national society, is
going to feel compelled to march the streets and protest their presence.

Since New York contains – and contain is now a police problem – contains well
over 100 different ethnic groups there is always somebody, some small dedicated
army, ready at an hour’s notice to heckle and chant and, if sufficiently
aroused, to throw things.

Mrs Thatcher, for example, has her critics but I don’t imagine she needs
iron-clad protection on the streets of London, but I’m sure she’s quite used to
it by now. The day she appears here to make her speech before the United
Nations there is bound to be a boisterous Irish contingent out on the sidewalk
across the street from the United Nations enclosure. I say “across the street”
because the sidewalk that edges the United Nations is part of the UN’s 16 acres
that constitute an international zone.

Across the street and step on to the opposite sidewalk and you are immediately
in New York City again and peaceful demonstration – peaceable assembly is what
the American Constitution calls it – peaceable assembly is a right guaranteed
to all citizens.

Well, on Tuesday, the opening day of the assembly, 26 separate protesting
groups were marching and shouting and carrying banners for such obvious causes
as more sanctions against South Africa, down with Castro, right-to-lifers, pro-
and anti- the Sandinistas, pro-Arabs, anti-Arabs, advocates of the release of
Russian dissidents and it would not be safe to bet against the appearance
sometime of New Zealanders heckling the French and an Argentine posse
protesting British sovereignty over the Falklands.

On the first day the police thought that a mere 26 protesting groups were
easily handlable. There will certainly be groups protesting the United States’
decision to reduce its contribution to the United Nations budget down to 20% of
the whole, as also groups who would like the United Nations to fall and sink in
the East River.

Forty years ago, 50 nations gathered in San Francisco and set up as the UN’s
main punitive body, the body able to take action, a security council with five
permanent members – the United States, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom,
France and China. Since then, the China that was thought of as one of the five
great powers of the earth is now the embattled Republic of Taiwan. It was
expelled by the assembly in 1971 in favour of Communist China.

There are now 159 nations and 15 of them are members of the security council
and they have, some time or other, signed the charter which means that they
signed a crucial article, Article 43, which alone gave the United Nations not
only the authority but a power that would be stronger than any combination of
powerful members.

Now this had not been done by the League of Nations and way back there in 1945
we were all very gung-ho about the prospects of the UN as an actual
international force guarding the peace. What did Article 43 say and what
happened to it? It said that member nations, all member nations, would
undertake to make available to the security council on its call, and in
accordance with a special agreement and agreements, armed forces, assistance
and facilities including rites of passage necessary for the purpose of
maintaining international peace and security.

The UN was not setting up its own standing army, navy, air force, but under
article 43 it would have them on immediate call. The UN could say we want so
many air squadrons from you, infantry from you, battleships from you, all the
weapons we need etc etc.

Even before the UN was set up a preparatory commission was working on the sort
of quotas of men and arms that could be expected from the big and little nation
members. Splendid. At last, an international organisation had moved to create a
force that could exert the authority it claimed and there was one practical
down-to-earth phrase at the end of Article 43. It said, and it was written and
signed by all the 1945 members, these agreements were to be negotiated as soon
as possible.

Well, those agreements have never been negotiated in 40 years. The UN has, of
course, many times requested contributions of men and materiel to form standby
or emergency United Nations peacekeeping forces, but it has not and never has
had that great over-riding army on call, so not since 1950 and Korea has it
been able to order punitive action.

The Russians happened not to be in New York then and so could not veto a
decision of the security council. They have never been away since. In the
beginning we of the west thought the United Nations was going splendidly
because the United States, the UK, France could count on our satellites,
western Europe, Scandinavia, all of Central and South America to vote our way.
The Russians thought this was awful and slapped their veto on council
resolutions with almost automatic monotony.

Today about two-thirds of the nations vote more or less automatically against
us and with the Soviet Union. So we in our turn have come to save face or
positive action by slapping down our veto, and so the United Nations remains
the only sounding board for every nation’s propaganda.

As an actually superior international peace force it was strangled in its
cradle the day the first 50 members chose not to negotiate an arms agreement,
not as soon as possible, not in 40 years.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP