Jimmy Carter is nominated for re-election - 15 August 1980

Looking back over many odd and rousing scenes in the White House, I think of
one now which has a fascinating relevance to the Democratic convention.

It was around Christmas time, 1941. The Japanese had dealt their devastating
blow at Pearl Harbor, and crippled the American Pacific fleet. The United
States was now in the war, and Mr Churchill flew secretly to Washington.

He and Roosevelt now ranged over the new half of the world that had been added
to Europe and Africa and the Mediterranean as a battleground. And when they had
done this, Roosevelt thought it a good idea that they should each, in his own
way, give a radio account to their own peoples of the majestic task that lay
ahead.

They agreed that Mr Churchill should be allowed time to get home, assemble his
thoughts and his prose and on the same evening, each of them would make his
fireside speech, one following the other. Both speeches would be heard in both
countries.

They agreed on a date, Roosevelt was generous: he could afford to be, Churchill
had ahead of him a weary flight, with refuelling stops, on a bomber which in
those days, took most of a day. He would then have to collect his speech
writers.

Let’s say, said Roosevelt, two nights from now. Agreed. They shook hands.
Churchill growled out some memorable quotation, probably from Churchill, and he
zipped himself into his siren suit and was off. Roosevelt lost no time rounding
up several advisors and three speech writers, of whom one was the lanky and
lugubrious playwright, Robert Sherwood.

All the time that Churchill was over the Atlantic, at one stage perkily taking
the controls to the terror of the crew, Roosevelt was looking over drafts of a
speech that plainly must be the best he can do. After all, he was up against
the champ.

It came out, later, that Churchill too was not idle. He was probably the only
orator who could fly a bomber and compose a speech at the same time. Anyway,
two days went by, and on the night of the evening of the joint broadcast,
Roosevelt was sitting in the White House with Sherwood and the others, blotting
an idiom here, improving an adjective there; he was almost ready with the
final, the stupendous draft. He would go on the air later that evening and all
the radio networks had cleared the time.

Then the telephone rang. To the horror of the Roosevelt team, the president of
one of the networks said that they had been asked from London to clear the
airwaves for Mr Churchill in an hour’s time. There was no way to stop it. An
hour later, Roosevelt sat there, assembling the almost-perfect draft of his
wonderful speech when a voice came on, announcing the prime minister.

Churchill began, he went on, he ended, after an incomparable, a God-like survey
of the globe, its fighting fronts, the problems that had to be met, the victory
that must come. When it was over, Roosevelt, knowing in his bones that America
was humming with admiration, blew out a long, slow, stream of smoke. He looked
wearily at his speech writers. "What happened?" he said. "Mr President," said
Sherwood, more melancholy than ever, "he rolls his own."

I thought of this the other night when we saw on the floor of the Democratic
convention young Kennedyites jumping like grasshoppers, old men pounding their
palms, a black woman with the tears rolling down her cheeks crying "Fantastic,
wonderful, he’s the best".

Senator Edward Kennedy had delivered what everybody agrees is the campaign
speech of the year. Sceptical reporters, old ones, who long ago had their fill
of bloodshot orators alternated between calling it galvanising, brilliant, the
best since his brother's famous inaugural speech.

In the quiet dawn, after that heady night, a bulky question comes to mind –
does he roll his own? Not likely. Senator Kennedy has always been at his best
presiding over a Senate committee hearing, when he has at his wrist a sheaf of
memos and questions, composed by his senatorial staff and whereas some senators
get along with a dozen or so fully-paid helpers, Senator Kennedy can afford to
have over 100 on everything from foreign policy to the financing of New York
City's underground system.

But when he is on his own he has always been tentative, inarticulate, his
response punctuated with many ers and ahs .. and on the stump, with no text, he
has been even less impressive. He has adopted a style that has puzzled the
generation which claims him as his own, the rolling, ominous tune, of an
old-time evangelist, of God's angry man.

But his language has been clumsy. It never worked until the other night and we
are bound to ask why. The answer, I think, lies in the very noble, very vague
prose of the speech and its characteristic cadences, characteristic of whom?
Listen... "I am a part of all that I have met. For me, a few hours ago this
campaign came to an end. For all those whose cares have been our concern, the
work goes on, the cause endures, the hope still lives and the dream shall never
die..."

Does this remind you of something? It reminds me of his brother when he stood
before the Capitol on that brilliant icy day of January 1961, and ended,
"...let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay
any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any
foe, to assure the survival and the success of liberty."

The nation was galvanised by that too. But not galvanised in the long run into
keeping those promises. Americans, it soon appeared, were not in fact, prepared
to pay any price – say, a million dead. Meet any hardship? We didn’t even
forego our automobiles. To jump to the defence of 43 friends, whose survival
was guaranteed in 43 treaty commitments? One hard-pressed friend was enough,
Vietnam.

America was sorely pressed and it did meet some hardships and took on ghastly
burdens, but when it didn’t work the nation rebelled, and concluded that
Vietnam was either a thundering mistake or a moral disaster. Vietnam, I am
afraid, was the price we paid for John Kennedy’s noble inaugural.

Well both that famous speech and the brother's speech the other night carry
echoes of Alfred, Lord Tennyson. The note that sustains their rhetoric is that
of a hero vowing never to submit or yield. The John Kennedy speech for which we
paid so galling a price, was written by Ted Sorensen, a name forgotten by most
of us but not by the Kennedy family.

It should be no surprise to learn then that he also wrote, I am pretty sure he
did, Edward Kennedy's rousing speech. Both speeches sound like an heroic call
to battle, while your back is against the wall. I believe, rather, that they
are a brave but sentimental response to the strangling complexities of the
world around us. They express a yearning for resounding simplicities, to heal
the sick, to tend the poor, to deem the dispossessed. On a second reading, away
from the fire and plunging cadences of the delivery, they sound, to me at any
rate, resoundingly hollow.

Now the other question that troubled old timers was the puzzle of guessing how
this evangelical tone which Kennedy had used so badly should have worked so
well on Wednesday night. I think because, for once, the substance matched the
delivery.

After hearing from plain Mr Carter for so long, how hideously complicated and
how grim and grey and tangled our problems are, the Democrats, distraught and
divided, were ready to throw in the congressional reports and the statistics
and dive into a bath of pure rhetoric.

When life for a politician comes to seem like a revolt in the civil service,
why not indulge one hour of good old-fashioned rhetoric and come out for Mother
and Santa Claus. Long ago, in a similar depressing time, a young man who made
his home on the Platte River in Nebraska, came forward to a Democratic
convention, his name was William Jennings Bryan.

He was not, by a long chalk, the automatic nominee. He had a bee in his bonnet
about silver, about the need, as he saw it, for a second currency. The gold
standard, he truly believed, was a devilish monopoly of Wall Street. And he
spoke for the farmers of the prairie who hated Wall Street. If money is short,
abolish the single gold standard, and allow the free coinage of silver.

He appeared before the convention. He had a voice like ringing brass, it soared
and boomed and reverberated. He ended a thrilling speech, with these sentences,
"You shall not press down upon the brow of labour this crown of thorns. You
shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold." He, too, had a 40-minute
ovation, Bryan's speech took the nomination in fact, and the nation's heart,
but it did not take the votes.

Four years later, the boy orator of the Platte was nominated again and again he
lost. Four more years went by and the Democrats turned to a less inflamed
politician, and lost. So, 12 years after his first candidacy, the Democrats
nominated him again. Again, he lost. He died an embittered old man, swatting a
fly and having a fatal stroke. By then, young actors and elocutionists, were
going round the country, reciting the cross of gold speech. Years from now,
when Ted Kennedy is dead and gone, actors may well give solo performances of
his Madison Square Garden’s speech.

Actors, like writers, love word men, and assume they would make the best
presidents. The word man they will be commemorating, will not, however, be Ted
Sorensen, but his mouthpiece, Ted Kennedy. In the fine flush of Kennedy’s
speech, and the following lead balloon of Carter's, it’s not difficult to
predict that what Ted Kennedy was doing was making his first campaign speech
for 1984.

But, in our present euphoria it’s not easy to say whether Kennedy is truly
dedicated to reviving the discredited, all-powerful, all-providing central
government, of Roosevelt’s liberals, or whether simply, hounded by that voice
from beyond the grave – the founding father Joe Kennedy – he simply has a
compulsive drive to be president.

All I would say for now is that on his feet, and before a hundred audiences,
the boy orator from the Charles River will be forced to roll his own. He
doesn’t do it as well as the maligned, the less than heroic Jimmy Carter, but
Jimmy Carter knows, by now, that the presidency is not a crusade, it’s the
duller, harder job of running the country.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP