Sir Isaiah Berlin - 21 November 1997

In the early part of last week, as a preparation for the oncoming sessions of
the United Nations Security Council, I sat down to read, without relish, about
the three main toxins, the chemical or biological weapons and ingredients that
Saddam Hussein is making and hiding and so far successfully protecting.

Anthrax, which with one generous spray could kill over two million city people.
Botox, to destroy the nervous system of say 40,000 strollers in a giant
shopping complex. And the hideous VX, the muscle paralysing gas which would
kill 12,000 with a single spray.

Our reluctance to read or talk about such morbid and melodramatic things could
be the ace up Mr Hussein's sleeve: his awareness that the subject is so
horrible we don't want to hear about it and hope it will go away. I ought to
say that I'm talking to you just before the weekend, days before many of you
will be hearing these words and by then anything may have happened.

The first solution proposed by the Russians was one which would require the
United States to soften its simple, ultimate demand, allow all the inspectors
and destroy the stuff and seemed almost to reward Saddam with new concessions,
if he would only be kind enough to let in some inspectors for a limited visit
and promise they could have access to the suspect sites.

This promise, we ought to remind ourselves, was made in the treaty agreement
six years ago and has been systematically broken often enough to have the
United Sates lob a few missiles his way with no effect on litmus. Incidentally,
the first time UN inspectors were denied access to a weapons site was five
years ago.

But I want to go back to the week or more of the United Nations debates because
they seemed to me to underline my point about our reluctance to face the main,
ghastly fact. How else to explain the wordiness, the mechanical rhetoric, the
interminable waffling that masqueraded as statesmen thinking aloud in public?

Usually when the delegates, for reasons of national self-interest, are plainly
disinclined to say in front of the council what's really on their minds, it's
possible to get the bolder of them to be a little franker in a television
interview.

But when challenged to answer the one essential question, if Mr Hussein
wouldn't give in, could there be military action – the word war is never even
uttered these days – we'd hear a response like this. "Well I must say that my
delegation believes, as indeed do the other concerned delegations, I'm quite
sure, that we would prefer to pursue every avenue of negotiation and diplomatic
consultation with a view, of course, to the peaceful settlement of this
difficult issue, I might say, by all proper methods of diplomatic compromise
and a mutual agreement."

And, as the old double-talk comedians used to say, also don't forget the
hemdren tackling and the portis friggis.

There's no doubt that from the start, President Clinton saw the problem simply
and truly. The weapons sites, laboratories and materials had to be discovered
and destroyed. If not, Saddam Hussein would have to be punished by the United
Nations. But, from the start, Mr Clinton's problem was that only one member of
the UN Gulf War alliance, Britain, was prepared to support the United States in
a military attack. The Arab world deplored the thought of it. The Russians
expressly condemned it, so did the French. Even such a neutral friend as the
President of Egypt thought such action inappropriate. Mr Clinton's only ray of
hope came from a national survey which showed 49% of the American people
willing to back a new war, 41% against and the usual, dependable 10% who didn't
know, didn't want to know and didn't care.

But back then, even this ray of hope was fractured by subsequent polls, the
results of which showed the pro-war majority assuming that the second Gulf War
would be like the first, only more so; thousands of smart weapons that could
accurately pinpoint chosen targets. Only one man, a former American assistant
Secretary of State said aloud a week ago that he thought all the missile
attacks of the First Gulf War and all the aerial reconnaissance developed since
the Second World War would be unable to discover and destroy the weapons'
underground hiding places, let alone the person of Hussein himself who has 49
scattered houses, flats, bunkers in a country eight times the area of England.

So when it was suggested that what would be needed was manpower, a great army
of ground troops, the percentage of willing supporters dived way down and so by
the end of the week, President Clinton faced the most excruciating hour of his
presidency.

By an association which will become immediately clear, I think of a famous
black day in the capital city of Connecticut, in the early 1770s, before the
War of Independence, when the colonial legislature was in session and at high
noon the sky darkened over into an unbroken pall of blackness, so that the
delegates could barely recognise their neighbours. Many of them fell on their
knees and prayed aloud for help or salvation.

One man rose, the Speaker, one Colonel Davenport. He said, "Either the day of
judgement is approaching or it is not. If it is not, there is no cause for
alarm. If it is, I choose to be found doing my duty. I pray therefore that
candles my be brought." It was done and they went on with their business.

But Saddam or no Saddam, I shall do my duty and try and say something vivid and
worthy about a great man who has died, who was also a friend to whom I was
writing when the sad word came in. The New York Times, in a splendid obituary
last Friday said a great deal in its first sentence, "Sir Isaiah Berlin, the
philosopher and historian of ideas, revered for his intellect and cherished for
his wit and his gift for friendship, has died in Oxford, England, following a
long illness".

You have to picture a middle-sized but large, shambling man, a swarthy face,
bird's-nest eyebrows, a large firm mouth and behind a pair of horn-rimmed
glasses, dark, glaring eyes. The expression is that of a glorious Russian
clown, pretending to be a stern headmaster and when his eyes twinkled and he
opened that large, generous mouth, it was as if a two-minute silence had been
proclaimed. All other human traffic stopped. He began to pour out a cascade of
ideas, a Niagara of thoughts and images that never paused in its down-rushing
volume and eloquence.

It was no surprise to learn that he wrote his essays, his books in that way, by
torrential dictation. I assume he'd discovered a shorthand typist who could
take down from a machine enormous, perfectly-parsed and structured sentences,
spoken at the rate of about 700 words a minute, in a rolling operatic baritone
with still the echo of Mother Russia.

For that's where he was brought up, the son of a timber merchant who being a
prospering Jew, quickly departed from St Petersburg on the arrival of Lenin and
took his ten-year-old son to London, where he went to school and then on to
Oxford, where for the rest of his life he lived, he wrote "in my eyrie, far
removed from the bustle of real politics and the movers and shakers you spend
your life reporting".

What has this to do with America, or Letter From America? Well, true his gift
for friendship was so generous and sustained that just to talk about him for no
particular reason is a delight. There's just one thing I want to say about him
and America. European exiles who become Englishmen very often become also, in
one matter or another, more English than the English and there's one
embarrassing trait, or trait in particular, they're likely to pick up more than
another: the gift, which every sort of Englishman has by instinct and has to
learn to conquer, the gift of condescending to America and Americans.

Isaiah Berlin had no trace of it. He'd talk to everybody, to Duke Ellington and
the Duke of Devonshire and a dustman in exactly the same way. He lectured to
American students as he did to British or Italian or Russian students. He once
told me, after judicious thought, that the most intellectually curious,
inquisitive students he ever lectured to were not at Oxford or Harvard or
Cambridge but at the University of Chicago.

He had the deepest and sharpest knowledge of American government and was an
almost prophetic observer of American politics. In 1952 he came over here
briefly for the Eisenhower-Stevenson presidential campaign. He was not greatly
impressed by the Stevenson effort because he feared, way back then, that in
embracing the beloved Adlai, the Democrats were betraying the radical roots
planted by Roosevelt. Stevenson he called a Republican for Stevenson. It was
about as acid as he could ever be.

He was a very rare type, if indeed there is such a type. A man of enormous
learning, a brilliant man, who was at the same time, and always, warm and
kindly, He was six months younger than me and I used to josh him about his
comparative youth and ask him whenever his birthday came around, when and where
we next should meet.

The last letter I had from him ended that wherever we were next to meet, arm in
arm we shall march into the future. I'd hoped to have a photograph showing the
starting moment of that march.

Of course it is not to be, but I see him slumping smartly off into the Elysian
Fields, ready to enlighten the angels, if they can keep up with and understand
a newcomer who talks 700 words to the minute.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP