America's problem with gun ownership - 29 October 1993

Before we get on to anything else, I hasten to apologise for a couple of slips
in recent talks. A letter from a member of the London Chambers Society reminds
me that Don Giovanni's 1,003 seductions were performed in Spain, I was actually
chanting to myself "Ma in Ispagna son già mille e tre", but then accountably I
said "Italy".

The other correction came from a close friend, surely he said it was the St
Valentine's Day Massacre was it not. Oof course it was the shooting down in a
Chicago garage of seven of Bugs Moran's gang on the orders of Al Capone in
1929. That's what I was deploring, but I called it the St Bartholomew's
Massacre – that was of course the ferocious massacre of about 50,000 Huguenot
protestants on the orders of Catherine de' Medici in 1572 an act for which
Catherine received a special medal and congratulations from Pope Gregory XIII.

Some rather bewildered listeners may wonder how such horrors 1,003 seductions,
50,000 murders got into this normally temperate chat. Don Giovanni came in when
we were discussing the bombarding of the courts with lawsuits from women
claiming sexual harassment. The St Valentine's Day mistake was aside to a
recent depressing talk on crime and a Senate committee's recent hearing on the
social effects of television violence.

With all this talk about guns, there is now a likelihood that at long last the
Congress will pass the so-called Brady Bill and the first federal attempt to
control guns. Mr Brady was President Reagan's press secretary when in the
spring of 1981 pistol shots from a demented young man wounded the president and
three others. Mr Brady suffered brain damage and has been paralysed ever since,
but ever since also he and his wife have laboured against the opposition of six
Congresses to fashion a gun-control bill. It is a very modest proposal in the
main, requiring people wanting to buy a gun to wait five days till their past
has been looked into. People for and against gun control have pointed out for
years that anyone intending to commit a murder or even to possess a weapon as
an intimidating cover for a burglary is the last sort of person who is going to
wait five days or even to put in an application.

I think that once such a bill is passed or even one much more stringent,
there's a good chance of a repeat performance of the social calamity that
followed on the passage of the prohibition amendment to the Constitution. That
was ratified in 1919 and became law one year later; it was called at the time
the noble experiment though pretty soon it became painfully clear it did not
end how American's with more nobility than they already had.

People who'd never drunk were tempted to try the forbidden fruit and to the
amazement and then the despair of the general population, a whole underground
industry arrived to bottle and provide the fruit, it spawned of course the
whole savage and squalled era of the bootleggers, the emergence of rival
warlords, petty crooks turned into millionaires from their remarkable
initiative in developing a far-flung transport system recruiting armies of
agents bribing police and on the side making an even more profitable living
from squeezing regular protection money from small shopkeepers, laundries,
groceries in exchange for protecting them from the protector's own guns and
arsonists.

At the moment, there's been surprisingly little speculation by people who are
for gun control about the methods of evading a new law likely to be devised by
the types who shoot each other down. For the most part, random murder in this
country is performed by street gangs run amok and whatever the law they will
certainly know where to get guns and surely their new sources of supply will
mushroom.

Most crimes in the home, 85% of all shootings are done by one member of the
family or a relative against another. I should have reminded you that most
states, I think 38, have their own form of gun control laws, but I noticed that
the governors do not make a habit of boasting that the laws have made a
striking difference in the number or frequency of homicides. The disparity in
numbers follows rather disappointingly the difference you might expect: large
population many shootings, small population – Wyoming, Vermont – few.

This brawl over gun control, it's rarely achieved the civility of a debate, has
been going on for 30 years ever since the assassination of President Kennedy
and throughout that time two forces have accidentally combined to defeat any
national gun control bill. First is the almost holy power over popular opinion
of the Second Amendment to the Constitution, it consists of one clause, one
sentence to do with a well regulated militia being necessary to the security of
a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be
infringed.

The National Rifle Association is the second defeating force and it has that
sentence chiselled or used over the entrance to its national headquarters or,
wait a moment, not the whole sentence, not the whole reason for allowing the
people to keep and bear arms, just the right of the people.

Now that amendment was written at a time when the new nation the United States
had no standing army and it was the intention of the founding fathers to see
that it never had one because standing armies were either the private
possession of monarchs or they could be commandeered by upstart dictators. You
simply had to look to Europe and to the country they'd broken away from to see
the universal truth of this, so they naively thought the country could be made
safe by a militia on call, by allowing every man whatever his trade – farmer,
mechanic, parson, lawyer, butcher, baker – to keep by his fireside a rifle.
When there was an uprising a succession is moved, an Indian raid, a tax revolt
whatever, the militia would be called.

And when it was all over, the man went back to his trade and the gun went back
by the fireplace, so the Constitution says because the security of a free state
needs a militia, then you should be able to keep and bear arms. Of course this
beautiful system couldn't last long especially against warlike threats from
abroad.

Today, need I tell you, the United States has a standing army, navy, air force
and marine corps, voluntary to be sure, but recruited, permanently organised,
paid and uniformed. The one condition the founding fathers set to allow the
keeping of guns is no longer there. Nevertheless, not only the National Rifle
Association but the great majority of the American people defend your right and
mine to possess guns because it's there in holy writ, the right to bear and
keep arms shall not be infringed.

I do believe that an overwhelming majority of Americans both educated and
illiterate simply do not know that the Constitution does not proclaim any right
to have a gun to protect your family, to shoot an intruder even to shoot a deer
or a rabbit. The condition that allowed private ownership of guns is either
ignored, forgotten or by most people not known about.

I've called the National Rifle Association the second force always mobilised to
resist any form – local, state, national – of gun control. The association's
argument has been from the beginning first that the Constitution gives
Americans the right to keep guns. Secondly, that 99.9% of Americans who own
guns have them for shooting animals with and this point is a very strong one.
In this country, this continent, whole communities of rural folk depend on
their rifles to help feed the family and shooting, hunting as it's called, is a
sport among all classes. No bill now being proposed and no bill likely to be
proposed as far as thought can reach will ban guns for sport anywhere in the
United States.

The solution of the problem is quite simple to state and probably quite
unobtainable, how to keep guns out of the hands of people we would once have
called mad and now call unstable, disturbed, psychopathic.

In the meantime, there's been a large penitential movement in popular opinion,
the solid opposition to gun control is dissolving fast to the satisfaction of
the pollsters and the alarm of the National Rifle Association, there is now a
firm majority of citizens in favour of a gun control law.

The National Rifle Association futilely points out the truth that the homicide
rates have dropped in the past three years but throughout this year people have
been subjected on their nightly television news to episodes of random slaughter
among the young, especially in many cities and small towns. And the grisly
statistics have been widely published and confirmed that one American
schoolchild in five carries a gun that among all the American young between the
ages of 15 and 24 the leading cause of death is homicide. Enough people are
saying is enough.

So what does the National Rifle Association do in this critical situation? The
association has mounted a powerful drive to have women buy guns. Says one
actress posing in an arms industry television commercial, "I refuse to be a
victim, you can too". "Tip the odds in your favour," says another, glancing at
the gun on the night table. These dramatic messages will I'm afraid reach and
impress many more people than the readers of the New England Journal of
Medicine, which has just published an elaborate study whose conclusion is that
keeping a handgun in the home just about triples the chance that someone will
be killed there.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP