Hurricanes 1992 - 28 August 1992

While we were wondering whether they'll be another war in the Gulf and whether
they'll soon be any war to fight in Bosnia, I found myself thinking back to the
third week of September 1938. After a sparkling holiday in England, disturbed
at the end by the oncoming rumble of Munich, we were sailing back to New York
on the pride of the French line, the huge sleek and elegant Normandy.

After days days at sea, we had good reason to congratulate ourselves as you'll
see on our choice of ship and by the same token to feel sorry for westbound
passengers on the smaller nine-nights-an-10-day ships. For we woke up one
morning or were more or less shaken, hurled, up to find the ocean sloshing
above the portholes leaving the immediate impression that we were already five
fathoms down with all hands. Another enormous lurch and the sound of the decks
cracking and now there was through the portholes nothing but a leaden sky.

I seem to remember we'd awakened to press the stewards button and he came
tottering and wheeling in a creditable impersonation of Charlie Chaplin in
Modern Times, he was sorry but it was impossible to serve any food or drink
till things calmed down. Understood. What's going on we asked. Ah, he said,
c'est l' équinoxe. He was right, it was early morning 21 September but, we
thought, some equinox!

Well, I won't go on to describe the indescribable except to say that through
the day things got much worse, the great ship came spinning out of the water
like a dolphin, shuddered in mid-air and crashed down into the deeps. I learned
later that five people out of a passenger list of something like 1,500 went
hand over hand on ropes to get down to dinner. It was easing off by nightfall,
the great ship merely bouncing up and booming down. We woke to a brilliant
morning, the ocean a slow heaving glistening pond, under our door as usual was
the ship's newspaper. Ships' newspapers on any line consisted of four maybe six
pages of very bare information, quick, short summaries of the wire services
supplemented by jolly pieces by way of what we called human interest and funny
stories. There were that morning as I recall no funny stories; the front page
had a nonsensical headline "hurricane à New hyphen York". Not surprising coming
from the French who wouldn't know that hurricanes do not blow into or near New
York.

However, we read the accompanying story and revised our judgement about the
French when sticking out from the sombre prose – French is especially well
suited to catastrophe – were names that we weren't merely familiar with, they
were the places where we lived and had our being. Southold, Green Port,
Peconic, West Hampton, Southampton, they form a cluster of small towns at the
Eastern end of Long Island through which the hurricane had screamed its way and
done outrageous damage on and across Long Island's sound, flooding the coastal
cities New London, Rhode Island, Providence and then up through New England
killing over 600 people and destroying 100,000 houses and stores and churches
and stripping the state of New Hampshire of two thirds of its stand of white
birch before the monster petered out in Canada.

We later discovered that this 1938 hurricane was the first to hit the
north-eastern United States in about 80 years, but since then since the 1950s
anyway we seemed to be the preferred glide path so to speak of about one big
blow in three. I have been in the thick, the thick grey howling nothingness of
three or four hurricanes since then, but the memory of them, the visual memory
of their damage has faded far more than that of 1938. What with the fallen
trees and crumpled roadway and broken bridges, it took us about a week to be
able to drive the five miles from our village Southhold east to the fishing
port of Greenport. The high winds –that means the whirling counter-clockwise
winds that blow at a height of about 20 feet – they are the murderous agent
that with a vicious whisking motion, unscrewed trees and plucked buildings out
of the ground.

Until 1938, the characteristic tree of New England was the feather duster elm,
so called, a tall slender tree that curves out in a frozen fountain of foliage.
It doesn't exist today. The main street of Southold was lined with these elms,
but the '38 hurricane uprooted them all, pulling the sidewalk and the pavement
along with them, so that you had to climb through a street-long broken trench
to get anywhere.

Two years after the hurricane, the Dutch elm disease came creeping east from, I
believe, Ohio, the Middle West anyway and in the next 20 years just about
ravaged that noble tree.

Greenport, the fishing town once a whaling port, was the town nearest to us
with a movie house. The day after the hurricane – always a beautiful day after
the hurricane – the cinema had been neatly dislodged uplifted and deposited two
miles out in Peconic Bay. To balance this false distribution of objects, half a
dozen sizeable yachts, which had been at anchor offshore were lifted and blown
into town and were on display right way up, upside down on Greenport's main
street.

On the south shore across the bay from us lies the ocean-side town of
Westhampton, cheek by jowl with the colonial village of Remsenburg where PG
Woodhouse lived and would subsequently say he was sorry to have been away then
and missed what I imagine they call a humdinger. There were it was reported 27
people attending a matinée in the Westhampton cinema that afternoon. The next
morning all that was left of it and them was a ragged hole in the ground.
Theatre audience, projectionist were far out to sea. The power, the power of
the wind that's always so difficult to credit is its ability not just to blow
things over with a deafening sound and rip off roofs, but to get inside
structures and do the sort of ingenious damage you'd only expect from a
dexterous madman. You know that New Orleans lies nine feet below sea level, you
cannot bury people underground because only a few feet from the surface is
marsh, so the cemeteries have piled up the dead in tombs above ground, long
streets of what look like lockers – so they are.

Well, in the 1957 hurricane that fell on New Orleans, not only did the wind
whip the coffins from their tombs, but ripped bodies out of the coffins. The
most palpable sign of the wind's accurate power can be seen on any wooden
house, which before the storm was painted. In New England as you know most
houses, certainly most old houses are made of wood and painted white. We have
an old New England salt box house up the point from us and two hours after a
1954 hurricane that came right through our house, we went up the point to see
how our neighbours were doing, we thought we'd taken a wrong turn their shining
white house was stripped, shaved rather down to the bare wood not one dab or
grain of paint and everywhere instead of dense foliage not a leaf on any tree.

So now the first hurricane of the 1992 season, they always start brewing in the
Caribbean at the end of August beginning of September, in the northern
hemisphere that is, and the first was also one of the worst to hit southern
Florida in 30 years. In anticipation of it, they managed to evacuate and move
inland further up the peninsula over one million people – that's a boggling
figure. I don't remember anything like it, but the aerial pictures of 40 miles
of bumper to bumper motorcars and vans all sliding north made it believable.
You'll have seen the far-ranging helicopter shots of the appalling devastation
of the coastal town south of Miami. One's immediate response is to marvel that
so far not more than a score of people have died. The great difference between
the casualty count in the old hurricanes and the new is quite simply the
existence of a federal hurricane centre, which in turn was made possible by the
development after the early space flights of whether satellite photography.

I remember only a few years ago being with a 10-year-old grandson and
smothering a feeling of irritation at him for sitting there and yawning while
we watched one of the miracles of our age, a satellite picture of the whole of
north America with the weather systems moving in full view. No such warnings
existed 50 years ago in 1938, for example, on the fateful 21 September.

The New York Times that morning had the weather forecast as usual in the upper
right hand corner of the front page, it said "seasonably cool, high temperature
around 70, rain likely later". Within six hours the hurricane of the century
was roaring across Long Island. I recall a farmer who lived near us, he woke-up
that morning and found in his mailbox a new barometer he'd ordered, he opened
it up and the needle was way over, it said "hurricane" what rubbish he thought.
He wrapped it up again and walked off the two miles into town to return it with
a complaint to the post office; he didn't make it back home for two days,
staying after the first 100mph gust, bivouacked in the post office basement.

Nowadays, we spot the hurricanes when they are struggling to be born and plot
their perilous life mile by mile and project their likely landfall, which is
why one million were safely trundled away from the Florida coast and hundreds
of thousands from the coast of Louisiana. But the plight of maybe two million
people without light or power and three-quarters of a million without homes is
grievous. In both states by midweek, hundreds of thousands of men and women and
children defying a a curfew were roaming the city's nearest to their shattered
homes searching for tinned foods, batteries, petrol, water, charcoal for BBQ
grills. A young woman in a trashed suburb bearing the euphonious name of Pine
Lakes said, "They're saying on the radio to boil all your water". She had
waited two hours to buy a one-litre bottle. "What," she asked, "am I supposed
to boil water on? At this point, I don't have a home."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP