American political underdogs - 16 September 1994

I have in my possession, I have in my hand a $3 bill … Whoa, Dobbin, I hear,
there's no such thing. Well there is now. It was handed to me a month or so ago
in San Francisco and I've kept it, I've passed it in payment to taxi drivers,
to shop assistants and most times I've had to say "hold it" and take it back.

What eventually puts people off after a second glance of course is the figure 3
printed like the figure 1 on the dollar bill four times, once in each corner of
the note. An old French lady round the corner, who sells pastries and cheeses
took it, marvel at it, and was going to ring up the cash register. I said it's
not legal. She then looked at it carefully, something not one person – I
include close friends among persons – not one person in 10 does, then they will
see that the central figure George Washington on the $1 bill is Bill Clinton
with a referee's whistle in his mouth.

And the dollar bill is issued in prominent type by the United States of
America. The $3 bill is issued by the Disgruntled States of America, whereas
the legitimacy of the dollar bill is guaranteed by a line at the top saying
"federal reserve note" the $3 dollar has in the same place "queer reserve
note", a rather clumsy parody but one meant to recall the old jock idiom "queer
as a $3 bill". In the right-hand corner we see on dollars bills, the signature
of Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the secretary of the treasury. On this new bill the
signature of Truman Capote, no federal office indicated, which is not
surprising since he's no longer with us. On the reverse side, instead of "in
God we trust" it says "in $3 bill we trust not", a picture of the White House
with a sign on the lawn "for sale" and that's about it, that about completes
the jokiness. Oh, the bill has a serial number, possibly the neatest touch,
"oh, oh I see you 812".

You can buy these things in packs of 25 from an address in California's Central
Valley. This in my experience is the first time anybody's had the wit to issue
a fake dollar bill in the likeness of the president you wanted to mock and this
bill is the simplest, the most colourful or facetious expression of the
national pastime which is likely to replace baseball now that baseball has
shutdown and there'll be no world series for the first time in 90 years, the
national pastime of knocking the president.

In the past spring and summer, he's taken an awful beating in Congress from the
Republicans, of course, from the media most noticeably and perhaps most
damaging to the Democratic Party from disillusioned Democrats who turned to
Reagan first, wobbled with Bush and in the 1992 election returned to the party
and to Clinton. And now, according to a national survey, are about to desert
him in droves, not literally since he's not running for re-election but
punishing him through the congressional elections in November.

The Republicans are by now gung-ho about the signs of widespread disappointment
in Mr Clinton, at his dithering foreign policies, the dumping of his health
bill, the continuing investigation of that failed land deal in Arkansas, not to
mention in public their secret joy over that young lady's sexual harassment law
suit against him.

But it's remarkable now as the summer's waned, so it seems, has the Republican
passion for beating up on President Clinton, they seem to feel they no longer
have to go up and down the land affecting deep shock and indignation with Mr
Clinton. Instead they're busy counting the wonderful gains in November's
elections, they don't of course expect to get a majority in the House, that's
happened only twice for four years in 61 years. It's by now almost a rule of
our two-party system that the House of Representatives shall by run by one
party, the Democrats, just like Mexico whose failure to produce a federal
democratic system we regularly deplore. But the the Senate and the Democrats
themselves privately concede that they could loose the Senate and the
Republican leaders are going on the cocky assumption that they've already won
it. The last time they did it was for the six gorgeous Reagan years.

And when the president has his own party in control of the Senate, there's
every chance for him to get through the laws he wants, except we might add with
Bill Clinton. His aides and friends point with pride to the North American Free
Trade Agreement, they shouldn't – it was passed only because 150 Republicans
came to the presidents aid when 130 of his own party rejected it.

However, let's suppose for a minute that the Republicans do get a majority in
the Senate in November. The field commanders of the American legislative system
are the chairmen of the Senate committees and of course the majority party
takes over the chairmanships.

I've been looking back and trying to rescue from the doldrums of history, a
president who performed any legislative magic or even success when the Senate
leaders were not of his party, some astute oldster will no doubt recall with a
rush of pride the fact that during Eisenhower's second administration several
bills that were to become historic having to do with freedom of expression and
civil rights went through. Eisenhower had little or nothing to do with them, it
was the work, the labour, the ruthless arm twisting and rib bashing of the
Senate majority leader Mr Lyndon B Johnson of the opposition party. So
successful was Johnson in perversely pushing through social legislation on
Eisenhower's behalf that it became a byword among the learned, Eisenhower
second administration is called "Johnson's first administration". Anyway that
was a freak.

The Republicans today are doing something that their forebears did in 1948 when
President Harry Truman standing was as low as any president's in history, his
short term from the death of Roosevelt in '45 through to November 1946 was so
awful in the view of the voters that both the House and the Senate went to the
Republicans, so by the summer of 1948 when he was foolishly going to run again,
he was politically impotent.

The Republican candidate – a man who the Washington wit Mrs Longworth said
looked like the man on the wedding cake – Mr Thomas Dewey started to pick his
incoming cabinet, never formally published but anybody in the news business
could have called off most of the main posts by election day. But remember what
happened on election day, Harry Truman said he was the only man in the United
States who thought he could win except all the others who voted for me, he won
and went crowing back into the White House while the staggered Republicans tore
up their cabinet appointments and faced the dread prospect of four more years
of Truman during which, by the way, he carved out a solid, conspicuous figure
in world history.

Most students, even the youngest, have heard of Truman's thundering upset, but
they can forget it in the assurances of their fathers that no president except
Truman has ever been so lambasted, so discredited as Bill Clinton, before a
national election. Well it's not so.

I was persuaded to do a little remembrance of things past when I recalled how
years ago when my daughter was repairing an old colonial farmhouse in Vermont
and stripped the ceiling of the living room, it was deep and dense with
plaster, old wallpapers and right there under the roof as insulation newspapers
laid out and horizontally packed, they were of the year Thomas Jefferson ran
for president. He didn't take Vermont and no wonder, the despatches picked at
him as a radical monster, a chronic adulterer with at least one black mistress
and had a general warning about his mental health, he was, in fact throughout
the entire east, known universally as Mad Tom. You may recall he won and he
won, also a measure of fame.

The whole political history of the 19th century howls with rumours and
imprecations against every other man who ran for president and got in. We think
our press can be brutal, but in the 19th century there was no limit to comic or
ferocious libels. A picture of a president holding the Senators in a money bag
over the caption "the best Senators money can buy".

The campaign song of the Republicans against Cleveland who revealed just before
the election that for several years he'd been supporting and illegitimate son,
"Ma, Ma where's my Pa? Gone to the White House, ha ha ha". And how about the
Democrats musical rejoinder, "Blaine, Blaine, James G Blaine the Continental
liar from the State of Maine".

Nobody in my time, not Harry Truman, was the target for viler abuse, especially
behind-the-hand gossip than Franklin Roosevelt. When I was at Harvard even,
only two years after FDR had been elected, the sons of prominent Republicans
confided to me they got it from their fathers that Roosevelt had a fatal brain
tumour and would not last until 1936. When by the way, he won another four
years till 1940, when he won another four, and then 1944 another four, he
didn't live out the 16 years to which he'd been elected and true his health and
his wits slowed down but only in the last four months. Suppose, I remember
naively asking back then, suppose Dr Harvey Cushing – a famous surgeon –
removes his brain tumour and he survives and runs again in 1936, what will your
father do then? All of them had the same pat reply, "move to New Zealand". I
never met or heard of one who did.

The knocking of Bill Clinton has reached an almost monotonous drumbeat, the
chuckling distribution of that $3 bill is almost among Republicans, in the
Clinton disillusion, a guarantee that his number is up. Remember George Bush,
the spring after the 100-hour colossal desert war popularity rating 82%, people
said facetiously that the 1992 presidential election should be called off just
crowned good King George Bush. Mr Clinton's rating has nowhere to go but up,
the Republicans would be wise to read a little history blessed by ignorance of
it they repeated.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP