America's polluted waters - 29 July 1988

One of the very first talks I did, I mean in this series, was about the end of
summer. Well this atrocious burning summer is not over yet, as Vice President
Bush would say, darn it, but because that very early talk was printed I have a
copy of it. I looked at it the other day to see how if things have changed. Let
me read a bit of it.

“The official end of summer” I said “ is Labor Day, so that at the beginning of
September you packed up at the cottage by the sea, on the lake, in the
mountains and this was the general routine. The swimming trunks squeezed for
the last time, the ashtray is filled with mouse seed and rat paste, the storm
shutters hammered into place – we are on the top of a cliff that faces due
north-east which is where the most damaging winter storms come from – fetch in
the porch furniture and from outside the rusty barbecue grill we haven’t used
in four years, phoned the electric company to turn off the current, the phone
company to disconnect, draw all the curtains, sprinkle moth flakes on the rugs,
try to hide the smelly fishing rod in a dark closet and fail, your wife coming
at you saying 'Could this be bait?' It was – for an uncaught striped bass, the
noblest of the small game fish and the best eating fish.”

I’ll stop there with a deep sigh. The striped bass is no more, or rather he’s
there, especially in the fall, but not to be caught, not to be bought. He
breeds in the Hudson river which has now just about taken its fill of
industrial and other wastes. We are 100 miles east of the mouth of the Hudson
and you’d think by the time he’d swum so far he would be fat and healthy and
toothsome. Not so. As far as we are concerned, we are told, he’s gone for good.

Well we left and drove back to New York City – we are in the late 1940s – I
noted something very up-to-date and enviable in those days. As we curved round
and down off the Triborough Bridge coming into Manhattan there was a billboard
advertising a de luxe apartment building shortly to be opened. It had stars
printed against the features it was specially proud of – thermostat heat
control in each flat, all-electric kitchen with deep freeze, laundry and
dish-washing machine and garbage disposal unit, air-conditioned units
"available in summer" – not many changes there.

I’m surprised, though, that we had garbage disposal units then and instead of
the post-war town lockers a private deep-freeze section in what we used to call
the ice-box and now call – one bit of slang picked up from England – the
fridge, and in such a building there would be no longer just air-conditioning
units "available for summer", the whole building would be air-conditioned from
the start.

There was, however, at the bottom of this soaring billboard a jolting note. It
said "Adequate sub-basement atomic bomb shelter”. Today such a note would
guarantee no buyers for those flats, however de luxe in other ways. Those signs
seem to have vanished and, we must hope, for good.

This summer, which has kept more than four-fifths of North America frying and
stewing, there are gloomy changes. The worst of them were arrested in my mind
by two television pictures I’ve just seen. One is a picture-postcard beauty of
a majestic, very still, lake between dark, forested mountains. It is Indian
Lake, one of the more than 200 lakes up in the Adirondack mountains in upstate
New York where over two million acres of forest reserve provide, have provided
for well over a hundred years, a summer paradise for millions of New Yorkers,
New Englanders and down-dropping Canadians.

Indian Lake, a picture to drool over, is in merciful contrast with the other
picture which was a photograph bang on the cover of one of our weekly news
magazines and then shown on television. It’s of a splendid stretch of white
sandy beach along the New Jersey shore. All you see is a horizontal line
dividing the beach from chafing blue sea, two empty trash baskets, in the
foreground a big rectangular red sign nailed to a post it says, "Beach closed.
Health hazard."

The water on the edge of the sand is no lake; it’s the Atlantic Ocean. Similar
signs have suddenly appeared on four or five of the Long Island ocean beaches.
In fact, most evenings now the summer story on television news shows includes
white, bare beaches and muscular young lifeguards atop their high ladders.
They’re there not to get people out of the water but to stop them getting in
it.

What about that idyllic picture of Indian Lake way up there in the mountains of
upstate New York? Same story – what fish there are are dead. The neighbouring
beavers have taken off for safer quarters, the loons bob on the edge of the
lake but crazy as they’re known to be, they’ve known better than to try and
raise their young there. They depart at regular intervals for some other water
not yet polluted.

I’m afraid the story spans the continent from the northern coast of Maine down
500 miles to the coast of Delaware, and the poison pours into the great bay
that laps against the shores of Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, that bay which an
old Baltimorean passionate for the wonderful Maryland crabs and the other
seafood called "the protein factory of Chesapeake Bay". Today he could better
call it "the toxin factory".

The melancholy picture spans America from sea to shining sea. The acid test, if
you’ll excuse the expression, is the level of toxic chemicals in the livers of
fish and they’ve been found abundantly in the water off Puget Sound in the
extreme north-west of the Pacific coast, down along the coast of the states of
Washington and Oregon.

Then there’s the healthy stretch along northern California, the toxins taking
over again at San Francisco bay and on down to the Mexican border; same the
coastlines of Texas, Louisiana that look out into the Gulf of Mexico. Just now,
it seems, the only absolutely clean sands and harmless ocean are from North
Carolina down and round the Florida peninsula and along the Gulf coast of
Georgia and Alabama.

Wait – I didn’t look closely at the map. That great curve of liquid purity is
not so pure after all. There are reported toxins and no pesticide
contamination. What there are, though, are clusters of little symbols which
signify shorelines one-third of which are closed to commercial shellfish
harvest.

How about the greatest inland reservoirs in the world, the so-called Great
Lakes – Superior, Michigan, Huron, Eyrie, Ontario – from the western end of
Superior at Duluth to the outlet of Lake Ontario 1,160 miles, the great prize
for which the English fought the French for so many years.

It seemed way back in the 1960s that those silly warnings of gloom and doom for
the Great Lakes were just the usual patter of environmental freaks, but by the
end of that decade Lake Eyrie was dying.

The state governments woke up slowly and the Federal government a little later.
The Great Lakes, after all, did not offer a bottomless pit for industrial
waste. The other four lakes too began to mock the definition in almanacs,
encyclopaedias, “a group of huge, freshwater lakes”.

Perhaps the lucky factor in the plight of the Great Lakes was that they
encompass large parts of both Canada and the United States. The two countries
alarmed each other, they blamed each other. From time to time the Canadian
prime minister and the American president met and asked each other what are you
going to do about it.

Beginning in the early 1970s the two governments together have spent something
like nine thousand million dollars on the cleaning job. In the late '60s about
half a million pounds of factory and sewage wastes went into the lakes every
day. Today it’s only fifty thousands pounds.

It’s something. It’s a great deal, but not, evidently, enough because now they
are the dumping ground for newer or more ubiquitous chemicals and the toxins
born on the wind and good old acid rain, another fetish 20 years ago, it
seemed, of the "good earth" nuts.

Acid rain is pouring down its poisons not only on the lakes but on all the
forests and crops of the lands that lie east of the industrial midwest. We all
hear these statistics and are suitably impressed or depressed and then you hear
about something close to home, the inedible striped bass, the maple forests of
Vermont actually wilting, and you’re shocked, resentful.

The other night one of the networks did a whole raft of beach interviews with
young and old about the new signs, "Beach closed", "No swimming", "These waters
hazardous", and so on. They were not rich summer folks, not the bad and the
beautiful in The Hamptons who find the prohibition signs on the beach an awful
nuisance. Many of them merely look at the ocean anyway and never go near it;
they have their pools and they can be filtered.

No no, these were ordinary working-class mothers, sons, daughters, fathers
doing what they’ve always done in their thousands, getting away from the
searing heat at weekends to the blessed beaches of the Jersey shore or Long
Island. Their reactions were uniform – they were outraged, as if the government
had done it on purpose.

The worst misfortune hit those beaches which last week found themselves
littered with clinic garbage, hospital waste of every gruesome sort from
syringes and bandages and decayed organs to the corpses of laboratory rats.
Mayor Koch, just back in time from telling Amsterdam how to deal with drugs,
expressed astonishment and got busy looking for the culprit hospitals.

Of course it would happen that one of the interviewees on such a beach was a
recent Russian immigrant living close by Coney Island in what has become a
Russian refugee colony, a strong burly man, a Dostoyevsky police-chief type.

He pointed accusingly at the mess and the forbidding sign. In a rich guttural
voice he said, “What is this? The Land of the Free? The Soviet Union?”

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP