The meaning of Labor Day - 4 September 1987

The first Monday in September has been, for nearly 100 years, a national
holiday called Labor Day.

It was so proclaimed by President Cleveland in 1894, when he signed a bill
making all the states follow the example of a humble carpenter, one Peter
McGuire, who put up to the New York city fathers an idea 12 years before. His
idea was to mark the end of the summer, when children went back to school and
the labourer to his labouring, by holding an annual procession up Firth Avenue,
to celebrate not so much the working people of America, as the working people
who had joined the union.

It was a pretty daring thing to do in those days, when unions were about as
acceptable to industrialists and conservative businessmen as Communists today.
There were some carefully interrupted processions, cracked skulls and sporadic
chaos. But, in New York city, where every other Irish cop probably had a
brother who had joined the union, the police protection came to be impeccable
and as organised labour was seen, regretfully, by many employers to be the way
of the future, first 31 states and then all of them followed New York in
holding a parade on the first Monday in September.

And the bigwig politicians elbowed each other aside for the privilege of making
the big speech to the big crowd, saluting the glory of the working men, and the
virtues of honest toil. The parades and the speeches in every city, and also in
every hamlet, were going on in my early time here, but then, so was the annual
get-together, or encampment, of veterans of the 1865 Civil War.

In 1932, after all, there were still more than handful of octogenarians who had
fought on the Southern or the Union side, and who picked some old battlefield
for a sober, and I must say, quite often, a very moving reunion. But of course
if there was a veteran of the Civil War alive today, he’d have to be at least
138.

Well, today I suspect that not many Americans under 40 could tell you why next
Monday's holiday is called Labor Day. The holiday is there but the cause is as
vanished as Empire Day in Britain. Still, I don’t doubt that those 13, 14 men
running for next year’s presidency, especially the seven so-called Democratic
dwarfs, who are against the administration, they will probably show up in
Detroit, or Pittsburgh or some other industrial city, and promise a workers
utopia, to be ushered in on 20 January 1989 when they are elected.

But to everybody else Labor day is the theoretical end of the summer. I say,
theoretical because the theory is that all the public beaches will close,
families lucky enough to own or rent a summer cottage by the ocean, on a lake,
by the mountains, will shut up shop and return to the city.

The fact is that the climate of most places is such that September and October
are warm, sunny, usually brilliant months, and, in the more or less continuous
prosperity this country has enjoyed for the past 30 years, more and more people
take long weekends through the fall, and think of the working year really
beginning only after the baseball championships, the World Series, end in
mid-October. Still for parents, young and middle-aged, Labor Day is the end of
the summer fun and games – back to school, back to college.

Back to college these days confronts the parents with the grim prospect of
budgeting anything between $12,000 and $18,000 a year, some places higher, for
the education of an offspring during the regulation four years in college.
Except, I hasten to say, for children going to the state universities where
tuition is free, thanks to the foresight of the legislators in those states
that long ago started the state university system and charge the bill to the
taxpayer. But at the privately-endowed or self-sustaining universities and
colleges, the tariff is alarming.

The other day, an enterprising father put an advertisement in three of our
papers, appealing to all civic-minded readers to club together to send his son
to Yale, the college of the young man’s choice. Eighty thousand dollars the
father thought would be about right, for the required four years. You can
imagine the instant and voluminous response of other parents protesting that
the father's enterprise was only exceeded by his gall. It will be interesting
to see how much, if anything, he collects.

I should say that Americans, both in song and story, and in spite of the famous
Disney character, are just as adamant as any other people, in refusing to
believe that the world owes them a living. But while we have all accepted this
hard fact, there has sprouted a generation which does seem to assume that it
has a right to set conditions for its employment. Of course, that was the whole
reason for the rise, and, acceptance, of labour unions.

Today, however, you may have heard organised labour in America, is a smaller
percentage of the workforce than at any time since the beginning of the big
national organising drive of the 1930s. By the late '30s and '40s it had got up
to, I think, something like 30%. It’s now hovering, below 20%.

So, say that four workers in five, don’t belong to a union, it’s an astonishing
figure and, easily jumps to the conclusion that working man, from the labourer
to the office worker to the computer programmer, is pitifully bereft of
protection, and is back at the mercy of the buccaneering employer. Not at all.

What has happened throughout industry and manufacturing, and the service
industries, is that the private companies, learning from the long embattled
experience of the '30s and beyond, have come to offer, automatically as a term
of employment, what the private companies of long ago fought to resist, then
accepted and then were almost proud to offer.

I think of all those bloodily-fought issues: a legal minimum wage, time and a
half, the five-day week, illness benefits followed by the three weeks' or a
month's holiday, the company recreation club, the tennis courts, swimming
pools, the cost-of-living adjusted pension, the maternity leave and now, in
some firms, the paternity leave, for the young men who have, for a stated time,
to attend parenting classes.

Course, I am not saying that every motor car company, cell company, spaghetti
manufacturer, offers all these benefits and blessings to everybody who shows up
to a job, but in the past decade or so, American companies have had to offer
more and more of these incentives, especially in automobile factories, in
computer firms, high-tech companies, makers now of semi-conductors and coming
soon, super-conductors, in order to hire skilled workers who can compete with
the Japanese firms that made such a big thing of regarding their workers as
partners in a family firm.

The Japanese, during the past decade, their executives, presidents of firms,
have been over here in a steady stream giving instruction almost you might say,
giving classes to American executives not only in how to make an automobile,
but how to conduct labour management relations, on their model.

Now, the snag here, of course, is that the Japanese worker, for all his
company's paternal affection, earns less money than the American workers and in
view of the enormous Japanese cost of living, has nothing like the Americans
power, or choice as a consumer, and so, the American firms, by copying such
Japanese management indulgences, as worker profit-sharer plans, recreations
clubs, maternity leaves and so on, have made the cost of their product
uncompetitive against the Japanese product. It’s a stalemate, a bind, a chronic
unsolved problem.

Well I got off on labour management practices from mentioning that there
appears to be a new generation of Americans that not only sees no point in
joining a union, since so many of the old union demands are now normal perks of
industry and business, but a generation that will condescend to take a job,
provided the employer meets some particular demand.

I have rounded up from an employment specialist, reported by USA Today, some of
the more audacious of these demands, which, undoubtedly will be received with
chuckles by some potential employers, but, as I have checked, are not
considered unreasonable by various spritely young people.

For instance, a man who will gladly take on a new job, if he is paid for a
three-week holiday before he starts the job, another wants medical insurance to
pay for visits to a faith healer, a willingness to take the job only if there
is an Italian and a Chinese restaurant close to the office.

Another wants a guarantee that the job will never require trips to New York,
Los Angeles, Houston or Miami. (Some of us would certainly second that motion
if it applied to Miami and Los Angeles.) And here is a man who’s requested that
salary be boosted to meet the exact cost of his wife’s alimony. And here is
another who will take the job if he may every year take off Elvis Presley’s
birthday.

The most far-out demands are a man who has been out of work for four months,
who asks that his new employer, pay him half – two months income. Last, and
grandest of all, a man ready and willing to sign a contract with his new firm,
if it will bear the cost, of flying in his prize-winning horses from Australia.

The expert in the employment studies who put together this bizarre list, one Dr
Robert Haffe, admits that these particular examples of nerve or chutzpah, are,
as he says, unrealistic and self-defeating, but, he adds, they are not
freakish. Far from singular is the way he puts it.

We have come a long way from the first slogan of the first national labour
union of the United States which, in 1886, proclaimed the limits of its
demands, "Eight hours for work, eight hours for sleep, eight hours for what you
will."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP