President Clinton's alcohol and tobacco taxes - 18 June 1993

This time of year the republic resounds with graduation, or as they're called,
commencement ceremonies, what we used to call speech day, all across the land.
Not just universities and colleges of every kind, but all high schools.

Parades of every 17-year-old who came through with a passing mark, in a rented
nylon gown and a cardboard mortar board. Long parades, the distribution of
scrolls to everybody, in most places a commencement address, an uplifting
speech – usually a recital of stunning platitudes – and then, as the parade
patters out, a solemn tune, which I discover, most graduates of high schools
anyway, take to be some very old school song and what do you suppose it is? A
majestic tune with a heavy beat, played in some places with solemn respect and
a respectable band. In some country schools it's heroically strangled by two
trumpets, a flute, a fiddle and a trombone. Nothing less than Elgar's great
march from Pomp and Circumstance, known to generations of Britons as Land of
Hope and Glory.

At one or two recent graduations I've asked a pupil or two which land they had
in mind, whose bound they wanted to see set wider and wider. Seriously, I
wasn't as cruel as that because I could have foreseen the utter blankness of
their reaction. But it was news to me, and to them, that they were begging to
have the British empire expand and expand till it took in most of the world,
including, who knows, the former American colonies, which Edmund Burke and even
Doctor Johnson thought were lost, in the first place, by sheer stupidity.

Well, I was not, the other evening, at a graduation ceremony or even at the
following dance. I was at a kind of event that also flourishes in the spring in
every city in America, much to the credit of the people who organise these
events – a fundraising dinner. This past week or two and well into June, there
must be thousands of such dinners, at which the guests pay alarming mounts to
occupy a table for six or eight, and I'm talking about five or ten thousand
dollars a table. So in these hotels usually famous men and women – from the
castle to the ghetto or what we used quaintly to call every walk of life – will
rise to a riffle or a flourish from the man in the background and they will
plead eloquently or simply or funnily. The 90-year-old Bob Hope is a regular at
these ceremonies, on behalf of the hospital or maintaining the park or cleaning
up a neighbourhood or subsidising a housing plan in a slum or building a new
day-care centre or helping the sick, the lame, the disabled, the poor.

There are still legions of comfortably-off Americans and I'm not thinking about
the very rich, who still feel a regular obligation to comfort the afflicted and
they do it by these charity drives which in the spring often take this form of
a big subscription dinner. Now I know this is done in other lands but the
subscription, the contribution is a charity and so exempted from taxation. Dare
I say, I will, that I think one of the worst laws ever passed since the Second
World War in one of my favourite countries, was the law abolishing tax
deductions for charitable contributions. In the result, I gather from my
stealthy enquiries, that what it has done to two generations, has been to
stifle the impulse which I believe is a natural and a good impulse, to do
something on your own, from your own pocket for your neighbour. I suppose the
underlying comfortable assumption of this ban is that big daddy, the
government, will do it anyway, which we know all too well, from the experience
of Sweden and the Netherlands, to go no farther, it can do only in part.

The same impulses that work in, what in this country is known as public
television, started 30 years ago as a national alternative to the commercial
networks and stations, public television has over 300 city stations in its
network. It gets a small subsidy of a few millions from the government and it
depends regularly on corporations, big firms who financially back certain
regular programmes and forgo a commercial. But many, many stations on the
public network could not survive were it not for a couple of million viewers,
who send into their local station $15, $20, a hundred, a thousand, anything.
About a quarter of the entire revenue of the public television system comes
from viewers who wish to help and most, an interesting statistic, from middle
and working class families, from people send in once, twice a year, $15 or $20
at most.

Well I was at this charity dinner the other night, as I say, and towards the
end I stood up and squinted through a blazing spotlight at an audience in this
great ballroom and what I noticed first would have been noticeable in a
thousand other such events, in hundreds of American cities, namely, across this
ocean of glistening faces, about two thousand of them, not a rising plume of
smoke, not a whiff, nobody – and it's the same everywhere you go.

Since I last reported on San Francisco's initiative in banning smoking in all
offices and public buildings, the airports have now fallen into line. I know a
lady who smokes very little, but she insists on that very little and looking
around a few weeks ago in a huge airline building at Kennedy airport, looking
around for the usual sign marking smoking area, she couldn't find it and
checked with the girl at the check-in counter. Where, she asked, can I smoke?
Outside the building, madam, said the cool one. So the old lady took back her
ticket, her boarding pass, tramped off a mile through security, out and out on
to the sidewalk, puffed away briefly and 20 minutes later, was back at the
departure gate, having made her point – which is simply that she's not going to
have the government telling her what's good for her. Now all United States post
offices have joined the ban.

You'd think that President Clinton, remember him, would be happy as a clam with
this general movement. He's eager to raise money in his coming budget package
from what have become known as sin taxes. Tobacco, alcohol are the favourite
targets of non-sinners. Now Mr Clinton, as you may have noticed, has a habit of
thinking up many aspects of many policies, all at once. He is, you know, very
inquisitive, very well-informed and since well before his inauguration had
spend days and nights going into things more diligently, more exhaustively than
any president I can think of. However, he tends not to check first with the
senators and the lobbies and the businesses that might oppose him. Now
President Reagan had a few simple, strong convictions. He stayed with them, he
left his Cabinet and his aides and his allies in Congress to go ahead and do
all the spade-work and he went off sawing trees or riding his nag or just
having a television supper. But in the strange chemistry of leadership, these
greatly-mocked habits made him no less of a leader as strong and persuasive as
Franklin Roosevelt.

Well, now Mr Clinton first announces there are going to be sin taxes. So then
the distillers and the importers of hard liquor raised Cain, if you'll excuse
the pun, and good people raised the spectre of Prohibition and the hard liquor
people have other interests, other mergers, so the president quickly backed off
hard liquor. What about beer? Even beer ads are allowed on television. Good, so
the president announces he's all for a beer tax. Then he hears from his chief
whip in the House, whose constituency is St Louis, the capital, practically the
vat of the beer industry. Whoa, Dobbin. Other brewers from other states called
their Congressmen. The president was only now astonished to discover the size
and tenacity of the beer lobby and how many Congressmen it knew on the House
Ways and Means Committee.

So how about a cigarette tax? Only one American in four, and it will soon be
one in five, smokes, so that should be safe enough. An immediate outcry from
the four senators and many congressmen in the states of North and South
Carolina, add also a Virginian or two. Why? North Carolina, chief crops,
tobacco, soya bean, corn, South Carolina, chief crops, tobacco, soya bean,
corn, cotton, Virginia, chief crops, tobacco, soya bean, peanuts. And even up
in New England, just across from me, across Long Island Sound, surprisingly
Connecticut, chief crops, vegetables, sweetcorn, tobacco. The senior senator
from South Carolina thundered to the effect that a cigarette tax would throw
out of work half a million farmers in three states. The problems is essentially
the same as that of the farmers of Colombia and Peru. Sure, the coca leaf
produced cocaine. So find us another crop to keep us alive.

In a more personal way there was a touching irony. In a university town in
South Carolina, Clemson. Clemson University officials have just announced that
they are ordering a ban on all smoking in all university buildings except
dormitories. The big neighbouring tobacco growers immediately suggested they
might withdraw scholarship funds amounting to over a quarter of a million
dollars a year. One of the largest of them, bearing the euphoniously historic
Southern name of John Monroe Holliday said sadly, I co-operate in so many ways
with the university but if they take my bread and butter away, it's going to be
a different story.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP