The Cambodian guerilla coalition - 20 July 1990

In London, once Wimbledon was over and I had no cause to be glued to the tube,
I yielded once or twice to the incessant finger-wagging warnings of my spouse
that unless I got out and took a walk I would find myself permanently frozen to
a chair.

I have nothing against walking in London that I don’t have against walking in
New York or San Francisco or any other place that I find myself holed up in. I
just don’t like walking on cement, on flagstones, that’s to say on what
Shakespeare and Americans call sidewalks and Britons call the pavement. Walking
on green grass in pursuit of a little white ball is something else.

I’m afraid my distaste for street walking is much like that of my old guru
Henry Mencken, who was once asked why he never took any regular exercise. He
said, “Any man who steps off a sidewalk takes his life in his hand.”

Well I don’t step off the London pavement onto the roadway without a little
wary reconnaissance, mainly to see if the cars and buses are whizzing from the
left or the right. In the past fortnight – you’ll see I’m learning to say
fortnight again – I saved the lives of two Americans who were sallying off into
the traffic on the assumption that it was coming at them from the left, when it
was coming from their right.

“No wonder,” said one grateful man from Austin, Texas, “they have these big
signs painted up against the kerbs, look right, look left.”

No such guidelines are printed in American cities, as Britons on a first visit
here discover. So, instinct is the perilous guide, as Winston Churchill
discovered to his cost, 60 years ago.

Here was a man who, in his late 50s as a soldier, traveller, escaped prisoner
of war, a survivor of the brutal landscapes of two or three continents had
experienced more hazards to life and limb certainly than any politician of his
time. And yet the one really damaging accident of a lifetime occurred here in
New York City when he stepped off the sidewalk on 5th Avenue, I believe, looked
the wrong way and was knocked down by a motor car. He never completely
recovered from it.

There’s one thing, though, about walking in London which I noticed years ago
but which I was able to confirm picturesquely by looking down on a busy street
from a hotel upper window. I spotted an American couple. They appeared clumsy,
they stopped and started they tended to bump into people.

This is because in London, and I guess all over Britain, there’s no rule or
custom of the sidewalk, the pavement. In America people tend to conform to the
rule of the roadway, that’s to say since they drive on the right they walk on
the right, so there are two rough streams of human traffic.

In London, I find, you thread your way through people walking, left, right and
centre. So on the very few expeditions I took I slunk off into quiet side
streets and admired the work of Mr Nash and walked through Belgravia, and for
the first time in my life found myself thinking a kind thought about Marshal
Göring, he it was – some people say it was more likely Albert Speer, but my
ferocious research says Göring – advised Adolf Hitler to keep the bombers, the
bombs, away from Belgravia and the surrounding crescents because Göring had
persuaded the Fuhrer that that was the most majestic and beautiful part of
London and would, once Britain had surrendered, make the most perfect site for
the British capital of the Third Reich.

By a comical paradox the marshal pointed out to the Luftwaffe that what made
Belgravia possibly the most conspicuous target in London, a mass of white
stucco, made it also the easiest target to avoid.

Well all these pleasures and observations came to an end last Tuesday when we
flew back to New York and winged over Long Island and trundled and taxied into
Kennedy airport and came out of the cool arrival building into the oven of the
outdoors and climbed into the furnace of a taxi that was not air conditioned.

The driver was an Indian – of India that is to say – he didn’t trust air
conditioning, the motor overheats, you know. And we shot through blasts of
sweaty air through Queens and on to Manhattan island and through the uptown
slums.

I always say, the moment I get back, why do I live in this jungle? And then
always some small thing happens and within no time you’re reconciled. The
doorman of our apartment house threw up his hands in welcome, a middle-aged
Puerto Rican, he said, “M. Cook, I have good news for you.”

This man, who is on the four to midnight shift, lives by day close to his radio
set following the fortunes of his beloved team the Mets. The good news was
really for him. His team, after a disastrous start to the season was on its way
up and up.

I went round the corner to the French baker, smiles, and embraces, at the
little Arab market absurdly called a supermarket, they asked about London.
“London town you call it huh?” “That’s right” I said.

At the liquor store my friend Art was there, a mountainous man with a
permanently mocking smile. “So,” he said, “welcome home, you need dollars
right?”

“Right,” I started writing a cheque. I don’t believe I’ve used my bank in
midtown to get cash for oh, at least 30 years. “You’ve got pounds?” asked Art.
“That I have,” I said, flashing several bills, pardon me notes, of three
denominations.

“Tell you what,” he said, “I’ll give you one on one.”

“Not me,” I said, “£1 buys 1.80 dollars,". “I know it,” he said, “Just wanted
to see if you were on the ball.”

This little expedition took about 15 minutes but already I felt at home, and
knew it once I got inside my apartment and sat down to the faint breathing of
air conditioning in the study, a nice steady 70 degrees, something I didn’t
have indoors in London. And looked out at the heat haze trembling over the
great blobs of foliage in the park and saw the seagulls skimming for relief
into the reservoir.

Next morning, up astonishingly early for me since it was already noon in the
time zone I’d just left, so to the papers. I’d left London in the teeth of the
storm over Mr Ridley. I was told later that of course the New York Times had
carried the story, not a headline maker, good careful piece from its London
bureau chief. But it caused no waves, naturally the big news, the headlines,
once the London summit was over, were about other things.

I really came to a couple of days later to pick up where I’d left off with the
topics that are preoccupying Americans. Looking at the front page of the New
York Times on Thursday morning I realised once again that for all our shared
interest in Eastern Europe and Mr Gorbachev and the rest, once you’re in
America the news, especially the foreign news, is seen from a different curve
of the planet.

The east, the Far East and what we now call the Pacific Rim are matters of
continuing concern, so there’s never a day when there isn’t something from
Beijing, from Manila. The chances of a stable democracy are still very wobbly
there.

From Tokyo, of course, but suddenly on Thursday the big news carried a
three-column front page headline, in the New York Times, “US Shifts Cambodia
Policy, Ends Recognition of Rebels, Agrees to Talk with Hanoi”.

Here are the first two sentences of the Times report, “In a major policy
reversal secretary of state, James A Baker announced today that the Bush
administration was withdrawing its diplomatic recognition of the Cambodian
guerilla coalition which includes the Communist Khmer Rouge and opening
negotiations with Vietnam.

"Mr Baker, speaking to reporters after a two-hour meeting with Soviet foreign
minister Mr Shevardnadze, said the move was necessary because existing American
policy appeared increasingly likely to promote a return to power of the Khmer
Rouge under whose rule in the 1970s more than a million Cambodians were killed
or died of starvation."

Well, perhaps it’s hard to convey the stunning effect of this new move. Again,
human rights groups here and many congressmen have been pressing for this
change – a policy, we should remember, that most recently is attributed to the
Reagan administration but which in fact started with Jimmy Carter.

The original motive was to improve relations with China, back there in the late
'70s and to defer to the nations of South East Asia that felt threatened by
Vietnam. So Mr Carter and President Reagan who followed him, turned a deaf ear
to the human rights uproar to approve China’s support of the admittedly
murderous Khmer Rouge.

This move, and the importance of it to the United States, is another example of
a burden that the United States carries, has carried, since the end of the
Second War. The burden of being seen abroad as Britain was for most of the
century – as the big power responsible for half the world.

Whereas since the war, the Second War, the other former great powers can tread
water about rebellions, totalitarian regimes, human rights abuses, in remote
countries they no longer have interests in. But the United States is not
expected to be a spectator.

I’ll bet most Englishmen, Frenchmen, Scandinavians, Dutchmen have no idea if
their country has a policy at all towards Ethiopia, Angola, Albania, Malaysia,
Cambodia, Cuba even. The United States is the succeeding big shot who is
expected to have a policy and because America and Americans go on so vocally
about democracy as their special faith, their triumph, those policies are also
expected to be humane.

So the opportunities for cynicism when a supported ally is less than
simon-pure, are many. It’s the price I think that Americans have to pay for, 30
years ago, the never-forgotten Kennedy inaugural, “Let every nation know,
whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden,
meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe, to assure the survival
and the success of liberty.”

It’s a lovely, ringing thought, but in the world of real politique, impossible
to act on. Certainly all around the globe.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP