Lockerbie and anti-terror laws - 15 March 1996

The day we heard the sad, atrocious news from Scotland was, by a grim
coincidence, the day the president of the United States met in an unprecedented
summit with 27 national leaders in Egypt to deplore terrorism in the Middle
East and hope to do something about it.

It was also the day that the House of Representatives in Washington tried and
failed to write an anti-terrorism bill that would match a more drastic one
passed by the Senate last June. And also on the same day there was a shot of
good news. For the first time since the atomic age was born in the thunderclap
of Hiroshima, the United States has discovered a way of containing the most
dangerous form of liquid waste from nuclear weapons, and last Tuesday they
opened a factory in South Carolina to prove it.

We all know that for more than 40 years, from the first days that four nations
anyway began to stockpile nuclear weapons, there has been this general problem
of safe storage and the particular problems of the leakage of radioactivity
into the atmosphere and of liquid waste into the soil. We all know too of
serious breakdowns and explosions. There have been 11 accidents at nuclear
facilities since 1957,

The first, which the British government decided had caused 37 cancer deaths,
was at a plutonium production reactor in Liverpool. The most frightening, in
the United States, was the overheated reactor that threatened the meltdown of
its core at place called Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania in 1979. 140,000
people were evacuated. But worst of all, as surely anybody who was alive and
sentient 10 years ago will never forget, was the fire, the fires and explosions
at a nuclear power plant, Chernobyl, in Kiev, which left 31 people dead on the
spot and spewed radioactivity all over Europe. There is still a sizable stretch
of northern Italy that is unfit for any growing thing and I believe a part of
Cumbria that can no longer be cow pasture.

The new factory in South Carolina has taken liquid waste which had been stored
in steel drums that are now rotting, turned it into solids and re-stored it in
a form of glass that can absorb radiation. The stuff may not be safe for
thousands of years but there'll be no leakage in, they say, the foreseeable
future, which should take care of most of us.

About the Scottish obscenity, the one certain thing I think we can say, which I
admit offers bleak comfort to the parents and friends, is that absolutely
nothing can be done about such sporadic horrors which are happening all across
the globe. They always did, but to know about them you had to take a daily
paper interested in news from China, Siberia, Tibet, Chile, France, Germany,
wherever, and dig the lurid item out of the inner pages and the fine print.

One of the many burdens television has loaded us with, is the certainty that
every multiple crime, massive accident, big fire, small assassination, can be
known about, can be seen that same day, by everyone alive with a television
set. What I'm saying is that there's no way of taking precautions against the
sudden brainstorm of a man with a gun, anywhere on earth. No magic formula, no
psychiatrist, no detective, no witch doctor. The Romans thought they had
portents of trouble to come. They didn't, and nobody has had since, except
frivolous astrologers who pretend to.

But about terrorism organised, certainly this country's pretty steamed up after
the appalling bombing of the World Trade Centre in this city and the more
recent explosion of Oklahoma City's federal building. By the way, one of the
conspirators in the World Trade Centre disaster is said to have been foiled in
a plan, carefully worked out, to explode eight or nine American commercial air
flights on the same day. Last summer the United States Senate passed what it
called a Terrorism Protection Act. It increased the staff of the FBI and
loosened the law that made tracing explosive devices an invasion of privacy.

But there've been lots of objections and there will be more to other parts of
the act that give more power to the police and in some emergencies, the
military, to trail suspects and to keep a closer watch on aliens, which is
quite an undertaking when you consider that about 400,000 aliens, legal and
illegal, pour into this country every week. The objections will be, as always,
based on two phrases in the First Amendment to the Constitution: Freedom of
speech and the right of the people peaceably to assemble. That last right can
cover a multitude of gatherings.

As we learned in the heyday of the gangster era – I mean when gangsters were
recognisable on the street and in nightclubs, not as now, well-groomed members
of the Mafia who deny there is such a thing as the Mafia and who, when arrested
in a meeting of their brethren or family, can always protest the invasion of
the police, the FBI or whoever, into an innocent get-together of Friday night
chums or a business meeting, involved entirely in making better and cheaper
doughnuts or mousetraps or whatever business they pretend to be in. And you can
see also how trigger-happy cops could intrude on any meeting of the newly
arrived or old arrived aliens, under suspicion of being spies or nowadays,
terrorists. Since the Oklahoma City bombing, the Islamic population of that
state has been intimidated and in some places, bullied. Not because they took
any part in the plot, but because, after the arrest of the Islamic suspects in
the New York World Centre bombing, all members of an Islamic sect even the most
decent and law-abiding families, lived, moved and worked under a cloud of
suspicion.

Now assuming, which is a mighty, a miraculous assumption, that both houses of
Congress will come to devise and agree on an effective bill to combat
terrorism, there will remain the most American of stumbling blocks: the
admirable concern for the liberty of the subject and the hysterical
interpretation of the First Amendment by well-meaning groups that believe every
child is innocent of swiping anything from the kitchen until they see the jam
smeared on his face. Or, as one newspaper here put it, Congress is right to
give federal law enforcement agencies more money and manpower but diminishing
American liberties is not the solution to terrorism. What the solution can be,
while still preserving everyone's right to say anything on his or her mind and
to gather for innocent or villainous purposes, what the solution might be, it
does not say.

In the numerous talk shows, panels and public discussions on television that
came on while the House was debating its anti-terrorist bill, many people
echoed a popular complaint. That advertising the techniques and tricks of
bombers and plotters, terrorists in general, would give ideas to mischievous
people, to which Senator Sam Nunn, chairman of a relevant Senate committee, had
the right, blunt answer. The terrorists, he said, already have the ideas, more
and better ideas than are advertised or discovered. The terrorists who plot and
plan on a grand scale are intelligent, imaginative, ingenious. This is always
hard for some people to believe, who think of a madman as somebody who babbles
and foams at the mouth, someone to whom you cannot, in your mind's eye,
attribute high intelligence.

Well just to add the final cheerful note to a frightening week, I ought to note
what's also come up in Washington and no doubt in talks in the White House, is
the discovery that in the vast area of what was the Soviet Union, there are 80,
80 centres, store houses, if you like, of enriched plutonium and uranium that
are not monitored all the time, some of which are guarded by one person.

One former and, I guess, reformed spy, confessed this week, how easy it had
been to get past single guard, go into a lab and swipe a pound or two of
plutonium, which in itself may be harmless, but I ought to mention that a year
or two ago, a young Princeton student, 19 I think, and not a whiz at physics,
acquired a small amount of uranium and over the weekend, followed directions,
well-known enough to have been published years ago, and made a bomb that could
have destroyed half of the town of Princeton, New Jersey. He handed it over to
the government.

Well there must be something or other that happened this week that could take
our mind off these doomsday thoughts. There were two items I made a note of.
The oldest living American Indian has died in Elko, Nevada. She was Mamie
"Marie" Bill, Bill was the surname, a Shoshone. Her father and a brother both
lived to be over 100, she died at 112. it's always interesting to know to what
very old people attribute their longevity. They rarely let us down. Mamie Bill
then said, it was entirely due to her diet: squirrel, rabbit and deer.

There was a curious and much questioned decision of the Supreme Court two weeks
ago, having to do with what is known as the law of forfeiture. A husband had
sexual contact with a prostitute in a car owned jointly by him and his wife.
The innocent wife protested that her share in the car could not be held by the
government. The court said the property on which the crime was committed was
tainted and the government had the right to the whole car and its value.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP