Clinton's State Of The Union address - 26 January 1996

Two American institutions were on display this week, one of which is purely
American, the other of which used to be English also, indeed it was invented in
England but was abolished. For the first institution, the United States
Constitution, debated on and composed in the summer of 1787, says: "He shall
from time to time give to the Congress information of the state of the union
and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary
and expedient."

Not all presidents have felt any obligation to muse on the state of the union,
at least not in public. And for a century or more, the custom was to send to
Congress a written message and have it read out by a clerk. But in our time, by
which I mean the time of mass circulation newspapers radio and television, I
mean in fact the 20th century, every incoming president knew that the annual
state of the union address to Congress was going to be reported to the whole
country, not as in the previous centuries, to the few people who could read the
few newspapers that were printed.

Roosevelt the second, Franklin, was the first president to take to the radio
and to revel in it, because he was a persuasive at times a hypnotic
broadcaster. And with the coming of television of course since, everyone
secretly fancies himself as an actor. Every president since the Second World
War has hastened, so to speak, to expose himself to the largest possible
audience as often as possible and the state of the union address is a gorgeous
opportunity to have your say for as long as you like without protest or
interruption. However, something new happened this time, a precaution that
deserves to be called historic.

The 80 odd freshman Republicans who've been the most belligerent soldiers of
the Gingrich "revolutionary army", the most unyielding supporters of a budget
balanced their way and no one else's, these freshmen were called together on
Tuesday morning and given a little warning lecture by a party leader, not about
policy but about decorum, how to behave during the president's address. This is
not only remarkable, it is unprecedented, but somehow the word got around to
the Republican high command in both Houses that some of the Republican freshmen
were in a mood to protest openly, maybe to groan at some of the presidents more
partisan remarks, possibly to his, or make mocking sounds, which is absolutely
against the protocol in either House.

In debates, there is no applause, no booing, very rarely any laughter, with,
which is rare in any assembly, passes without a chuckle, but the president
state of the union address is a very majestic occasion. A supreme court is
there, all the cabinet, the diplomatic core and it has its own well understood
protocol. At least, it's been well understood by both Houses for a century or
more until the arrival last year of the Republican young Turk, the first time
congressman, they have introduced into the House debates, notably disturbing
signs of rudeness and temper, which have upset the old timers and for the first
time in memory, the good behaviour of some congressmen was in doubt. To
everybody's relief nothing happened.

On Tuesday evening as the Democrats and their families and the gallery rose
mechanically and applauded mechanically 74 times, the young Republicans
followed their elders, they either literally sat on their hands or glowered
like puzzled owls at the hullabaloo going on around them. The address itself,
the most striking note of it was the president's shoplifting of many of the
slogans the Republicans have had on display since they took over both houses in
1992: an end to a big government, a tax break for the middle class, tough
penalties on young criminals, a balanced budget.

Mr Clinton sounded for all the world like an old liberal Republican, talk about
moving to the centre from which point most elections are won. Mr Clinton
sounded most of the time like anything but an old or a new Democrat. When the
whole glittering pack was assembled, and just before the president started to
speak, many eyes were turned to the front row of the gallery where Mrs Clinton
sat with her daughter Chelsea. Mrs Clinton is the subject, or object, of the
second American institution that came into the spotlight this week. For the
first time in history, a president's wife has been subpoenaed to appear before
a grand jury. Would the president ignore this strange some say humiliating
precedent? Of course he did not, he didn't mention the cause but at one point
he looked up to the gallery and paid tribute to the support he'd had from a
wonderful wife, a magnificent mother and a great first lady.

We talked last time about the first ladies who down through the 200 years of
the republic had been criticised for not staying in the background preferably
in the kitchen, the sitting room and the nursery of the White House and
behaving as a good president's wife should. And how is that?

Well I went into the very different ways that first ladies have defied the
domestic stereotype, indeed there have been so many departures from what each
succeeding generation thinks off as the norm, that the rebel first lady is
really the norm, so many of them I didn't even have time to mention Florence
Harding, the strong wife of a weak, poker playing, amiable ladies man, a first
lady who rewrote the presidency inaugural address, who passed on cabinet
appointments, who fed him – because she was more intelligent than he was – the
policies he came to espouse. And how about Mrs Woodrow Wilson who for 18 months
was positively in charge in the White House, who alone decided who should be
allowed to see the president and who shouldn't, while the vast majority of the
people didn't know it, the president sat paralysed in shaded rooms.

And what is Mrs Clinton's dereliction? Mainly, though it's almost forgotten
now, that she was given the job at the beginning of creating the presidents
program for a national health insurance system. Of course it should have been
done by a cabinet officer or some other imminent public figure heading a
presidential commission and the plan was enormous, over elaborate, impossible
to simplify and likely to create more bureaus than it was intended to destroy.
It fell apart with a heavy thud. It was a mistake. But Mrs Clinton's subpoena
has nothing to do with her political interference, it is to try and find out
how much work she did 10 years ago on a building society that went bust and on
a real estate firm of questionable integrity.

The records, files, documents, bills, tax returns and so on, many many
thousands of them have come out in driblets whereas the Senate committee
looking into the chances of fraud say that they should have been turned over
years ago. Two sets of documents that record Mrs Clinton's legal work on these
dubious projects have only just been released, they showed up in the White
House not in Arkansas or in the files of the accused company managers.

On Tuesday then came the news that Mrs Clinton had been summoned to appear not
before the Senate committee but before a federal grand jury, which has been
called to see if anyone in the White House obstructed justice in handling the
records of Mrs Clinton's former law firm a grand jury. It's always a shock to
Americans to have to explain the phrase and the function of an institution
invented in England no later than the 15th century I think, but which was
abolished there in 1933.

The original idea was a noble one. Before there were permanent regional courts
in England, judges rode off from capital cities, on circuit as they said. A
judge would arrive in Nottingham say, to listen to a charge of robbery with
intent to murder against say, John Spook, and the judge of course didn't know
John Spook, but the practice grew of inviting John Spook's neighbours 15 in
some places, 23 here, to be questioned to say whether they thought John Spook
was likely or not to commit such a crime. If the charge was ridiculous they
said so and the man was let go. If it was credible then the grand jury voted to
indict him for a probable cause, which meant that he ought now to be tried by a
regular jury.

In England, I think the death nail of this system was sounded by the late
brilliant waspish and long forgotten character F.E. Smith when he was Lord
Chief Justice Birkenhead, he made a brilliant mocking speech, as was his wont,
just before I think the First World War in which he pointed out, that to put a
suspect through a preliminary hearing in the presence of his neighbours was a
good idea when the neighbours numbered a few hundred, but that to choose a
score or so residents of a city of seven millions, and pretending they knew him
as neighbours, was ridiculous.

20 years later Britain abolished the grand jury system leaving the question of
whether a suspect should go to trial, to a magistrate or a tribunal. But in the
United States, the grand jury system flourishes. I ought to say now before you
read lurid testimony at Mrs Clinton's hearing that the grand jury is absolutely
the creature of the prosecutor, usually of the district attorney, a witness
cannot have a lawyer present nor call witnesses in his or her defence, you hear
only the prosecution side and if you were to be indicted then the headlines
would flare – first lady indicted! And I've always been astonished to find how
many Americans, educated Americans, think that indicted is an early form of
conviction. All it says is, perhaps there's a case here, let's have a trial.
It's worth remembering that when Mrs Clinton's testimony is reported. Oh
incidentally, the grand jury's hearings are supposed to be secret and it's
record un-publishable – that's just another courtesy that has gone by the
board.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP