Boston busing crisis - 18 October 1974

I mentioned last week the blessed relief from our troubles of the World Series,
the play-off in seven games between the champions of the two national baseball
leagues.

It came to a climax this weekend and it occurs to me quite seriously that in
some cities, where the schoolchildren are back from their holidays and where
they are under court order, to start mingling their blacks and whites by
"busing", the World Series may have dampened, or at worst postponed, the
defiance of white parents.

Not however, in Boston, where almost every day there have been menacing and
bloody scenes reminiscent of Little Rock Arkansas, before President Eisenhower
sent in federal troops. For a month now the country has looked uneasily at its
television screens in the evening, to see and hear the latest news from South
Boston. Northerners and southerners alike have goggled at their tellies, and
made the same simple comment: this is not Georgia, this is not Alabama, this is
the north, this is Boston, the old cradle of liberty.

Old Bostonians are very much on the defensive and hasten to point out that
nine-tenths of Boston looks and goes about its daily business much as usual.
But it’s difficult even for Bostonians to pretend that the bitter defiance of
the whites is an accident of geography. It is in reality an incident of the
peculiar national, what we now call the ethnic, composition of South Boston,
and nowhere else.

South Boston is a broad finger of land fringed with docks and jutting out into
the Atlantic. It’s practically divided, seen from the air, by a motor freeway
going through. On one side is a poor section inhabited mostly by blacks. On the
other side is an old compact, middle and lower middle-class neighbourhood
originally settled by the English, and then the Irish, and later on swollen by
Poles and Lithuanians.

It’s worth a moment’s reflection, I think, that when the central and eastern
European immigrants came in over the turn of the century the Irish took a
suspicious view of them, as the original English settlers had taken a poor view
of the invading Irish. By now, indeed for the past three generations, the Irish
have predominated and they get along well enough with the long-entrenched Poles
and Lithuanians. Even if they were still disposed to quarrel you maybe sure
they would close ranks today, for the visible fact is that they are all white,
and the intruding schoolchildren, coming in from the other side of the freeway,
are all black.

The hard facts of the turmoil are plain enough. A federal court ruled in the
spring that, beginning with this school year in September, south Boston must
achieve a racial balance in its public schools. Where there had been say, 90%
whites and 10% blacks, black children must be bused in to achieve something
like a 50:50 or 40:60 ratio. Of course, it’s never as pat at that. But the way
the old south Bostonians see it is the way indignant whites have seen the
busing experiment in Florida, and Virginia, and Ohio, and California.

An old character – a legendary bartender – said we just don’t see the sense of
it, we are a tight community we know everybody, it’s a good place to go up and
work. We are almost a town in ourselves and we can’t see why children should be
bused in every day from six miles away when they could go to school across the
street? To this, the blacks make the obvious retort that the school across
their street tends to be run down and the teaching indifferent. Then why, say
the angry white parents, should we send our kids from a good school to a bad
one? The main grievance, the main fear, of the whites is, of course, the fear
of familiarity with the blacks. The secondary fear, which is much more often
mentioned, is that their children will be bused off to black neighbourhoods and
find themselves slipping down to the level of the least educated blacks.

These are all elements in a very well-intentioned social experiment which,
after initial outbreaks of violence, is working well in some places. In others,
not. In Boston, it’s not working at all because the white parents and children
are maintaining a furious boycott of the court order. So from the first day of
school only the busy buses were the ones fetching black children into the tight
old community of the Irish, the Poles and Lithuanians. And at once there were
noisy parades, fights, bloodshed and beaten-up blacks.

As the busing has gone on there have been days when no teaching, no schooling,
was possible, when the blacks have sat out their siege till they went out to
take the bus home. Then the fights have started up again and we’ve had both
whites and blacks brutally beaten up. Inevitably, there has been sporadic
looting.

The mayor of Boston said through the difficult early days that the violence was
inevitable, but it would, as it has done in other places, taper off and finally
wither away, as the children themselves grew to know each other and were able
to override the prejudice of their parents. But it hasn’t happened.

The riots grew worse and last week Mayor White went back to the court room of
the judge, who had given out the original busing order. He asked for over a 100
federal marshals to help keep order. The judge turned him down, and asked him
to exhaust the help of the local police and then perhaps, the national guard.
Mayor White shuddered at that suggestion, and recalls the ineptness of the
national guard – which in each state is a voluntary reserve of ordinary
citizens – at handling racial violence, he recalled the horrors of Kent State
University where those students were killed by panicky, or trigger-happy,
national guardsmen.

The next day, the President of the United States opened his mouth and, in Mayor
White's anguished opinion, planted his foot solidly in it. President Ford said
he didn’t agree with the original court order, and had always thought that
forced busing was not the best solution to quality education. Having given, by
these remarks, a boost to the defiance of the most militant south Boston
whites, the president then added, rather limply, that still and all it was very
important that the citizens of Boston respect the law.

By the way, this intrusion of the president into the affair has given many
people an insight into the way he thinks and works which greatly disturbs them.
In the short two months or more he has been in an office, he has time and again
made a decision on his own – the Nixon pardon for instance – and only during
the subsequent outcry has he consulted the interested people who might have
tempered his impulsiveness if they had been consulted in the first place. On
the Nixon pardon he never talked to the special prosecutor or the attorney
general, or his top advisers. On the south Boston business, he never called up
Mayor White or the judge in the case, or the governor of Massachusetts.

Understandably Mayor White was livid. He was now denied federal marshals, the
police were overwhelmed by the rioters, and the mayor found himself with no
reserves to handle the white protestors who had now been invigorated by the
president's opinion. President Ford then tried to make up for his unintended
encouragement by broadcasting a message urging the rejection of violence – it
did no good.

So now, the governor of Massachusetts got in to the act. He requested federal
troops and meanwhile mobilised 400 national guardsmen. The White House said the
troops would be made available only when the governor could prove that he had
exhausted the full policing resources of the city and the state. Well, after
that, seven white students were injured; one was put in the hospital with
multiple stab wounds and later in the day, a black girl was stabbed.

Mayor White, who was not consulted by the governor before the national guard
was alerted, was by now a very ragged and angry man. By Wednesday morning it
appeared that the White House might have repented yet again – four divisions of
paratroopers were put at the ready to go into Boston if things got intolerable.

Boston, of course, is not unique either in being subjected to a federal court's
ordering forced busing, or in experiencing precisely the sequence of violent
events that has happened. What suggests a bloodier outcome there is the fact
that the boycott has never broken down, that south Boston regards itself as an
ethnic enclave that may not be broke up, and more than anything the fact that
the blacks come in as a body from their own tight community across the tracks,
so to speak.

The busing experiment, has worked best in cities so large, and so diffuse in
their national and racial origins, that what is achieved is another sort of
mixture. New blacks, to be sure, but also new whites from the other end of
town. South Boston, on the contrary, is like a miniature of one section of
Detroit in 1943, a working-class neighbourhood entirely white, compact, long
settled where suddenly, armies of Negros – who had come up from the south to
work at the huge, aeroplane factory of Willow Run – armies of Negros moved into
the housing of the poor whites. It produced the worst and most truly race riot
in modern times, not excluding the burning of Detroit a quarter-century later.

All we can say now, I think, is that if federal troops are used and the streets
rumble with tanks to protect the black children on the way to school, it will
take a long time for the races to mingle in goodwill without tanks and troops.
And if the protection fails, if the defiance of the south Bostonians wins out,
then the prospect elsewhere for forced busing will be very dim. It comes down
in the end – and the end maybe nearer than we think – to the growing question
of whether any body of whites can be forced, in an democracy, to do something
that rouses all their most belligerent instincts.

Last weekend there was another distraction from our troubles that after that
may be seen incredibly frivolous even to mention. One man, an old crooner,
appeared before 20,000 people in a trance in Madison Square Garden. But he drew
a television audience of astonishing size – 50-odd million Americans looked in
on him, better than one in four.

He was Frank Sinatra. Chubbier now, but no less cocky, the voice a memory of
its great days but the artfulness of pretending that you are his favourite
companion in a neighbourhood bar was so beguiling that you would have thought
the audience at Madison Square Garden was an Indian multitude in the old days
listening to Ghandi.

Mostly, I noticed, as the camera roved around, they were middle-aged and
once-fetching females, swooning in a day of memory for America during the
second war, when their world was young and uncomplicated and Sinatra was their
troubadour. The way they sat and worshipped set back women’s lib, I should
guess, by at least one generation.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP