500th letter - 8 September 1957

It is almost as much of a shock to me as it surely is to you to realise that
this is the 500th Letter from America. I can not truthfully say that it seems
only yesterday when these letters began, it seems like an age since they were
first conceived and, after a short labour that would have done credit to a
rabbit, were delivered to a sceptical world exactly 11 years and six months ago
today.

Since 1946, we have seen many things. We have seen Harry Truman emerge from the
lowly fame he enjoyed with Ginger Rogers as the only other known native of
independence Missouri and we've seen him go back there. He now drives his car
every morning to work even as any other wage slave and most mornings he says he
is commanded by his wife at the door not to forget the new dish mop or the next
insurance premium or that book from the library.

This was the man who ordered the dropping of the atom bomb, who stripped one of
the most celebrated and certainly the gaudiest of the war generals of all his
commands and retired him to the comparative obscurity of a chairman of a
business machine company.

We have seen the swift beginning and the uncertain end of the first war in
history fought by an international company of nations for their own collective
security. We have watched the United Nations, which undertook that war, lose
much of the bloom of the rosy youth that rollicked around the fun-lit hills of
San Francisco. We have grown grey in the recognition that Soviet Russia, a
jolly, if rambunctious, pal at San Francisco holds to its ambition to bestride
and dominate the western World, the only argument amongst us now being about
the means she intends to use to do it.

In a very few years, we have seen the famous under-defended frontier between
Canada and the United States deprived of all meaning as the rather desperate
frontier common to both of us has been pushed far to the north, to the edge of
Alaska and Canada. We have seen frontiers shed their forts and concrete
emplacements and emerge as a 5,000-mile screen of radar towers scanning the air
24 hours a day for the first Russian jet coming over the pole.

Old names in 12 years have taken on brave and grizzly meanings: Israel,
Hungary, Swiss, Malaya, Indonesia, Algeria. New and menacing words have come
into our vocabulary – automation, thermal nuclear, integration, the
intercontinental ballistic missile, rock 'n' roll. The whole of American
society, fattened in 12 years by another 20 million people, has ceased to
revolve around the city and the farm. The farmer is now a permanently
subsidised crop planter put out to grass; the city is turning into a cluster of
office buildings. The new American social unit is the classless ranch-type
suburb with its supermarket and its shopping centre complete with parking space
for 2,000 cars.

I'm having these thoughts as I sit on a terrace overlooking a noble bay at the
end of Long Island. Nothing, at first glance, has changed here since the iconic
Indians speared for blue fish and porgies and greeted very courteously the
first white fugitives from New Haven colony. I went through the nearest
graveyard a day or two ago. The tombstones, the big ones for the grown-ups, the
children's ones surmounted by skittish angels, are no mouldier than they used
to be.

The names of the families that run our farms and stores and post office and
lumber yard are the same names inscribed on the first stones, which were sunk
in the 1640s. The Grizzwolds and Moores and Vails and Smiths gave their sons to
the Revolutionary War and the War of 1812 and the Civil War and the Spanish
American War and the First World War and the Second. The cleaner stones add the
youngest generation of the same names that fell in Korea.

But the place itself, the landscape, is much as it will be I suppose a hundred
years from now. It is the first flawless day of the fall, though the calendar
says not so. The sky is a clean wash of blue; the bay is a sheet of blue glass.
The bayberry and chigger grass are turning red, as they do at this time of
year. The wild ducks are waddling south.

The wind, says the weather bureau, is from the south at seven miles per hour.
The weather bureau is a liar, there is no wind; there is only hot sun and
silence. It's the sort of day on which you can feel the sand rustle between
your toes, on which the window panes in the little house on a sandy point four
miles across the bay glisten like flies preserved in amber. Our cat, called
Tisha in a hasty moment before we discovered she ought to be called Tom flaps a
lazy paw at my paper.

Thinking back in these surroundings to the first American letter, do I again
recall Korea and the United Nations and the jet airplanes and the rising star
of Khrushchev and the falling comet of Adlai Stevenson? I do not. Like any
other humans surrounded by the things, the sights and the people he loves, he
thinks about himself. And there's a memory brewing up in me, which – because it
belongs to me and nobody else – is more vivid than anything caught in the
headlines. It's the memory of how these talks started, and I should like to
tell you about it.

It seems like a generation ago since I came into Waterloo Station on a damp
night in January 1946 and thought I was in a catacomb. There were few lights in
the station and they were painted over black to obscure their dim rays from the
German bombers, which happily were no longer overhead, but if the war was over,
its scars were everywhere. And to a visitor from the big brash non-combatant
land across the ocean, London looked like a sad city still living in old
bandages.

I would have been only mildly surprised to see people like the Siberian
refugees in Russian novels shuffling about with newspapers around their feet.
You must please forgive the memory of this shabby picture because I've never
forgotten it, whereas you had to forget it and outlive it, if only from the
healthy suspicion in a proud nation that austerity – originally a noble word –
had taken on a meaning that was gloomy and abominable. But the night when the
train disgorged its well-pressed trans-Atlantic travellers and the customs men
frisked us for currency and nylons and bottles of the nourishing produce of
Scotland, that night you had not begun to outlive the condition of a man who
has used up all his capital, mortgaged his house and moved into a one-room
lodging with his ration card and his oldest jacket.

Later in the evening, I suffered from an emotion I never expected to have. An
old and whimsical English friend of mine, released from his customary tact by
some hefty pulls on the extract of barley I'd brought over, leaned towards my
chair and, very delicately, ran his index finger along the crease in my
trousers. He said only two words; he said "Well, well", and I felt the way I
imagine a racing tout would feel at a prayer meeting.

The dank and melancholy scene at the railway station was warmed for me,
however, by the sight of a slim blond man with a black hat and a rapid stride.
His chin was down in a heavy coat as he bent against the wind, but as he made
for me his face broke into a foxy grin. He could have been a secret agent but
he was, in fact, an emissary of the BBC and he'd come to meet me. Not as an
official greeter, but as an old friend, a man I'd had the honour at various
times of introducing to championship boxing in Madison Square Garden, to jazz
piano, and colonial Williamsburg and the staple product of Bourbon County,
Kentucky. He was just the man to ease my re-entry into an England beginning to
take a second and cooler look at the American ally.

For Lindsay Wellington – that is his name – had his own shrewd views about the
delicacy of stretching hands across the sea once the honeymoon was over. He had
lived much of the war in London and had also worked in the United States as a
British official for three years, one of them during the taxing time when the
players blooded on the field were receiving such irritating advice from
Americans in the grandstand.

He could have told you, as any honest war correspondent can, that it is a
comparatively simply chore to write rousing things about two allies when they
are shivering together in the cannon's mouth, but a peace correspondent has to
report the trickier relationship of two people, two nations that have no
pressing choice between fighting together or hanging separately. They lick
their wounds, sell their uniforms and stand off, panting slightly, with time to
wonder if their late comrade-in-arms is really a fine fellow or something of a
heel.

I have a daily reminder of this foolish truth in the fact that a beautiful
house next to my apartment house has recently been taken over and very tonally
decorated by a race of men we are now given to understand have no peers on
earth for intelligence, ingenuity, humour and grace of manner; they are
Japanese of some distinction. And the house they have renovated now bears a
tasteful plaque bearing the legend "The Nippon Club of New York". When I bow to
them as smartly as a non-bowing Westerner can, I can't help recalling that only
12 years ago it was proper, it was even compulsory, to believe that such men
were little yellow monsters more akin to anthropoids than any branch of the
human family.

Well, Lindsay Wellington knew all this and he came to me with an offer, which
he elaborated when we got inside a room and crouched over one coal, with
overcoats on. He said he feared the time had come when the ordinary Englishman
was going to skip his wartime lessons in American politics. It is always a
strain, even in the most comfortable times to keep up what is called an
intelligent interest in other people's politics, it's like asking a man who has
just mastered the elements of chess to work himself up over another form of
chess in which kings count less than pawns and the knights move sideways. In
wartime, he might try it. In peace time, people revert to their own game.

Even the most America-phile Englishman cannot be expected to stay in
palpitation for long over the stirring news that the House Rules Committee is
bottling up a Senate bill that will deny offshore tidelands revenues to states
producing more than their quota of the national production of oil. In a word,
said, Mr Wellington "Let's forget politics, how about the America I learnt to
enjoy when I left the office and the memoranda. Could you not talk week after
week about the fundamental things in the lives of 150, now 170 million
Americans?"

Well, that's how these letters started. Tentatively, I was warned, because even
if they were kindly received, the BBC at the current rate of the pound sterling
then could most likely not afford to run them for more than three months, six
months I was told, at the outside. Well here we are in our twelfth year, and
it's this discovery that gives me, if you will forgive it, a touch of pride
that I cannot cover up.

It does occur to me, as a chastening afterthought, that pride is a swollen form
of self-respect and I recall with a twinge the definition of self-respect given
by my favourite American author. "Self-respect," said HL Mencken, "is the
secure feeling that no one as yet is suspicious", so I had better stop preening
my feathers.

After all, the BBC gives us abundantly, but the BBC also taketh away. Not yet a
while, I hope.

This transcript was typed from a recording of the original BBC broadcast (©
BBC) and not copied from an original script. Because of the risk of mishearing,
the BBC cannot vouch for its complete accuracy.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP