Diverse peoples under one language - 13 April 1990

I was struck the other morning by a photograph in the paper, a news photograph
of a rather splendid figure of a man, flanked, if that is the word, on each
side, or flank, by two women wearing decorative peasant blouses.

They were standing in a church, in front of Romanesque arches and the
commanding figure of the man was centred against a rather elaborate altar
surmounted by a dome. So far, you can imagine, a straightforward if rather
exotic religious group.

What made me look again and goggle was that all five of them were holding in
front of them, like waiters about to serve a very fancy dish, cake stands
containing what looked like great pies with poached eggs planted in the middle.
If the photograph had not been so sharp and realistic, you might have thought
you were seeing a missing work by the late Salvador Dali.

The man, who rose head and shoulders above the women was, I should guess, in
his late 50s, early 60s, and mighty handsome, a cross between the young Sean
Connery and the old Lord Mountbatten.

He was clothed in a capacious, evidently gold, dressing gown with wide lapels
and flowing sleeves, a gold chain dangling on his chest and ending in a
jewelled cross. Around his neck, a thin black band with a gold clasp. The
really bizarre note was struck by the caption underneath the picture.

It said, "The Dean of St Paul's with, from left to right, Theodora Lourekas,
Athena Philippides, Katherine Boulukos and Helen Milukas". Well, he was not any
Dean of St Paul's I could recognise. All the way back to John Donne and all the
way forward to the present occupant.

No wonder. Everything came clear in the first sentence of the news story. He
was the Reverend Nicholas Magoulias, Dean of St Paul's Greek Orthodox Cathedral
in Hempstead, Long Island and what he and the four women were proudly holding
on display was tsoureki, a braided sweet bread, planted with dyed red
hardboiled eggs. A dish that is to be consumed just after the traditional Greek
service that begins on the stroke of midnight on Saturday.

Throughout the United States this Sunday, there will be hundreds of different
Easter services to accommodate the traditions of all the Christian sects, of
which, in this country, there are about 180. The Roman Catholic Church claims
55 million members.

In all, and including 4.5 million Jews, six million Muslims, about 150,000
Buddhists, the latest total of practising members of a religion in this country
stands at 145 million, well over half the population, something we tend to
forget when issues that appear to be secular political issues in other
countries take on a strong religious bias in this country.

Abortion, for instance. And the annual fight in many towns, about mounting the
Nativity scene in a public square. The paradox here is that the opposition to
such a Christmas scene comes not only from irreligious people, but from
non-Christian sects who are quick to remind the city fathers that when this
nation was founded, it gave, in the very first article of the Bill of Rights, a
promise that Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of
religion.

In other words, this is a nation without an established church, a point I
constantly have to make to visiting Englishmen when they say aloud about some
American they've just met, "What is his Christian name?" Americans, including
Christians, do not have Christian names, they have first, or given, names.

This year, the ceremony at Hempstead, Long Island, coincided on Easter Monday
with the publication of a book written by one of the ladies who flanked the
priest. It's called "The Complete Book of Greek Cooking". The royalties from
this book are estimated at just under a quarter of a million dollars. They will
go to the maintenance of the cathedral. Hence the big photograph which
blanketed half a page of a section of the New York Times celebrating the
arrival of Easter and the availability of the Greek bread with the hardboiled
eggs.

This detail, this little item, is a small reminder of a new movement among more
recent American immigrants that greatly cheers some Americans and alarms
others. It's a sort of militant pride in the native origins, in the native
culture, which seems now to resist the immemorial habit of merging into the
life and language of the new country. This is quite new.

In the first decade of this century, when something like 12 million immigrants
came pouring in from central and southern and eastern Europe, the governor of
New York, Theodore Roosevelt, later to be president, saw these hoards of
newcomers being assigned to pools of cheap labour, immigrants of all ages, from
eight-year-olds to 60-year-olds, having little provision – no compulsory
provision anyway – for education so that they would remain the useful victims
of the wealthy employers. Perpetual dwellers, Roosevelt called them, in a
polyglot boarding house.

Roosevelt dedicated himself to a brave mission, through laws which he passed
through the state legislature of New York to require schooling to a certain
age, and to set up in the public schools' night classes for new adult
immigrants to learn English.

One of the first stories I covered in this city, as late as 1937, was such a
night class in a school in the Bronx, where Italian mothers and fathers who'd
been here some time were learning English so they would not be ridiculed or
embarrassed by their teenage children who already had the language.

Roosevelt saw the first-generation immigrant, in his time, bound by the
hampering liabilities of the native tongue. "We must," he said, "stop talking
about German-Americans and Italian-Americans and Polish-Americans. We have room
for but one language here and that is the English language, for we intend to
see that the crucible turns our people out as Americans. There must be no more
hyphenated Americans".

There were no riots, no protests against this crusade, least of all from the
immigrants themselves. They applauded it.

Well, today, it would arouse massive opposition, most of all from the so-called
Hispanics who represent easily the largest new influx of immigrants from Cuba,
Mexico, Colombia, the Dominican Republic.

At the other end from Teddy Roosevelt's view of America as a nation of diverse
peoples unified by one language, stands today the mayor of Miami who said some
time ago, "there is no need at all to learn the English language".

And this could well be true in the most populous county of Florida, Dade
County, which, 30 years after the Castro revolution, has a large and
flourishing Hispanic community, from its banks and businesses and city fathers
down to its "barrios" in which the prevailing language is Spanish.

Mind you, nobody's saying that Spanish should replace English, only that, as in
Quebec with English and French, here English and Spanish should have equal
status.

On the west coast in California, most of all, there is the next largest
population of Hispanic immigrants, legal and illegal, but also the largest
number of Asians. Chinese, Hong Kong natives, Vietnamese, Koreans, Cambodians.

There is much less friction with them over the language problem because it's a
striking fact, confirmed in recent surveys, of how immigrant children are doing
in American schools, that the Asians not only learn English in record time and
swim into the mainstream of the educational system, within five or six years
they actually surpass the native American students, especially in science and
mathematics.

Is this because they are more docile, more painlessly receptive to the idea of
a diversity of peoples with a unity of language? No. The Asians have a
firmly-rooted tradition, in whatever government they lived under, of hard,
daily work, of pride in the accomplishments of their family, of respect for
their elders. An Asian tradition they have not yet lost.

Maybe, like other strains, they will lose it in time. Remember the wise old
bitter sentence of Henry Frick, Andrew Carnegie's partner, who for years had no
trouble replacing striking steelworkers with the latest wave of immigrants.
Then, after a year or two, they learned their union rights and struck.

Frick called up the newest incoming nationals as strike breakers, from
Hungarians to Romanians to Italians. Soon, however, there was a shortage of
gullible innocents and Frick moaned, "The immigrant, however illiterate or
ignorant he may be, always learns too soon".

But in those days, the immigrants' children almost automatically shed the
parents' language. Of course, then, as now, they had a natural bias in favour
of the old foods, games and songs and dances, and nobody wants to snuff out
those traditions, or the use of their language in most places.

But there are two national organisations believing that unless bilingual
education helps children to learn English as soon as possible, believing in
Pandit Nehru's contention that the independence of India would not have been
possible without the English language, these people are alarmed that in many
states now, ballots must be printed in several languages and students may go
through college with their native language alone.

These people fear the fracturing of the republic, so they've succeeded in
getting several state legislatures to pass a law making English the language
for all official business. Official business.

Many people misunderstand their aim as an attempt to stifle native languages.
Even Mrs Bush said the other day that their efforts amount to a racial slur. In
Arizona, a federal judge has overturned the new state law. It comes down to the
question "Does the pot still want to melt?"

Mayor Koch said there never was a melting pot, that it was always a bubbling
stew. Not so. The customs, the folk ways, the tastes of the immigrants may have
bubbled, but in the past, within one generation, the English language has been
the one sure solvent.

Today, there are powerful forces, and powerful numbers of immigrants who resist
the solution, or look forward, without alarm, to an America of diverse peoples
and now of diverse languages.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP