The Montana Freemen - 12 April 1996

Whistling in a graveyard is a wonderful image worthy of Shakespeare or Dickens,
and somebody said this week, that the American people were whistling in a
graveyard in Montana, but I think the true situation is more scary than that.
It's more like a man in a nightmare tiptoeing nervously through a graveyard
that never ends. I'm talking of course about those rebels, mutineers – whatever
you want to call them who call themselves freemen – and are holed-in, camped in
a cabin or two out on a range on the short grass country of the Great Plains.

In a week or two, the snows will vanish from the lower slopes of the Rockies,
which buttress the state on the west, and the forests will glisten with most of
the conifers western march and the noble Douglas fur and the high plains that
roll away to the east will be alive with blossoming bare grass with aster and
dog-tooth violets with over 2,000 species of flowers, which you'll be relieved
to hear we're not going to count or name!

Between the western mountains and the plains, the foothill country sparkles
with a watery paradise for fisherman, and does no more great rivers hiding
grayling and bass and white fish and leaping with most varieties of trout
including the giant fighting rainbow.

I stress at the beginning the pleasures of Montana, it's vast restful solitude,
the gentle west wind over waving grass, the great possibilities for shooting,
hiking, mountaineering, camping, fishing. For solid citizens who like these
country sports, Montana has always provided a wonderful holiday through three
seasons of the year. Montana is almost as large as California, but whereas
California's population density averages 200 to the square mile, in Montana
it's five humans.

So what could be a more attractive place, and on such a grand scale to get away
from it all, that attraction has been its blessing and its curse. It long ago
made tourism an important industry, it also made Montana an ideal place for
rogues, ruffians, train robbers, murderers to hold up for months, years even.
Of course, there is a resident population something we always forget to add
when we call off the delights of a holiday land, not quite a million population
against California's 31 million.

Since Montana was first settled, to stretch a word, in the early 18th century,
by fur traders and missionaries meaning to convert the Indians, since then,
most people saw their livelihood all about them: in the huge amount of timber,
in farming and underground minerals and oil. But what with one thing and
another – depressions, new materials, light metals, plastic – most of the old
logging and mining towns are abandoned or bankrupt.

The little town outside of which the FBI recently arrested a Unabomber suspect
after 18 years of sleuthing, that little town is broke. And now in the past few
years, Montana has suffered another invasion, which on the face of it looks
like a fine jolting injection to any states economy: the rich, the rich
retired, the youngish people still, who made a fortune way down in California
Silicon Valley and movie stars followed by ageing television stars. These
people buy very expensive land, build fancy lonely mansions don't they, and
shop lavishly so they do, but in no time they also drive up the real estate
prices, which means of course also taxes.

Now wherever this happens, has happened and the creation of Palm Beach in
Florida, which was practically drenched up from the seashore, Palm Springs in
the California Desert, the natives begin by welcoming the rich but as they
proliferate and as what they spend doesn't compensate for what they take away
from ordinary people by way of taxes and affordable homes, they come to be
resented.

In Montana where solitude and a modest livelihood with prime gifts to the
natives, the invasion has been swift and the resentment has been bitter. It has
been felt by most of the people who've lived there for 10 years or more:
retailers, college professors, religious sects, scraping farmers, but it has
been felt with rage by the poor, and the sons and grandsons of the old miners
and the sugar beet farmers who are, in Montana's recession having a tough time
making out.

Among these malcontents is the curious minority we've learned about only
lately: the militia men, not always so self-styled but those 13 defiant freemen
– that's the number as I talk – belong to a type of political rebel who have
formed in groups, and while so far I believe there's been no large violent
episode, they've threatened to seize courts, radio stations and made actual
threats on the life of state and county politicians, judges so on.

The Montana Freemen seem to us outsiders, to be pitifully small, and the
numbers of all the militia men do not yet begin to compare with say, the armies
in the early 20s who joined and terrified and burnt with the Ku Klux Klan. But
the apparent harmlessness of the numbers is obliterated by the law defying
noises they make. As you know the FBI is parked a very long way off, keeping
them as the saying goes, under surveillance, but why is the FBI there in the
first place? Because the freemen have already committed plenty of crimes
against this state, and others, and the federal government, of which inciting
to riot is only one. They have refused to qualify for driving licenses, they
won't pay taxes, they don't recognise the jurisdiction of the courts – they set
up their own – they routinely, you might say on principle, write nothing but
bad cheques.

From FBI men who have infiltrated the freemen, as of other groups, they
undoubtedly teach insurgency and in some camps, the making of bombs. Their
rhetoric is not only high flown but positively frightening. They predict, and
soon, the overthrow of the dreadful federal government. Clinton or Dole they're
all the same.

The freemen in Montana have been around the state for two or more years, a
constant nuisance, but now people are saying, if they've cheated and forged and
refuse subpoenas for so long, why didn't the police – and once members came in
from other states, the FBI – move in on them, arrest them, try them and if they
were found guilty put them in jail?

And here we come on the dreadful truth that has made the FBI in this place hold
back, and made Ms Reno, the United States attorney general, swear over and
over, no armed confrontation, no siege. That doesn't sound at all like the
Janet we know, we all came to know three years ago when, you remember, February
1993, federal agents attacked the compound of a religious cult near Waco Texas.

The outcome of that episode was about as bad as it could be for the reputation
of federal agents and the FBI and gave a plausible stimulant to the rage of
militia men throughout the country. Whenever these rebels are interviewed – why
do you hate the government, why do you meet in armed camps and threaten
terrible things, they all quote the shame of Waco.

Remember in the first attack four federal agents were killed by shots fired
from within the compound. There was an outcry on the public side, but the
agents waited through February and March – the cult had been approached in the
first place, for being stacked with arms for which nobody had procured a
licence – in April, the federals could wait no longer. They lurched in there
with tanks. Pretty nearly the whole encampment, about 80 people, including many
women and children died in a fire, set it's pretty certain, by the cult leader.
Eleven of the cult had meanwhile gone to trial for killing the four agents in
the early raid. The fact of dead women and children preyed on everybody's mind,
not least the juries. The 11 were found not guilty of murder and conspiracy, a
result, which brought aid and comfort and boldness to every militia man in the
country.

You can well understand why in Montana, the FBI has been told to stand and
wait, and hope that negotiations between local officials and the freemen will
eventually persuade them to follow the trickle of freemen and women who have
defected. You may wonder why these rebellious or barmy groups call themselves
militia men? By so doing, they have to their satisfaction, solved a problem
that has bitten at the heels of the National Rifle Association ever since
rising city crime made gun control a national issue.

The NRA and most members of the Congress defend everybody's right to own a gun
by quoting the Second Amendment to the Constitution: "A well regulated militia
being necessary to the security of a free state, the right of the people to
keep and bear arms shall not be infringed." Written in 1789 when there was no
standing army, the old colonials had enough of them, kings could commandeer
them, the country would be kept safe by the understanding that every man would
keep a rifle by his fireside. When there was trouble from foreign enemies or
native Indians, the towns would instantly, they called themselves Minutemen,
instantly form militias, grab their guns, and put the insurrection down and
then disband.

Of course there have been no militias to organise since the United States got
itself a standing army. This simple fact has been drummed into the National
Rifle Association and its fans, but in the past year or two, and now in 32
states, there are self appointed militia men. And when their right to have guns
is questioned, they point to the Second Amendment: see we are a well regulated
militia. And they say, they threaten to use the guns one day to preserve or
rescue the American people from their present form of government, which they
proclaim to be undemocratic and corrupt beyond reform or redemption.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP