The secrets of a long life - 24 February 1995

Wherever you turn on the TV news channels on Tuesday evening, you saw the face
of an old French lady you'd never seen in your life, but who was now overnight,
not only an American heroine, but an overnight role model, Madame Jeanne
Calment, the oldest living human, who on that day, celebrated her 120th
birthday.

I'm sure she was noticed and interviewed in most other Western countries, but
in this country – whose people are more and more pounded by the doctrine that
death is defeat, and if you don't live to be 100, it's your own fault – Madame
Calment was the American dream fulfilled.

True, she can't hear much of anything, she sees badly, but otherwise she says
everything's fine. The great thing about her is that at 120 she's sharp as a
tack. Isn't her native city Arles the place where Vincent Van Gogh went and
painted in 1888,1889? Yes, she said, she met him and he was very ugly and
ungracious and impolite and sickly.

How does she enjoy her fame? "I had to wait 120 years for it, I intend to enjoy
it as long as possible." And what sort of future does she see ahead? A very
short one. Some old people may well pretend to be unimpressed by Madame Calment
because they will recall many entries in encyclopaedias, books of records and
in the daily press, of men and women, alive at prodigious ages, all of them
well over 100, some into their 130s, they were always in some remote village in
the Brazilian jungle or the farthest reaches of Siberia. The thing never
mentioned at the time, was that all these reports came from countries whose
remote regions did not keep registers of births and deaths. The age of these
old geezers was calculated by imaginative neighbours.

But there's no question about Madame Calment, she is an authentic 120. The
sight, caused a flight of American doctors, gerontologists mostly, to predict
quite seriously that most people sometime early in the 21st century will live
to be 100 or beyond. Why not, they say, why not? Many reasons. A good one,
having to do with people who don't have a family record of long life, a matter
of genes as we've come to put it.

The American stories I've seen do mention that Madame Calment's father died at
93 and her mother at the comparatively early age of 86, but that's no
encouragement to Americans, who don't want to feel shackled by what former
President Bush would call 'the gene thing'. They are searching at all times for
the magical formula, the diet, the vitamin, what to eat, what to avoid, as to
see you through to a healthier century. They didn't get much satisfaction on
that score from Madame Calment. She only recently gave up eating over two
pounds of chocolate a week and even chocolate freaks know that chocolate, with
caffeine and its sugar, is no recipe for anything positive except tooth decay.
Madame Calment does however, abide by one modern prohibition, she gave up
smoking years ago, three years ago when she was 117. So the reporters, the
Americans at least, are left looking for that magic potion and the secret, and
have been, ever since the publication of the famous Mediterranean 'pyramid',
famous I should say, so far only among doctors and especially cardiologists
heart men.

It's a statistical table, the result of 20 years research about the incidence
of coronary heart disease in the populations of 30 countries. It combines many
research studies done down the years and has the final imprint or approval of
the World Health Organisation. Imagine, an inverted pyramid diminishing from a
flat top down to a sharp point. The flat top is the country with the most heart
attacks per 100,000 of the population, and just below it is a little shorter
horizontal line, which is the next highest number, and so on, shorter and
shorter through 28 countries, till we come to the bottom, little more than a
tiny square, a point, the country with the least coronary heart disease, Japan.

The bad news obviously starts at the top. I should explain that the figures for
men are far more dramatic than for women, but they're not different. In other
words, the numbers diminish together at the same rate. Anyway, let's face the
music. The top country – 550 coronaries per 100,000 – is Northern Ireland, only
slightly behind Scotland, then Finland, Czechoslovakia, Ireland, Hungary.
England and Wales are in the top third with 450 per 100,000 and so on. The
United States is bang in the middle 350.

However, what the gerontologists and the cardiac boys and girls have found most
significant about this table, is that the lowest incidents of heart disease, is
from Switzerland down through Greece to Spain, Portugal and at the very bottom
France. What struck and disheartened Americans about this last revelation, is
that France is alleged to eat more fats, to consume more cholesterol, than
anybody, and the most striking thing about the whole upside pyramid is that the
five countries with the least heart disease are all Mediterranean countries.

And of course everybody, the experts and the media alike, thought first of
diet, but there is a team of gerontologists mixed with internists and cardiac
men – it's been working for a year or two on a village in the North of Italy –
which has a medical record that challenges if not ignores the whole cholesterol
theory. In that village, the males have a very high rate of low density
lipoproteins which is the bad cholesterol and they also have an astonishing
record of longevity. The doctors claim to have traced this tendency as a
genetic legacy all the way back to an 18th century family, very prolific and
with much intermarrying of cousins and the like.

So, for the time being at any rate, this village and its almost ludicrous
defiance of the conventional cholesterol wisdom, is regarded as a freak. So
what is it the Mediterranean's have that the northerners don't or tend not too?
And the best answer so far is olive oil, without which it's almost impossible
to imagine the Italians, the Spanish, the Greeks, the Portuguese and French
existing, let alone surviving to a rude age. Which brings us back to Madame
Calment.

Unlike most people of a great age, men and women, she holds no theory, she has
no explanation for her 120 years. It was offhandedly noticed that she lives in
an region where olive oil is a major component of the diet. I don't know if
this was brought up with three doctors who were present at her birthday or with
a doctor who's been studying her for over 10 years: he's much more dogmatic.
"Centenarians," he says "are people who haven't overdone alcohol or tobacco and
who temperamentally don't get too excited about unpleasant experiences".

He was asked about the genetic factor. "There isn't one," he said. Which brings
me to the interesting and baffling case of a man I know, a friend, who's over
70, has a bad cholesterol rate – higher than any doctor now has ever recorded
in the American measurement, 425. Two doctors have told him he's a walking time
bomb – they both died. He eats what he likes – which is lots of meat and
deserts and potatoes and butter and ice cream, not very fond of vegetables, so
what's the answer? There doesn't seem to be one, but the doctors are helped to
regain their self-respect by discovering, and wisely noting, that he is of
Greek extraction, that his mother lived to be 85 and his grandparents on both
sides were respectively 92, 94, 96 and 94. No genetic factor? "No." says Madame
Calment's doctor. Well how about alcohol, doctor? I have to hand a
distinguished medical journal, printing in its first issue of the year, a
review of the top medical stories of 1994, and I quote from the very first
article, the very first paragraph: "Just as some years are celebrated for their
wines, 1994 will be recalled as a banner year for research about the relation
between alcohol and coronary heart disease." Several authoritative long-term
studies support a correlation between moderate drinking and a decreased risk of
coronary heart disease.

Now as an old Methodist, I ought to say I'm not advocating anything of course,
I deplore these studies, but I'm just giving you the facts ma'am. If the French
doctor and these recent studies seem to contradict each other, let me tell you
about one American who would agree with both of them, and he was the vice
president of the United States 60 years ago. A small foxy, or rather a mole of
a man, a small burrowing slow talking shrewd monosyllabic Texan, John Nance
Garner, an old frontier character whom the President, Franklin Roosevelt called
on often for sage advice about what the congress would take and what it
wouldn't. "Come Mr President," Garner would say "let us reason together." which
meant going off into his office and consuming several snorts of bourbon
whiskey.

He always took it with water – branch water as Southerners say – hoping it came
from a freshwater branch of a river. When Mr Garner was 90, he was interviewed
on the radio: to what did he attribute his longevity? "Bourbon and branch," he
said. On his 99th birthday he was interviewed again: to what did he attribute
his longevity? He said, "Laying off Bourbon and branch".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP