The Return of Richard Nixon - 18 May 1987

A friend of mine, spotting a famous man’s photograph on the cover of an
American news magazine, said, "Well, bang goes one of your more memorable
sentences".

I was, of course, flattered that he had ever memorised a sentence of mine, but
I privately put it down to a, well, not mean a mischievous streak in him, that
the sentence he referred to should have made a judgement that has turned out to
be wrong. The sentence that I did not enjoy looking up came at the end of the
last talk I did about the only president in American history who decided to
resign in disgrace rather than face his certain conviction by the Senate
sitting as a court on charges of high crimes and misdemeanours including
obstruction of justice.

Of course, I was talking about nobody but Richard Milhous Nixon; the talk that
was given, I think, four years after Nixon had left the White House when he
surfaced, briefly, for a series of absorbing television interviews with David
Frost, and then it seemed, passed into oblivion. This was the sentence, "An
engrossing human being, once in high office trying, with astonishing tenacity,
to prop up the defences of his self respect, he is a character of Shakespearean
complexity and pathos, pitiable, sympathetic, and gone for good".

Well the picture on the latest issue of this news magazine is that of a
smiling, tanned niftily-groomed man in a midnight blue blazer, he could be the
chairman of the board of a highly successful multinational corporation. But no
doubt about it, it is old Nixon, 73 years old, his hair sleekly styled and
surprisingly darker than it appeared to be 12 years ago when he left Washington
in a helicopter for exile in California and, in spite of the forced grin and
the spreadeagled waving of the arms, was the very picture of a drawn, sallow,
exhausted and discredited man.

The headline on the magazine cover says "He’s back", and the sub heading reads
"The rehabilitation of Richard Nixon". Gone for good indeed. I suppose the
German politicians thought Hitler was gone for good when they put him in jail
in, was it 1923?, and Churchill himself must have been sure he was gone for
good when he was stunningly dismissed by the voters after the victory in
Europe.

But he was recalled by the British electorate six years later, and went out,
once for all, ten years after he thought he was done for. So I have learned,
rather late in the day, never to write the epitaph of a politician, however
movingly, until he is beneath the sod.

The word rehabilitation in that sub heading, "The rehabilitation of Richard
Nixon" is no exaggeration, though I ought to say at once that he is not going
to run, or stand, for any political office and even now, 12 years after his
disgrace, not even Ronald Reagan, who stood by him till the very end, would
think of appointing Nixon, as say, an ambassador. He might think of it but a
pack of his advisors and certainly a great majority in the Congress would tell
him to think again.

Still, it’s a remarkable, if not an amazing, story. Some people say that Nixon
laid low and brooded and never planned his return to respectability, let alone
power. Others say that he is, always has been, a calculating man and once he
recovered for the time being from a plague of fleabites and came slowly out of
a long stretch of criticism and neglect, then, as one friend put it, it was a
matter of feeling the way, biding his time and carefully erring on the side of
doing less than more.

He sat down to write books, burying Watergate from his conscious past anyway,
books about famous leaders, about Vietnam, in the main, about foreign policy.
By the time three of them were out, a fair reader couldn’t help noticing that
his experience through 40 years of politics was impressive and that, unlike
Carter and Ford, he had a sense of history, and later on that, unlike Reagan,
he was, is, a realist not an idealist, that he sees the world as something far
more complicated than a rousing B film.

So, gradually, serious societies, foreign affairs discussion groups – of which
the United States has some distinguished ones – began to invite him to speak.
He came out of his California shell, he moved to a country home in New Jersey.
From time to time, he dropped by ordinary lunch counters and burger stands and
said, "Hi" to the surprised and flattered lads and lasses.

He dined in New York restaurants, he went off on several foreign trips and was
received by heads of government with attention and after an hour or two of
expounding his ideas, with interest just short of awe. I should say that the
capitals in which he received this sort of courtly treatment were places like
Paris and Peking where his misdemeanours and obstruction of justice were
thought of as routine political tactics, hardly punishable by expulsion.

In the past three years he has been applauded by the annual conference of
American newspaper editors and given a warm, if cagey, welcome by the national
press club in Washington. By now, Dr Henry Kissinger has come to say that of
the three persons you’d call if you were president and were confronted with a
world crisis, he would be on almost anyone’s list.

But if he is now, slowly, cautiously being taken on his own terms, as an elder
statement of the Republican party and a valuable point of reference on foreign
policy, there is a majority of senators and congressmen who were there 12 years
ago. And millions of voters, who will remember why articles of impeachment were
drawn up against him and who do not share his own publicised view that his
White House wire-tapping was minimal compared with other administrations.

It’s true, we now know that presidential wire-tapping was routine in the
Kennedy and Johnson administrations. And never more culpable, though unknown,
than in Robert Kennedy’s secret wire-taps on all the movements of the Reverend
Martin Luther King. But Nixon was not about to be impeached for just keeping
records of telephone conversations, though it was they that revealed the high
crimes and misdemeanours. Not just the fatuous breaking into the Democratic
party headquarters in the hope of getting something on the opposition, but Mr
Nixon – while professing for two years total ignorance of this escapade –
actually mobilised his closest White House aides to cover up the knowledge, to
lie before a Senate committee, to destroy evidence, to pay out a million
dollars or more of hush money, to evade taxes, to break the laws having to do
with presidential campaign financing.

In the very beginning he enlisted the FBI to help in the cover-up, and later
brought in the internal revenues service to harry and hound a long secret list
of people Nixon took to be his political enemies. This was the catalogue of
wrongdoing that was uncovered, first by a Senate committee and then by a
special prosecutor, then by the ruling of the Supreme Court that all the White
House tapes must be released to the house judiciary committee which finally
voted articles of impeachment.

Since then, you may be sure, presidents and all other officials of the
executive ranch have been zealous not to have wire taps that were not
sanctioned by a court for purposes of a criminal investigation, the financing
of election campaigns is carefully watched, congressmen run a mile from anyone
who might offer to launder campaign contributions, and so on.

So the public scrutiny of those sorts of crimes was heightened by Watergate and
its aftermath, and behaviour which might once have gone unnoticed or rather,
unchallenged, is now carefully gone into by the press and by television.
Lately, for instance, there has been a big to-do about Mr Michael Deaver, a
close associate of Mr Reagan for 20 years, who quit his job recently as deputy
chief of staff at the White House, and now heads a very profitable public
relations firm whose clients include several foreign governments, including
Canada.

The allegation is that Mr Deaver used his great influence with the White House
to arrange the recent agreement between the United States and Canada to do
something about acid rain. Now the law says that an official – high official –
of the government may not lobby his own government agency on anybody’s behalf
within a year of leaving the government. The American-Canadian agreement came
within months and, admittedly, Mr Deaver had a lot to do with it.

I don’t know how it is with your government and the restrictions on, say, a
former Cabinet member's right to become a bank director or a representative of
a foreign corporation, but in this country, the penalty can run to two years in
jail. Well, the government ethics office is looking into Mr Deaver's case, so
is the department of justice and there is an official investigation been
started in Canada. I think that much has been made of Mr Deaver's allegedly
improper behaviour because the press and television have finally totted up the
score of dubious behaviour during the six years of the Reagan administration.

In that time, over 100 senior administration officials have been accused of
illegal or unethical conduct. Six presidential appointees have been indicted,
two have been convicted, and two are coming up for trial. Ten bigshots of the
environment protection agency have resigned after investigation. All of these,
whether simply accused or convicted, have had the steady support of President
Reagan, who said either that he trusted them completely or that the charges
against them were ridiculous.

So first, it was the media that unearthed these unsavoury acts and then the
courts, all the various investigating bodies of Congress; the result has been
to build up a pall over much of the behaviour of high officials of the Reagan
administration.

And finally, the conduct of these people and the president's unwavering defence
of them brings up the question – is this administration notable for extreme
Christian tolerance, or for moral numbness?

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP