Hilary Clinton, Eleanor Roosevelt and Abigail Smith - 19 January 1996

After Washington dug itself out of the blizzard of '96 – it's still hacking
away in the side streets at little mountains of snow and finding under them,
surprise, surprise parked cars – the government opened up again and we were
very soon back to normal. Normal now means a renewal on television, of the
vicious little 15 second political ads summing up in a tart phrase, the
miserable shortcomings of your political opponent. Since there are seven
Republicans running at the moment sloshing through the snows of New Hampshire,
each of them is going to have to raise a lot of money to take six pot shots at
his opponents. Normal also means that the president has started holding White
House meetings again with the Republican leaders in the Senate and the House,
Senator Dole and Mr Gingrich, and as usual they seem to be getting nowhere with
this never-ending dog fight over how to balance the budget.

However, there's something a good deal juicier for the gossips, and perhaps for
the historians, in the return to what has become a sort of second or subsidiary
presidential campaign: the campaign to discredit Mrs Clinton and so by
association weaken the president's chances in November of re-election.

Let's see just how badly, tactlessly a president's wife can behave. How far she
can get out of line from her expected role as loyal wife, gracious hostess and
you might say presidential ornament. It's come to something, don't you think,
when the first lady, the president's wife insists on saving the country from
its threatened bankruptcy by negotiating a loan from a foreign power, against
the president's wishes and without his knowledge. If he won't do it, she said,
then I will.

Since this took an age to come out, I won't mention the name of the foreign
country, suffice it to say that it had saved the credit of the United States
once before, but since the Congress hadn't yet agreed on a tax bill, the first
lady insisted on getting a second loan from the obliging foreign power.
Absolutely not said the President, so his wife secretly wrote to his big
political opponent saying in effect, he's a stubborn old mule, you try to
persuade him to seek a second loan. The enemy prevailed and America, as the
first lady said, is saved from bankruptcy for another two years. The president
by the way, didn't know about his wife's role in the business, but when it came
out he wrote, it's all your own intrigue, which has forced me to this loan, I
suppose you'll boast of it as a great public service.

Did you ever hear about this incident? Nobody mentioned it this week and I
remembered it only when more and more Republicans and newspaper columnists
began to rail at the first lady as a busybody surrogate president, and a woman
strenuously denying her part as a lawyer in a real estate scandal and a
building society savings and loans scandal in Arkansas 20 years ago.

Oh about the foreign loan business, Holland was the helpful foreign power. And
I hope you gathered from the tense of the verbs that I was not talking about
Mrs Clinton, but about Mrs John Adams, the wife of the second president of the
United States. It was only one remembered example of a president's wife
asserting herself in the running of the presidency or otherwise assuming a role
that does not correspond with what people think ought to be the role of the
president's wife.

It's what whole gangs of politicians, mostly Republicans, naturally have been
saying almost since Mrs Clinton moved with her husband into the White House,
one of them, overcome with writer's indignation, declared that never in the
history of the United States had a president's wife so intruded into the actual
business of the presidency. All this means is that the politicians and the
parroting commentators don't know any American history.

Of course it has to be said that American history in schools, and colleges for
that matter, rarely includes a history of the presidential wives, but since the
very beginning, since Martha Washington, it seems that every succeeding
generation of Americans has assumed a stereotype of what the first lady ought
to be and every other generation is shocked when she doesn't conform to it. I
suppose the role model that everyone expects every first lady to fill was set
by Martha Washington, George Washington's wife who had, as one author put it:
"Little interest in politics and less in fame." Her husband, his private life
and his welfare was her whole life, mother, hostess, nurse – during the
revolutionary war, the War of Independence – nurse to too many wounded and sick
soldiers whom she housed.

Well as you might have guessed, the mould was very rudely broken by the wife of
the second president, the Abigail Adams we've just talked about. She must have
been, as a politician's wife, something of a freak in the 18th century. She was
deeply interested in politics and philosophy, particularly in something that
ought to be an attribute of every politician but rarely is, namely the
difference between an ideal policy – what ought to be done – and what in a
world of divided opinions can sensibly be expected. She had ideas about
everything that was being discussed and much that wasn't during the first
Congress and the drawing up of the first American codes of law.

Imagine in the 1780s, the president's wife seeing him off to yet another
session of law making and nation inventing, and giving him a note to read and
memorise: "Now remember the ladies...and do not put such unlimited power into
the hands of the husbands, remember all men would be tyrants if they could."
Oddly, the women's lib people don't seem to have heard of her because she
could, with more justice than many another choice, be hailed as a true pioneer
of women's rights. A hundred and forty years before it became a fact of
political life in the United States and Britain she urged votes for women.
Eighty years before it was done, she advocated the abolition of slavery. Talk
about a dangerous radical! Alas, her brilliant and lively engagement in
politics caused her husband's political downfall.

In 1800, he ran for re-election. One of the elements that beat him was the
widespread belief that she had too much influence over the public conduct of
her husband. Well since 1800 there have been 17 first ladies. I've been looking
them over, and their public character, and I realise now that this stew over
Mrs Clinton is due to a stretch of history during which we've had more first
ladies who approximate to Martha Washington than to Abigail Adams or, I hasten
to say, Eleanor Roosevelt. The people who are complaining about Mrs Clinton
today, and were the first to protest her nosing into politics with a huge
ill-fated healthcare program, they mostly were little children when Mrs
Franklin Roosevelt was rampaging up and down the land, railing about the diet
of Southern farm families, urging her husband, beyond his power I might say, to
start a massive federal housing program for the poor of any colour.

The Republican outcry against Mrs Roosevelt as a political busybody was far
more strident and unceasing than anything Mrs Clinton has had to put up with.
Mrs Roosevelt appeared everywhere making public speeches on the radio for a
long stretch every breakfast time, which is why she gurgled over a delicious
coffee. Yes, she was sponsored by among others the manufacturers of soap and
mattresses. She wrote a well paid column, she earned by herself a steady
$100,000 a year, which in the 1930s was about a million and a half today. Every
penny of it she gave to experiments she sponsored, for unemployed miners
families, for all sorts of New Deal reforms. In the depression, oddly, she like
her husband, was as often loved as hated, most of all, because Mrs Roosevelt
was plain and had a high falsetto headmistress's voice, she was easily and
mercilessly mocked, she felt the sting of it as much as Mrs Clinton must be
doing.

The Democrats and others who now believe that Mrs Clinton has done nothing
improper in her real estate and building society dealings in the long ago, are
quick to point to Mrs Roosevelt as an assertive politically active first lady.
She too did not act as a first lady should, which is be housewifely,
non-political, if possible decorative like Mrs Kennedy who was so non political
she had to be begged to do her duty and appear as hostess at state dinners, be
like Mrs Truman, good old Bess, who never said a mumbling word in public. But
how about Rosalynn Carter? She sat in on every cabinet meeting and President
Carter himself said that she had an opinion on every crucial political decision
of his presidency. How about Mrs Reagan? She had a tough time for two years or
so, for too much influence on the public conduct of the president. Did she not
get the president's chief of staff fired? The evidence is persuasive.

While Mrs Clinton's involvement in the healthcare plan brought the charge of
being a political busybody, the new charge of deceit is based entirely on what
Mrs Clinton did or didn't do 20 years ago, about that failed savings and loan
association, which cost the taxpayers of Arkansas about 20 million dollars and
about the associated real estate deal.

She was a lawyer at the time, her husband was governor. A senate committee led
by Senator Dole's presidential campaign manager is sweating over 1,000's of
documents, documents they've rescued from oblivion, documents the Clinton's
have been tardy or strangely reluctant to find. So far though, they are out
fishing night and day and changing the bait every hour on the hour, they have
not landed a criminal or even an illegal Mrs Clinton, and she seems pretty
cheerful as she goes off on a tour flogging her book about children. Maybe
she's been told about a word or two Mrs Roosevelt spoke to a meeting of women
Democrats in the mid 30s at the height of the ridicule Eleanor Roosevelt
Campaign: "You cannot bear grudges...you have to take defeat over and over
again and pickup and go on".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP