Assassination of J F Kennedy - 24 November 1963

By now it may well be impossible to add any sensible or proper words to all the
millions that have been written and spoken about the life and cruel death of
John F Kennedy.

Those of us who have ever sat down to write a letter of condolence to a close
friend know what an aching task it is to say something that is pointed and that
touches the right vein of sympathy. But I hope you’ll understand that there is
no other thing to talk about. Not here. Three thousand miles away, it may be
easier to speculate about policy, the new administration. Not here. For I
cannot remember a time, certainly in the last 30 years, when the people
everywhere around you are so quiet, so tired looking and, for all the variety
of their shape and colour and character, so plainly the victims of a huge and
bitter disappointment.

That may sound a queer word to use, but grief is a general term that covers all
kinds of sorrow. And I think that what sets off this death from that of other
great Americans of our time is the sense that we’ve been cheated, in a stroke,
by a wild but diabolically accurate strike of the promise of what we had begun
to call the "Age of Kennedy".

Let me remind you of a sentence in his inaugural address when he took over the
presidency on that icy day of 20 January 1961. He said, “Let the word go forth
from this time and place to friend and foe alike that the torch has been passed
to a new generation of Americans born in this century, tempered by war,
disciplined by a hard and bitter peace, proud of our ancient heritage and
unwilling to witness or permit the slow undoing of those human rights to which
this nation has always been committed. Let every nation know, whether it wishes
us well or ill that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship,
support any friend, oppose any foe to assure the survival and the success of
liberty.”

This is of course the finest rhetoric, worthy of Lincoln, but what made it
sound so brave and rousing on that first day was the clear statement that a
young man was speaking for a new generation. It concentrated in one scornful
sentence the reminder that the old men who had handled the uncertain peace in
the second war had had their day and that there was at hand a band of young
Americans ready not to ignore the wisdom of their forefathers, but, if need be,
to fight for it.

It would be hard to say more bravely, or more exactly, that it was a fresh
America that would have to be negotiated with, but that, as always, liberty
itself was not negotiable.

Now, even in the moment of knowing that the promises of an inaugural address
are bound to have a grandeur very hard to live up to the morning after, this
remarkable speech, which the president had hammered out sentence by sentence
with his closest aide and companion Theodore Sorensen, did strike a note to
which the American people and their allies everywhere responded with great good
cheer.

Of course we know – older men and women have always known what in their youth
they blithely rattled off as a quotation from Shakespeare – that golden lads
and girls all must, as chimney sweepers, come to dust. But it’s always stirring
to see that young people don’t believe it. We chuckled sympathetically then at
the warning which Senator Lyndon Johnson had chanted all through the campaign,
that the presidency could not safely be put in the hands of a man who has “not
a touch of grey in his hair”. John Kennedy had turned the tables triumphantly
on this argument by saying, in effect, that in a world shivering under the
bomb, it was the young who had the vigour and the single-mindedness to lead.

If we pause and run over the record of the very slow translation of these
ideals into law – the hairbreadth defeat of the medical care for the aged plan,
the shelving (after a year of strenuous labour) of the tax bill, the perilous
reluctance of the Congress to tame the negro revolution now with a civil rights
law – we have to admit that the clear trumpet sound of the Kennedy inaugural
has been sadly soured down three short years.

Any intelligent American family sitting around a few weeks ago would have
granted these deep disappointments, and many thoughtful men were beginning to
wonder if the president’s powers were not a mockery of his office, since he can
be thwarted from getting any laws passed at all by the simple obstructionism of
a dozen chairmen of Congressional committees, most of them by the irony of a
seniority system that gives more and more power to old men who keep getting
re-elected by the same states, most of them from the south.

But that same American family sitting around this weekend could live with these
disappointments, but not with the great one, the sense that the new generation
born in this century, tempered by war, disciplined by a hard and bitter peace,
proud of our ancient heritage, unwilling to witness or permit was struck down
lifeless, unable to witness or permit or not to permit anything.

When it’s possible to be reasonable, we will all realise, calling on our
everyday fatalism, that if John Kennedy was 46 and his brother in his late
thirties, most of the men around him were in their fifties and some in their
sixties, and that therefore we fell for a day or two in November 1963 into a
sentimental fit. However, we are not yet reasonable. The self-protective
fatalism, which tells most of us that what has been must be, has not yet
restored us to the humdrum course of life.

I’m not dwelling on this theme – the slashing down in a wanton moment of the
flower of youth – because it’s enjoyable, or poetic to think about. It seems to
me, looking over the faces of the people and hearing my friends, that the
essence of the American mood this very dark weekend is this deep feeling that
our youth has been mocked and the vigour of America for the moment paralysed.

It is, to be hard-hearted about it, fascinating, when it’s not also poignant,
to see in how many ways people and things express the same emotion. Many of the
memorial photographs in the shop windows have small replicas of the
presidential standard on one side and the Navy flag on the other, recalling the
incredible five days' gallantry on that Pacific Island which Kennedy himself
never recalled except to the men who were with him and survived.

A young socialite whose life is a round of clothes and parties and music
bemoans the fact that the Kennedys will leave the White House and take with
them the style, the grace, the fun they brought to it. An American friend from
Paris writes, "I think his death will especially be felt by the young for he’d
become for them a symbol of what was possible with intelligence and will". An
old man, wise in the ups and downs of politics, says, “I wonder if we knew what
he might have grown to be in the second term.” A child with wide eyes asks,
“Tell me, will the Peace Corps go on?”

There’s another thing that strikes me, which is allied to the idea of a young
lion shot down. It is best seen in the bewilderment of people who were against
him, who felt that he had temporised and betrayed the promise of the new
frontier. One of them, a politically active woman, rang me up, and what she had
to say dissolved in tears. Another, a veteran sailor, a close friend and a
lifelong Republican, said to me only last night, “I can’t understand. I never
felt so close to Kennedy as I do now.”

This sudden discovery that he was more familiar than we knew is, I think,
easier to explain. He was the first president of the television age; not as a
matter of chronology, but in the incessant use he made of this new medium. When
he became President Elect, he asked a friend to prepare a memorandum on the
history of presidential press conferences. He wanted to know how much the
succession of presidents since Wilson had been able to mould the press
conference, and how much it had moulded them.

What he received was a plea disguised as a monograph to abandon Eisenhower’s
innovation of saying everything on the record for quotation and letting the
conference be televised. The President Elect looked it over at his usual rate
of about a thousand words a minute, granted the argument, but said simply,
“Television is now the main personal link between the people and the White
House. We can’t go back.”

He allowed his press conferences to be televised live. He also made another
decision which ran counter to the wisdom of all incumbent presidents: no man
who’s in power invites a debate with an opponent who is out of power and who
can speak not of the things he’s done, but of the things the incumbent has done
wrong. In spite of knowing well that next time he would be the man with his
back against the wall, the president decided that the television debate was now
an essential element of a presidential campaign.

So for three years and more, we’ve seen him at the end of our day on all his
tours, in Vienna, in Dublin, in Berlin, in Florida, Chicago, Palm Beach, in
(alas) Dallas; in his own house talking affably with reporters, rumpling up the
children, very rarely posing, always offhand and about his business; talking to
foreign students in the White House garden, making sly, dry jokes at dinners;
every other week fencing shrewdly (and often brilliantly) with 200 reporters;
and sometimes at formal rallies, stabbing the air with his forefinger and
bringing to life again, in his eyes and his chin and his soaring sentences, the
old image of the young warrior who promised the energy, the faith, the devotion
that will light America and all who serve her.

The consequence of all this is that the family, the American family, has been
robbed violently and atrociously of a member.

When Roosevelt died, the unlikeliest people – the very young who thought of him
as a perpetual president, and some of the very old who hated him – confessed
that they felt they had lost a father. Today millions of Americans are baffled
by the feeling, which seems to have little to do with their political
loyalties, that they have lost a brother, the bright, young brother that you’re
proud of; the one who went far and mingled with the great and had no side, no
pomp, and in the worst moments – the Bay of Pigs – took all the blame; and in
the best – the Cuban Crisis – had the best sort of courage, which is the
courage to face the worst and take a quiet stand.

This charming, complicated, subtle and greatly intelligent man, whom the
Western world was proud to call its leader, appeared for a split second in the
telescopic sight of a maniac’s rifle and he was snuffed out. In that moment,
all the decent grief of a nation was taunted and outraged, so that along with
the sorrow there is a desperate and howling note across the land.

We may pray on our knees, but when we get up from them we cry with the poet,
“Do not go gentle into that good night. Rage, rage against the dying of the
light.”

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP