Chinese refugess at UC Berkley - 28 July 1989

Early in the morning, here in San Francisco, when the night fog has burned off
and the town's beginning to sparkle, I look out from a room on top of Nob Hill
across to the bay, and then down, immediately below me, and there is a small
park, no bigger than a city block.

At that time, before the town has really started to stir, there are no
youngsters lying on their backs picking up a touch of skin cancer, and no
loungers, but there are always, dotted here and there on the small lawns, old
and middle-aged Chinese doing what at first you take to be some grave ritual
dance.

They are doing their morning exercises. They swivel, with infinite slowness, on
one leg and their arms weave up and round and, with a controlled slowness that
must be murder on the calves and thighs, they move on to the other foot,
placing it finally on the ground, with a gentle motion that wouldn’t hurt an
ant. Sometimes there is a teacher there. Four or five men and women gravely
mimic his gradual movements.

Slow motion is the word that distinguishes these people from any other
exercises in a nation that is obsessed with jogging, aerobics, stationary
bicycle pedalling, stretching, deep breathing, meditating and, coming in to
breakfast, counts the calories and checks the cholesterol content of the
approaching meal, all in the interest of prolonging the mortal span.

Which, if you try often enough, and regularly enough, can be done, for, as the
excellent Jane Walmsley puts it – she is the expatriate American married to an
Englishman, who wrote the funny, shrewd book, Brit-think, Ameri-think, "this is
a nation which believes that death is optional".

I doubt the old Chinese down in the park bother much to count the cholesterol.
They eat their own foods, they practice their own herbal medicine, and, perhaps
more than any other immigrants, they keep to themselves. They live apart, once
their jobs are done, rarely inter-marry and have never been cited, so far as I
know, as notable ingredients in the melting pot.

The Chinese have been here longer than all the people they trade with and
launder for and wait on. They were here in small numbers when California
belonged to Mexico, and a couple of years after Mexico had lost it and gold was
found on the American River, they came in to work for diggings and then, when
the east-bound railroad was being contemplated, they were brought in their
thousands to build it.

Today they have received a quite new type of visitor, one that came here as a
visitor but is going to stay here by presidential permission for a year at
least – some of them, no doubt, for life. They are the university students from
Communist china, a small proportion of the 40,000 or more that Mr Deng, in a
failure of foresight for which he must be cursing himself, allowed to come to
the United States for a year or two of study.

They were in the vanguard of the students in the nearby campuses Berkley, San
Francisco State, who paraded in protest over the Beijing massacre. Some of them
were wary enough not to parade, for among the young Chinese here, especially
the visiting students, there is a lively fear of spies and informers.

Some of the young who say they won’t go back of course are committed to the
democracy movement and won’t go back because they daren’t. The wary ones who
intend to go home have no intention of finding their names on a list of
dissidents.

In between these extremes there must be, a heartbreaking variety of young
people torn between loyalty to their families, their country, their beliefs.
And some of them, I imagine, who have read the stirring democratic rhetoric of
American leaders, who have applauded the congressmen who passed the bill that
allowed them to stay here, who have dutifully read some American history and
been moved by the tradition, the whole idea of the melting pot.

They must now be alarmed, disheartened at least, to discover that the melting
pot, is no longer the true image of American society even as an ideal. It
belongs to a vanished era, when the millions of immigrants came in from
southern and central Europe after the turn of the century, whose first thought
for their children was that they should become Americans. The time when
President Theodore Roosevelt bravely pleaded, "Let us have an end of talking
about German Americans and Polish Americans and Italian Americans, let us have
no more, hyphenated Americans – the English language is the crucible which
turns us all into one nation".

This idea, this ideal, is now being actively resisted, has been over the past
two decades, by great numbers of immigrants, mostly from the Spanish-speaking
people of south and central America.

Here in California the great immigrant flood, which is larger far than the
European tidal wave that fell on the east coast, has poured in from two
directions, from the south, from central America, but more and more, from the
Pacific, from Vietnam and Cambodia and Taiwan and Hong Kong, and the
Philippines and now – and never expected – a trickle from mainland China.

In Washington eloquent senators and other public ideology applaud in ringing
tones the western flood. And, more perceptively, remark on the fact that of all
the immigrants that have come here in the past 20 years, the children of the
Asians – the Vietnamese especially – have outstripped native American students
in such specialities as science and mathematics.

Having as tots to use the new language, it seems to me bizarre that it should
be these people more than immigrant Europeans, or Hispanics, who alone have
embraced, and in a sense glorified the idea of the melting pot.

The signs of this stubborn retreat into one’s own culture are plain and, to
some people, disturbing in many parts of the country – not least in Florida,
where, in the largest and most populous county, Dade County, the Hispanics have
formed such a tight and prosperous community that the mayor of Miami could say,
"There is no need whatsoever to learn English".

Dade County must be unique in having the largest population of unemployed who
are unemployed because they are white and speak no Spanish. But, nowhere, I
dare say, in this country are the symptoms of this fracturing of American
society more virulent than in California.

Take the revealing case of a young Filipino girl who came here last year,
enrolled at Berkeley high school. Miriam Avila, 17 years old, evidently a girl
who had been brought up on the old American texts. "I came here," she said the
other day, "expecting to be in the melting pot, the kind of place where I would
meet people from all over, and get to know them."

But, she said, she found, Filipinos socialise only with Filipinos, Chinese only
with Chinese, Latinos only with Latinos, blacks only with blacks, whites only
with whites. Another girl, an 18-year-old, a refugee from south-east Asia, made
the same despairing discovery. You don’t hang out with Vietnamese if you are a
Chinese from Vietnam, and you don’t hang out with Chinese from Hong Kong either
– they all hate each other.

Well, the testimony of two disillusioned teenagers hardly constitutes a
scientific study, but it was given before a conference, sponsored by the
University of California, in Sacramento, the state capital last week. The title
of the conference was, "The changing face of race relations".

It was a very crowded conference of government officials and educators from
California and beyond. It has, on its agenda, workshop discussions of white
Californians, blacks, Hispanics, but the first session was on the state's more
pressing racial problem, the mushroom growth of its Asian Pacific communities.
Notice they stress the word communities, not the influx of immigrants from many
contributories into the mainstream but their early absorption into closed
communities of their own nationality.

At the beginning the conference heard from a demographer who brought the
reminder that last year, for the first time, the numbers of white children in
Californian’s schools fell below 50%. And the further reminder of a fact, which
has been widely noted and discussed for several years, that by the year 2000,
California will be, from the whites' point of view, a minority state – that's
to say a majority of Californians will be Asian, Hispanic, Pacific Islands or
black.

Now the danger in this knowledge among white people is the danger of
conservative panic, which did set in just before the First World War, in
response to the south, central European flood, and took the form of severe
restrictive immigration laws against the new immigrants.

I must say I am surprised and heartened to see that, so far, this panicky
reflex has not happened in Congress, though I must say also that as the
millions keep pouring in, including more Mexicans to boost the seven million
illegals, already here, it seems to me inevitable, in a country with 30 million
very poor native Americans, that a strong protest movement is bound to arise,
among the blacks, most likely.

For the present, though, such a conference as the one in Sacramento is facing
the very unpleasant reality, as one Chinese American professor put it –
California can no longer think of simple majority-minority relations. The
reality now, is shifting power relationships between races and classes.

The tentative conclusion, the probable answer, he reached was a quite new one
and a bleak one. Assimilation, he said, is no longer the dominant trend. Or put
it more harshly and say we are looking at the prospect – not, I hope,
inevitable – of the collapse of that much vaunted American dream into a
nightmare of conflicting minorities, like the old German Republics' hardening
into suspicion and distrust of each other.

We await the Bismarck who will bring them together again.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP