OJ Simpson trial - 1 July 1994

There used to be a rule in England, which so far as I'm concerned might have
been the 11th Commandment handed down by Moses. The rule carried a warning in
two words only, for any journalist who, when a crime had been committed, felt
like stretching himself. The warning phrase as pronounced by the English judges
was "sub judice" or, if you pronounced your Latin in the barbarous Roman
fashion, "sub judice"', either way it meant that the crime you are interested
in was at the time under consideration by the courts and until some authority
decided there was a case to be tried, it was none of your business commenting
on or speculating about it.

In fact, there were strict sometimes expensive penalties that could be levied
against any journalist, any newspaper that broke this rule. Anyway, as a
fledgling journalist, I was brought up on the sub judice rule as of several
others that protected the citizen from being unfairly criticised. The laws of
libel and slander were also something you had to know a little about. One rule
I learned very early was never to write anything that brought a man into
ridicule with his fellow men. Well that pretty much would have deprived the
English literature of just about every satirist you can think of, from Geoffrey
Chaucer to Alexander Pope to Evelyn Waugh to Groucho Marx, not to mention
Spitting Image. Mention of that last, like a bomb dropping on a tea party, will
tell you in a flash that all these legal niceties and concern for what the
United Nations charter calls the dignity of the individual have been trodden
under foot in the rough-shod march of human curiosity as demonstrated by the
daily parade of those gallant defenders of free speech the tabloid press. The
tabloid telly is growing fast and flourishing in America in programmes that
once would have had its producers behind bars.

So you may have gathered why I have not at anytime during the past few weeks
made even a mention of the name and sudden notoriety of OJ Simpson and why even
now I'm loathe to talk about him. People have been saying to me, "I suppose
this week you had your fill of comment about the shocking case of OJ," and I
said, "no, when it's decided there's a case against him and he comes to trial,
then we'll go into it". And people say, "oh really". I'm afraid it's no longer
possible to stay with the old rule without sounding prim and fussy, prissy in
fact.

Now if it's possible that anyone listening to me at this moment has not heard
the name and the case of OJ Simpson, I better say that he's probably the most
famous, the most handsome, certainly the most greatly gifted of modern American
athletes in my time, your time or the time of anyone interested in American
football who is now alive and sanctioned just as once American's and not only
Americans automatically referred to Bobby Jones as the greatest golfer who'd
ever lived, so Americans repeat as an catechism the answer to the question "who
is the greatest running back in the history of American football?" OJ Simpson.
He's in his mid 40s now, long retired, but the memory of his weaving, feinting,
slicing through the plunging opposition is dazzling still and the recollection
of his grace, his elegant good humour, his looks has been preserved by some
clever television commercials he did for a car rental agency and then a raft of
movies, which were never going to collect all the Oscars, but didn't demean
either the remembrance of one of the most admired men as also one of the most
admired blacks of our time.

Imagine then the unhappy early morning of Monday 13 June, when the telephone
rang in OJ Simpson's room in a Chicago hotel. He'd gone there for a business
meeting with his car rental sponsor. The call was from the Los Angeles police
to tell him that his wife had been found stabbed and murdered just outside her
house along with a murdered man. Even that bare account, the first we heard was
brutally shocking and the first impulse was to grieve for Mr Simpson.

Within hours, it came out that OJ had been in his Chicago hotel room only about
two hours, he checked in about I believe four in the morning Chicago time, he
said he'd taken a plane from Los Angeles airport at a quarter to midnight and
it was shown that he had. He had his lawyer came to say been waiting in his own
Los Angeles home a mile or two away from his separated wife waiting for a
limousine to take him to the airport when the crime according to the police
could have been committed. There the first doubt was sprung. A day or two
later, the district attorney's office charged him with premeditated murder of
both victims.

Then we learnt that the day before, both OJ and his wife had taken their two
children to a school performance of some kind that OJ had gone home and Mrs
Simpson had gone off to dinner at a favourite restaurant. She was described by
friends as happy and much relieved at her decision to divorce Mr Simpson. She'd
left her glasses at the restaurant and in the evening telephoned the manager,
he said not to worry, a waiter who was a good friend of Mrs Simpson's would
drop them off on his way home. He did so, he was the murdered man.

To that point, the case the public knowledge of it was within the normal
restrictions of the law, but the moment OJ was charged, the television networks
and the cable networks and the independent city stations and of course the
tabloids went ape within patience to know the worst or to assume it. In no
time, even the most serious American papers and the television of course were
printing as news rumours and rumoured leaks they said they had from the police
or from that most useful informer when you haven't much to go on, observers.
There was a big to-do about a ski mask having been found, which would suggest
premeditation and do away with the early idea that Mr Simpson's defence would
be one of insanity.

It turned out, by a confession of the prosecutor there was no ski mask. Then
lots of unproved assertions about bloodstains drops, a glove in one place that
was said to match a glove in OJ's house and so on. Mr Simpson has by now
fortified himself with three lawyers who have an impressive record of getting
acquittals for defendants whose cases looked hopeless at the start. Mr
Simpson's lawyers first complained that some of these rumours were coming from
the police in the arraignment session, they said they would ask for a hearing
at which the prosecution would be challenged to say whether this rumour or that
was correct. The chief prosecutor responded with what amounted to an apology,
there was never any ski mask. The rumour mill ground on. Meanwhile, a grand
jury had been sitting, summoned the day after the bodies were found.

Grand juries abolished 60 years ago in England, are famously the creature of
the DA the prosecutor, the defence plays no part, it's allowed no witnesses, no
cross examination, so nine times out of 10, if not more often still, the grand
jury hearing at length the prosecution's case brings in a bill of indictment.
Yes, they're saying there is a case against the man or woman charged and it
should go to trial. Now we were being told every day after the murders that the
grand jury was on the verge on indicting Mr Simpson.

Then one evening about a week ago, it seemed to me that nearly every television
programme being aired was suspended for the time it took to play over with
subtitles an unseen but shocking scene and desperate sometimes sobbing wife
begging the police to come and arrest her husband who could be heard in the
background raving and storming and spouting obscenities. The shocking part was
the realisation that the wife was Mrs Simpson and the raving man was Mr
Simpson. This tape had not been filched; it had been released by the Los
Angeles city police without permission from anyone.

The DA's office, the prosecutor was furious, so was the judge who'd presided
over the arraignment for the same reason. The airing of that tape, the ugly
brutal scene, it fed into our imaginations was about as prejudicial a piece of
evidence as you can dream up. On that ground, the judge closed down the grand
jury hearing, an extremely rare practice but one a judge is qualified to do,
saying that it was almost inconceivable that the jurors had not heard or would
not hear about the police tape.

Incidentally, the solidly planted prejudice was dug deeper by the correct
report that Mrs Simpson had over the last year or two called the police nine
times to save her from her husband's beatings. Once he was brought to court for
a specific offence and lightly punished, somehow this never got out to the
media at the time. So instead of a grand jury indictment, the defence requested
and got a preliminary hearing before a judge at which the prosecution was to
lay out its positive case on the understanding that the defence lawyers would
be allowed to see and independently test every bit of evidence brought in to
support the charge of a double murder. That began on Thursday.

The first development being that the judge ordered 10 hairs to be taken from
the head of OJ Simpson to be matched against hairs found in a cap left near the
murdered bodies. The first strike for the defence was scored when it urged that
all the evidence – skid marks, blood, caps, whatever – picked up by the police
in the early morning of the 13th should be excluded from the case because the
police had secured the evidence by illegal entry, they did not have a warrant,
which they didn't.

The press and other media are of course within their respectable rights in
reporting that hearing, so the networks were prepared to loose millions of
dollars to sponsors by stopping the soaps even going to the extreme of
abandoning coverage of the World Cup and sacred Wimbledon, why, why so
inpatient little man? Because everyone wants to know the verdict now before
we've heard the facts, the case charged, the case defended, before, in fact,
the trial, which is the point at which we the media should decently come in.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP