Quebec and French relations - 3 November 1995

I wonder how many people reading the papers this week remembered that hot day
in July of 1967, when we woke-up to hear that the prime minister of Canada had
virtually thrown the president of France out of the country. The prime minister
was Canada's most famous postal or statesman, Nobel Prize winner Lester Pearson
the French president was the unique, the formidable – Mr Churchill used to say
the insufferable – Charles de Gaulle. Even though the Second World War had been
over for more than 20 years de Gaulle was still, to put it mildly, a
controversial figure among the Western allies.

In the 1960s as president of the Fifth Republic, he had two almost
belligerently publicised aims: to show France to be capable in the atomic age
of asserting its independence of the United States as a military power, and to
block every proposal coming either from Britain or Europe for Britain to join
the European community.

The year before he went on his visit to Canada, he withdrew France from the
fledgling Nato, the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation of which incidentally
Canada's prime minister Mr Pearson had been one of the principle architects.
This act of course forced the United States to shutdown the Nato military bases
it had in France, so when de Gaulle flew to Canada, hands across the sea were
making rude gestures at each other. Came that day visiting the mainly French
speaking province of Québec when President de Gaulle ended one of his majestic
speeches with a ringing defiant phrase practically a war cry, "Vive la Québec
liebe!" Long live a free Québec.

Frankly, so long ago, that was a new thought to most of us outside Canada, what
did it mean? I recall a visiting reporter from England asking me was the
province of Québec governed by a local dictator? Decidedly not, it was as
democratic as all the other provinces and as free from dictation by anybody
including the British crown as any other member of the, by then fairly loose
confederation known as the British Commonwealth. What de Gaulle was urging was
nothing less than Québec's independence as a separate country from Canada. That
was enough for prime minister Pearson. De Gaulle was meant to move onto Ottawa
for a welcoming reception before the Canadian parliament. Lester Pearson made
it clear no welcome would be available. De Gaulle went home.

The French press of course made the usual noises of outrage, but I don't
suppose de Gaulle was inclined to echo them. He probably felt well pleased with
himself. He could better say, "Mischief thou art afoot." In fact, something
most of us didn't know but Canadian's knew all too well and the people of
Québec most of all, de Gaulle had made a public act of nourishing a movement
that had been planted 200 years ago. There are Québecers who know their history
and will say there never was a time when Québec didn't resent its being lumped
with the other provinces as part of a united Canada.

Now of all the nations that in the 17th and 18th centuries challenged England
for control of North America, France was the most impressive, the one that
suffered the most crushing defeat. But also, as Québecers are the first to
remind you, she was the first and Québec was the first settlement in North
America before many Englishmen had stirred his stumps and yearned for the new
world.

Only 12 years after Columbus's first voyage, fishermen from Brittany were
working the cod banks of Nova Scotia and while we, along with the Portuguese
and Spanish, were poking at the Atlantic coast to find that greatly touted
route through to the Orient, the Breton started what was to be for a century or
more the great continental industry: furs. They did not neglect the prestigious
catch of the many rivers they'd come on. The French mapped the river systems of
the entire Eastern seaboard the Midwest and the Mississippi basin. The Breton
trapped and skinned every fur bearing animal in sight.

A half dozen intrepid explorers pushed what the French called the Kingdom of
the North, far into today's Midwest. They were determined to hem the British
colonists in east of the Appalachians. They travelled, they occupied one third
of the North American continent from New Orleans to the Canadian border. They
took in and hoped to have as their own, what today would comprise most of 13
large states. It was to be the nucleus of the great French empire that would
rout the British. They named it Louisiana.

Napoleon had a rehearsal for this grand design in Haiti, where he lost 30,000
of his crack troops, the flower of the French infantry, to, it has always been
said, the brilliance of a black general a master of gorilla warfare. It was
also true that at least a half of Napoleon's troops were lost to a far ranging
epidemic of Yellow Fever. Either way Napoleon abandoned his plan to solidify
new France in North America and conquer all of it. And in the luckiest
transaction in American history, he sold the whole of that triangle of acreage
– more than twice the then existing lands of the United States – at four cents
an acre. That was the end of any possible French conquest of North America.

But 40 odd years before, when in the far north, the French forces had been
beaten by the British and surrendered both Québec and Montreal, the British
government was concerned to do right by the 60,000 French speaking, now British
subjects in the new province of Québec. In an act perhaps as enlightened as
anything done later by the British or Canadian governments, it passed a special
act allowing Québec to be governed by French civil law alongside British
criminal law. This was done to protect the Roman Catholic Church and to allow
what didn't happen in Britain or the rest of Canada then, to allow Roman
Catholics to hold public office. Now all this was done by 1774 and a lively
politician, today imagining Québec's future, would surely have guessed that
long before now, Québec would have become an independent nation. Well as we
know it hasn't.

English and French are both official languages throughout the whole nation and
all items of public print from traffic signs to book matches must be printed in
both languages. By now almost half the entire population of Canada is Roman
Catholic, Québec 80 per cent. Québec was given special consideration of her
culture and the heritage of French law right through the 19th and 20th century
until a fateful year, 1982 when Canada adopted its own sovereign constitution
and Québec reverted to equal status with the nine other provinces. Two years
before that, Québec's rising indignation resulted in a referendum to see how
the whole of Québec felt about becoming independent of Canada. The separatists
lost badly.

Since then, the Canadian government has tried to pass special concessions to
Québec, to give it a status distinct from that of the other nine. Parliament
has rejected them. There have been other failing referendums, but last year,
the separatists party came to power in Québec and while we were all being told
they'd never get what they wanted, they mounted a new and determined campaign,
and last Monday they tried again. As we all know, they lost again, but this
time by a hair's breadth, by only 50,000 votes in four and a half million. If
there's one thing all the Canadian commentators agree on it is that we have not
by any means, heard the last of the independents movement. I know Canadians
have much knowledge and good judgement, who now believe it is bound to come.

Some American commentators who usually know about as little Canadian history as
Englishmen do, went into instant anxiety if not panic, at the thought of the
effect on trade across the border – that famous undefended border – which
American's have always boasted about, have always looked on as a triumphant
sign that feeling and custom between the two countries are so close they might
well be citizens of the same country. And for the same reason, there's a kind
of compliment in the fact that Americans know so little about Canadian history.
It's as if they didn't know much about the history of Arkansas because it's one
of them.

Canada and the United States combine to form far and away the biggest trading
partnership in the world, 275 billion dollars worth of goods and services.
There's no tariff but soon there might have to be. What happens to the cost on
this side of the border, of the five billion dollars worth of imported timber?
American mills would have to close. Canada sends to the United States 15
million tourists a year and the one's who flood Florida come mostly from
Québec. How about American access to northern Québec's power projects and so on
and so on.

But surely neither Wall Street nor timber firms not travel agents would fail to
workout an economic relationship with Québec as they might with any other newly
independent nation. The fact that, for the first time in 200 years, it would
turn Canada into two nations is an emotional wrench that Americans are not
likely to feel, but Canadians will. And certainly when you listen to the more
serious of the separatists, the less bloodshot orators, you can realise the
enormous emotional power of their historical memory. They can recite great
names for their exploring and pioneering past. They have Champlain and Joliet,
Cartier, La Salle. Whereas Americans if challenged, could name only La Salle,
Cadillac and Pontiac, but then only as names of automobiles. To Canadians, to
all Canadians these names are as resounding as to Americans are the names of
Washington, Jefferson, Franklin, Lewis and Clark. I think it's doubtful in the
next year or two whether their memory and what they stood for and what they
lost will be forgotten or forgiven.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP