Military downsizing and Rio - 12 June 1992

Before we get down to a matter not much talked about and that's affecting
millions of Americans, Europeans most of all the citizens of the former Soviet
Union, a note was sounded on Monday in the lofty halls of the United States
Supreme Court that I'm surprised to see has made no headlines, no ominous
baritone noises from the men on the tube, but on the face of it anyway it
strikes me as more than a little scary.

Simply the court by the unusually substantial majority of six to three ruled
that the states have a constitutional right to prohibit writing votes in
elections, let's say at once that very many people, millions have made it clear
already that if Mr Ross Perot doesn't manage to raise the required number of
petitions to put him in the ballot in their state, they will none the less
write in his name.

In most of the primary elections we've just come through, there were impressive
totals of writing votes for candidates not on the primary ballots. Mr Tsongas
for one, remember – he withdrew from the race early on for the stark reason
that he'd run out of money and was already a couple of million dollars, I think
it was, in debt.

It's one of the never-solved puzzles to foreigners that in this great
democracy, in order to run for any elected office, most conspicuously for the
House or the Senate, worse for the presidency, you have to go around cap in
hand to rich groups who will cough up vast sums not because they love the
colour of your eyes or your charming voice, but because they represent a
special interest – businesses, labour unions, farmers, tinkers, tailors,
sailors, soldiers, transport, whatever –interests which are bound to come up as
a new law and on which they expect your vote their way. This is called raising
a campaign fund and by no twist of meaning as catering to special interests.

Well, the court and its ban on writing votes – it met to review a case brought
last year before a United States Court of Appeals for the federal circuit that
is adjudicated in San Francisco. How the case came about is interesting, it
shows on the part of the man who started it, certainly no sinister defence of
writing votes, he was a Republican living in New Jersey who moved out into the
Pacific and settled in Hawaii. When the first election came up, he discovered
that Hawaii is a rock ribbed Democrat state so strong that once the Democrats
put their candidates name on the ballot, often the opposition party, the
Republicans for instance don't find it worthwhile to put up an opponent. The
Democrat will be voted in unopposed.

Well, Mr Burdick, this greatly surprised Republican, challenged the Hawaiian
law, which said that writing votes were illegal, he argued that under the first
amendment the right of free speech he should be able to vote for the man or
woman he chose and never mind if the name was not on the ballot. Well, the
majority of the court turned him down, Justice White saying that "the right to
vote in any manner and the right to associate for political purposes through
the ballot are not absolute".

I must say the majority had a strong case in Hawaii because its law requires a
petition to carry no more than 25 signatures to put a name on the ballot. In
some of the big states that Mr Perot hopes to contest, a petition containing at
least 50,000, some states I believe 75,000 are necessary before he can printed
on the ballot.

At first glance, it looks as if Mr Perot supporters had been dealt a blow by
the Supreme Court. I believe on the contrary, it will spur on his supporters
rallying the more sluggish to rush in there with a ballpoint pen and a
flourishing signature. In truth, there are only three other states that don't
allow writing votes and presumably would be legally justified in destroying
them – they are Nevada, Oklahoma and Indiana, not among the most populous
states. Still, I'll bet that by this weekend, the Perot recruiting officers
will be busy in those four states warning them that if they don't sign in old
Ross's name on a petition it will do them no good to write it in in November.

Now in the past couple of years to lean back no further, we've had two or three
lamentable examples of the constant conflict between idealism and earning a
living, the most dramatic, the most lurid and unsolved of these conflicts is
surely that between this government's genuine urge to wipe out the Colombian
drug cartel and yet to rescue from hunger and poverty the half million or more
Peruvian peasants who live by cultivating the cocoa plant. The obvious and much
publicised solution is alternative profitable crops. I'm afraid not too much
has been done or will be until somebody finds a crop that produces one tenth
say the revenue of cocaine.

This week at the very start of the Rio environmental conference, at which the
United States was cast from the beginning as the villain, suddenly the United
States proposed a noble plan and was thwarted once again by the poor people
who'd be the first to suffer from the carrying out of that plan. I'm referring
of course to Mr Bush's appeal to the assembled nations to double their spending
on conserving the world's forests. Some industrial nations have been quick to
agree, but the opposition is massive from the countries that would forego
stripping, logging, manufacturing from timber resources, from, that is, the
poor underdeveloped countries that we must now call developing whether they are
developing or not.

The latest and the most widespread assault on the jobs both of the unskilled
and the very skilled, the jobs of millions of workers in Europe and Euro, Asia
and America is the simple huge project of liquidating the military or cutting
it down in so many countries cutting it down to size. "Oh," moaned a friend of
mine, a strong liberal and an unlikely moaner of such a line, "Oh for the bliss
of the Cold War." I doubt that anybody listening to me now sighed or shook a
head when the Soviet Union collapsed and not very long afterwards the United
States and the collection of republics that still can't think up a name got
together to cut their arms production, their stockpiles and manufacture of
nuclear weapons and the mass of their armies and navies. What a splendid day it
was we thought and nobody said so more resoundingly than the Democratic Party
in this country, which for more than a decade ever since the coronation of
Ronald Reagan has deplored and groaned and bellyached about the size of the
defence budget, about the crime of Ronald Reagan increasing that budget from
Carter's 22% to 28%.

Very odd, by the way, that when John Kennedy lifted the cost of defence to 50%
of the national budget, nobody called him a warmonger. Well, the crooning and
whooping of the Democrats didn't last more than a year or so, by which time
several committees of Congress that have to do with the armed services found
themselves going through a long list of army camps, factories, forts and bases,
naval shipyards so on and having to decide which ones to close down. At that
point, every congressman of either party who had a shipyard or a camp or a
defence factory in his constituency pleaded with much eloquence and cogency
before those committees that of all the bases and plants that ought to go, it
was a curious fact that his own was the one that should be spared.

The hurtful irony is that since the Democrats are a majority of the House, the
chairman of all committees are Democrats and the majority on the committees is
Democratic. Nevertheless, the Armed Services Committee was brutal and many a
congressman contemplating the sudden addition of 50-60,000 unemployed in his
district simply decided not to run again in November.

The United States, like I suppose Britain and the NATO countries, is only now
beginning to feel the blow of the cutting down process. And of course when I
tot up unemployed, I'm thinking not only of soldiers let go but much more of
the workers in defence plants.

Well, if we think we have trouble, this week we heard from a committee of
Congress the Job-like sufferings being inflicted on the people's of the former
Soviet Union. The committee that heard this sad and later on for us alarming
tale has a jaw-breaking title, but it's a joint House and Senate sub-committee
on the economics of national security. It heard this week from intelligence
experts in the CIA and the Defense Department. I thought back to the old days
to the many long years when such experts testified with grim diligence about
the menacing strength of the latest Soviet weapons and appropriations, they
testified then in secret and were, by the way, usually right. Their testimony
the other day had swivelled 180º: they deplored the huge drop in the number of
formerly Soviet defence plants, the near bankruptcy of many of them, the
collapse of sales of weapons and the trouble the different Rrepublics are
having in paying their workers. The Russian military are bearing down on Mr
Yeltsin pointing to the hundreds of thousands of dismissed soldiers, officers
with no jobs, no homes begging him not to go on and halve the military, which
he'd promised from about three million to a million and a half. This year about
two million defence workers will be laid off. The result of all this is exports
down 30%, imports down 40%, inflation beginning to roar.

What I suggested was the alarming note for us was the common concern of these
officials about the great numbers of surface to air missiles and sophisticated
aircraft and weapons that are lying about and which are under an agreement
between Mr Yeltsin and the heads of three other republics in the defence
business are forbidden to sell these things abroad without permission, but who
could humanly expect these legions of skilled men unemployed to resist the
solicitations of arms dealers of every sort from every country of the Third
World under what the government witnesses describe as dire economic conditions.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP