US anti-smoking legislation - 24 April 1998

I'm not myself much of a collector of antiquities, as distinct from antiques. I
mean whimsical oddments like the original movie theatre poster of Mary Pickford
in Little Lord Fauntleroy or, what would fetch almost as much today, a first
edition of John Milton's Paradise Lost. All the more priceless if the word
'horrid' was mis-spelt in line 103.

But a couple of full-page headlines in two papers that don't usually go in for
such blazing horizontals immediately reminded me that some generous friend, or
maybe listener, once sent me, out of the blue, a pamphlet written in 1605,
written in blood by King James of the new United Kingdom, no less. It's called
A Blast, or maybe it's A Counterblast (I'm 300 miles away from the books), say
then, A Counterblast Against Tobacco.

It's an extraordinary, and extraordinarily radical dissenting piece for the
time, when some of the best poets were singing the praises of man's best
friend, sweet baccy. James's detestation of tobacco was so violent and so
spontaneous, nobody had to teach him to hate it, he must just have been
repelled at the first whiff of the stuff. A sentence or two is memorable, I
hope. He called it a noxious weed, a contempt of God's gift of the sweetness of
a man's breath. That's an odd gift to be grateful for in the dark age of
dentistry, when Queen Elizabeth used to lay on a quarter of an inch of perfumed
ointment to disguise the smell of her skin.

Anyway, James I didn't have a good thing to say about this corruption by
stinking smoke and he forbade all smoking in and around his palaces and, I was
about to say, even on the golf course. But he was quite a one for condemning
most human pleasures and put out an edict when the masses started rushing to
the links, prohibiting golf, saying it should be utterly put down because it
was imperilling the national defence by taking young lads away from their
archery practice. However, the prohibition of golf was a second thought. The
tobacco pamphlet caused quite a stink, you might say, as much as the campaign
that now fills our headlines. Here are two in the morning and evening San
Francisco newspapers.

Tobacco learns that lobbying has limits and a think piece – or propaganda
column, if you like – by Mr Clinton's former Secretary of Labour, "Big tobacco
must lead the fight against teenage nicotine addiction". They're writing about
the number one issue Congress is about to tackle, now it's come back from its
spring break. In fact, the leader of the Republicans in the Senate, first day
on his feet, complained that while he was back home in Mississippi, nobody
brought up the pending Tobacco Bill and that in the minds of his people,
tobacco was not the first issue, or the second, third, fourth, fifth or sixth.

They were eager to have the Congress get busy on turning welfare into workfare,
to save social security, to improve American schools and, for the sake of their
children of all ages, to do something to redeem the miserable record of several
administrations of both parties, in the matter of drugs and drug use, which
goes on rising alarmingly most among teenagers.

But you'll notice there's being worked up general concern about teenagers on
another matter. In a country in which today only one adult in four smokes, they
are smoking more than anybody and this is the pretext for all the hullabaloo
about bashing the tobacco companies, who recently cried help and walked out of
an agreement that last autumn we all thought had more or less solved, or
softened, the problem of discouraging teenage smoking. By the way, a hefty
proportion of teenagers have picked up from their baseball heroes the habit,
which I'm sure King James would have thought even more stinking than smoking,
of chewing tobacco.

Let's look into this much-praised agreement between the law and the tobacco
companies and see what went wrong and what the present brouhaha is all about.
The Surgeon General reported 36 years ago, following much American and European
research that positively linked cigarette smoking to cancer of the lung and
emphysema. The tobacco companies retreated to the storm cellar to await a
blizzard of lawsuits and in spite of the well-known fact that health warnings
have been compulsorily printed on every pack of cigarettes since that report,
so that people who can read and who choose to smoke are responsible for the ill
effects, this did not deter people from suing the companies.

Through many cases and great expense on both sides, nobody won damages until
the theory came in, proved to the satisfaction of many eminent doctors, but not
all, that simply being around cigarette smokers, being within whiffing distance
of a cigarette, could badly affect your lungs and that if you got cancer or
another respiratory disease, it might be due to what became known as passive
smoking. And that prompted one suit in particular, I recall, that can now be
seen to have caused the tobacco companies all their woe and loss of Eden.

A woman flight attendant of a prominent airline developed either emphysema or
lung cancer, I forget which. She sued, as a victim of her job, which forced her
to be enclosed in a smoke-filled area or room, and she won. The airlines
panicked and promptly Congress passed a law prohibiting all smoking on all
airplanes that flew across this continent. It's been all downhill for the
companies ever since.

The Democrats seized on a new issue, the fight against passive smoking and that
led to city ordinances. California was a pioneer against smoking, first in
restaurants and offices, all public buildings and now even in bars.
Congressional committees met and hauled before them officials of the leading
tobacco companies and on the first day put to them a simple question: Is
nicotine addictive? In a scene which they all wish had never happened,
certainly never been televised, they raised their right hands and swore in
turn, like Boy Scouts swearing to do one good deed a day, that nicotine was not
addictive. Subsequently, one big company official welshed on his colleagues and
cited company studies to show they well knew that the curse of nicotine is its
addictiveness. Many months later, the big boys who took the oath came back and
swore again that, ouch, they had lied.

Now the field was open for Mr Clinton, much in need then of a moral crusade, to
demand that the tobacco companies be made to pay a very large sum for what
cigarettes might do to people in the future, along with a guarantee that they
would be safe from lawsuits. Well, the tobacco companies had pumped 60 millions
in lobbying whichever party controlled Congress, which since 1995, has been the
Republicans. It was not enough. Sick people and state governments were now
fuelled by the reforming spirit and there was a dramatic meeting between the
tobacco tycoons and the conclave of states' Attorneys General. They cut a
settlement, greatly applauded, only a few months ago. The companies agreed to
stop advertisements that were designed to appeal to youngsters. They would
agree to a small increase in the price of cigarettes. They would set up a fund
of 368 billion dollars, to be used over 25 years to indemnify them against
lawsuits. Well done.

It hasn't worked. They'd assumed that this deal would soon go though Congress
with the blessing of the president and both parties. An expert in the art of
practice of lobbying remarked: the tobacco men clearly got some horrible
political advice.

Now the villain of the tobacco companies' script is, strangely, a Republican. A
maverick Republican who has drafted a Bill, with Mr Clinton's blessing, that
would greatly restrict advertising, would raise the cost of a pack of
cigarettes by one dollar ten cents over five years (not exactly a draconian
measure) and allow six and a half billions a year for individual lawsuits. But
now this Bill offers no protection against class action lawsuits, that is suits
on behalf of a group and, it turns out, the total outlay for the tobacco
companies will be not 368 billion dollars but 516 billions.

They have walked away from the debate in disgust and are thinking, reluctantly
but quite seriously, about the prospect of bankruptcy, which is, of course,
what the more extreme of the campaigners, including one or two old government
health officials, want, Well, it's very unlikely that the whole thing will go
through in this Congress in an election year. There is, first, the rising anger
and frustration of several Southern states, comprising a landscape the size of
twice the United Kingdom, whose staple crop is tobacco. A quarter of a million
jobs are on the line and if some realist in Congress wants to hit the true
unanswered question, how do you kill or lessen teenage smoking, he could point
out that throughout the scare and the negotiations and the public debate,
teenage smoking has been rising dramatically.

All, surely, that's needed to make it rise higher still, would be to ban
cigarette smoking altogether. That's what happened with the demon liquor, the
so-called noble experiment of prohibition, which did not make Americans
noticeably nobler than they already were, but created a huge underground empire
of crime and made it cool, when I arrived in this country, for even the most
innocent and respectable 15-year-old girl to carry, at all times outside
school, a flask of gin.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP