Irving Berlin turns 100 - 6 May 1988

I wonder what they’d be doing in Tyumen, Kyrgyzstan, next Wednesday. I can’t
guarantee the pronunciation and I am also pretty hazy about the place, about
Tyumen that is.

Kyrgyzstan I am a little more definite about, though I have never run into
anybody who has been there, except the man I have in mind, who was born in
Tyumen a hundred years ago, next Wednesday.

It would be nice to hear, though I think it very unlikely, that the streets of
the village will be flapping with bunting and the natives will be dancing
around hand in hand, and singing, Alexander’s Ragtime Band, and catching their
breath from time to time, to chant, "Viva!" or, more probably, "Long live
Israel Berlin". Whose name, by a printing mistake on a piece of sheet music,
got changed to I Berlin, and then, because practically every other Russian
immigrant boy to this country whose first name began with an I turned into
Irving, Irving Berlin.

That's the man, a little frail they say, as you might expect to be. Frail and
wiry, a friend describes him, but with all the marbles. It really blows the
mind my mind to begin to calculate the odds against the son of a rabbi, in a
mountainous Moslem settlement on the border of China, turning within one
generation into the pied piper, the troubador, of American popular music.

The odds against his ever getting away from the shadow of the 20,000-foot peaks
of Kyrgyzstan even, into European Russia, seem formidable enough. Looking back
on his boyhood Berlin could fairly say that he was born in the middle ages and
in the pre-civilised middle ages. Kyrgyzstan now, of course, the Soviet
socialist republic, didn’t even belong to Russia until 1876, 12 years before
the boy was born.

Before that, telling its history in the simplest terms makes you sound like a
film writer mocking up a script for something called 1000BC. For centuries the
Kyrgyz were a tribe of nomads of Mongol extraction, who about, it's thought,
the 16th Century migrated into the alpine border country we are talking about,
and, came under the rule of – wait for it – the Khanate of Kokand a relic of
Tamerlane’s empire.

In 1876, the Russians moved in, 12 years later, Israel Berlin arrived. He was
one of eight children of a rabbi, who in 1893, when the boy was five, saw his
home burn down. By whom is a matter of never-settled debate. At any rate, in
this remote Mongol Moslem country, Jews were certainly a minority, and as
elsewhere, looked on as a threat to the true faith.

Rabbi Berlin it is ruled, took off in a hurry, like many more persecuted
legions, for New York city, where the family lived for several years in great
poverty. The father died when young Berlin was eight, and he was thrown – as a
journalist at the time wrote – into the welter of New York, selling newspapers
for a while, trying out as a singing waiter in the seedier saloons of Chinatown
and the Bowery and rescuing coins tossed into the sawdust at his feet.

In New York then, before the immigrant flood that bought in a spate of musical
talent, anti-Semitism was rife enough, even in the lower reaches of show
business, to persuade Berlin to adopt for a time an Irish name, Cooney. For a
year or two, he plugged songs from music-hall balconies, he worked as a floor
sweeper and general handyman of something called Nigger Mike's Place.

At some point, he had access to a piano in his squalid boarding house and began
to pick out tunes – on the black keys only. He wrote and sold, for a pittance,
to a song publisher all sorts of dialect songs – one way for Jews to blur their
social stigma was to kid it, along with the fancied characteristics of other
immigrant strains. He wrote comic Italian songs, Irish songs, Jewish songs,
Marie from sunny Italy, Sadie Salome, Goodbye Becky Cohen.

He was just 23 when he picked up the incoming craze for ragtime, and thumpingly
made it is his own with two songs that rattled around America, and Europe.
Alexander’s Ragtime Band and, Everybody's Doing It. From Chinatown, Berlin’s
biographer put it, he dropped on to Broadway as abruptly as if he had come by
parachute. He was twenty three, and it’s safe to say that for the past 77
years, poverty is something he would not forget, but never again, endure.

I couldn’t help reflecting this week on one of the ironies of his awesome
longevity – of course, there will always be freakish exceptions to any
well-established scientific rule which is what makes researchers, I have
noticed, often rather nervous types always looking over their shoulders for the
glaring case that contradicts their best generalisations – I am thinking of
Irving Berlin as a physical type. And here again, the odds against his living
to be 100 must be incalculable. He was small, a slip of a young man, thin to
the point of transparency, the sort of man that, in my boyhood in grimy
Manchester was described with a hand over your mouth, as a candidate for
consumption.

On the long trek from the Chinese border to the Bowery, the refugee family made
many precarious stops in ghettos across Europe and came in here in the stew of
steerage, then into the foulest slums of New York. Little food and that not of
the sort of build up a bonnie boy, from his early teens on, he slept among
smells and rodents, 16-hour days sweeping, washing up, stowing garbage, then at
night, typing away in his reedy little voice in dives reeking of smoke and
liquor.

The annual medical check-up is something very few Americans had ever heard of
in those days, and today, Berlin’s kind still haven’t. But I am sure that, if
he’d ever gone to a doctor, to look him over, the prognosis would have been
dim.

This thought, came into my mind the other evening – I didn’t let it out – when
I was talking with the doctor about the current dogmas on diet. We have gone
into another period of general anxiety about cholesterol. These periods have
been waxing and waning since the early 1960s.

By this time it’s hard to find a friend – an American friend – who can’t tell
you, right off, his cholesterol count. A very good friend of mine on the west
coast, has something in the stratosphere of 425 and his doctor keeps telling
him "You are a walking time bomb".

Yet this friend, after feeling low and queasy through a succession of diets
soaked in polyunsaturated fats, has decided to back to his own diet, which is
to eat what he feels like and which, in theory, should have killed him a year
ago. Of all the pieces I have come across in the past year or so – and must be
hundreds – I have not seen one, not one, study that weighed the effects of
anxiety about cholesterol on the general state of health.

How about the cholesterol count itself? But there was a cool and reassuring
piece from a London doctor, of much experience and some distinction, a man in
his late '70s. He looked over the present raft of prohibitions – the meats and
dairy products and sauces and liquids you ought not to use – and set the list
against the diseases they are supposed to cause, most of all, heart attacks.

He then looked at the mortality rates, male and female of the species, now,
although the only true gauge of advancement in human preservation is the
expectation of life at birth. He went over British and American reports on the
age at which the great majority of people die. And then, for purposes of
comparison, he went back to magazines, both medical and lay, of the late 1920s
and early '30s.

He noted the different concerns about diet, the quite different diets
prescribed, and the different diseases the doctors threatened you with, if you
didn’t pay attention. Finally, he looked over the age at which 50, 60 years
ago, most Britons and Americans died – I hasten to say yes, I know it's higher,
not much for the male, strikingly higher by four or five years, for the female.
Still our doctor decided that there was not too much in it, not enough to
justify our saying that the radically different diets of today would prolong
your life dramatically, over the '20s and '30s.

What it comes down to, he decided, was we don’t really know what makes this
person die early and that one die late. And London doctor's last wry word was,
"You have a choice – the difference between then and now is you are likely to
die of a different set of diseases and at about the same time." This, for some
time, will be my last word on the subject which comes up in conversation here
rather more than often than the Persian Gulf, Yasser Arafat, or the
presidential elections.

As for the secret, if there is one, of longevity, even the most learned medicos
when stumped still take refuge in the shaking of the head and the pronouncing
of the phrase, "It’s the genes". Irving Berlin’s parents, by the way, did not
live overlong; his grandparents, I don’t know.

But when any public person gets into their 80s, he or she is, as sure as an
Oscar winner, to be tapped by some newspaper seeking the secret of their
success. Roosevelt’s first vice president, John Nance Garner, a small Texan,
built like a bullet, was interviewed on his 98th birthday. "The secret," he
said, "was bourbon and water." On his 99th birthday, he was interviewed again.
The secret? Laying off bourbon and water.

Field Marshal Montgomery remained 100% fit because, he said, he didn’t smoke or
drink. To which Mr Churchill responded, "I smoke and I drink and I am, too,
100% fit." The last word, the snippet of philosophy which should banish
sleepless nights of worrying about diet, health, long life, belongs, I think,
to Mark Twain. "Well," he said, "after all, nobody gets out alive."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP