OJ Simpson guilty - 7 February 1997

One of the happiest, most consoling pictures that have ever appeared on
television opened One Network’s news programme on Wednesday evening.

It had been taken in mid-morning and it was simply a high, long shot of a scene
that could be nowhere but Southern California. Or perhaps Southern Spain.

It was in Southern California. A handsome Spanish-style red-tiled roof
courthouse on its own grounds. In the foreground, palm trees glistening in a
gentle breeze; and on the shining, white sidewalks that are so characteristic
of California, there were one or two people passing by. A single policeman, a
state trooper perhaps, sat on his idling motor bike, his left leg swinging
slowly at ease. That was the mood; and it was one that I’d guess every American
who saw it was mighty grateful for.

It was of course the courthouse at Santa Monica, the small town up the coast
from Los Angeles, where OJ Simpson’s civil trial had ended and a verdict
brought in only minutes after President Clinton had finished his State of the
Union address.

That was not exactly a happy coincidence. The television networks were in a
dreadful dither wondering if the verdict would come through during the
President’s address to the nation, the very speech he gives (if at all) only
once a year. But the judge in the trial surely knew what he was doing when he
announced, soon enough for the early evening news shows, that the jury had
reached a verdict but he would hold off the pronouncement of it for an hour or
two.

He said at the time he wanted to give the principals – the defendant, the
plaintiffs, the families of the murdered wife and of the male friend, the
lawyers and the rest – time to get to the courthouse from the “clogged
freeways” at the rush hour.

Because of the staggering years ago of the working day by many businesses, the
rush hour in and around Los Angeles starts before three in the afternoon and
slackens off about seven, a fine, hurtling four rush hours.

Anyway, whether he’d been briefed or not, the judge saw to it that shortly
after 10 eastern time, 7pm in California, the verdict was announced – just as
the applause of the two Houses of Congress, the diplomatic corps, the justices
and the others died down. And next morning, the scene outside the courthouse
was calm and bright.

It was a sight that brought immense relief to anyone who has lived in this
country since the Watts Riots 32 years ago or has memories of the dreadful
night in Los Angeles barely five years ago when the first Rodney King verdict
came in. Remember? He was the escaping black motorist whom an amateur with a
movie camera caught being beaten up by white cops. Anyone who remembers these
things and saw coming literally true the dire prediction of the black writer
James Baldwin, it’s The Fire Next Time. We can only marvel at that California
shot of the elegant Spanish courthouse, the lazy palm trees, the lolling cop.

The various pundits of the media have not been slow to explain this blessed
contrast. On Tuesday evening, after 7 California time, the crowds jostled and
broke up and then drifted away, and there was miraculously no report of even a
nasty scuffle. There was cheering mixed in perhaps with a boo or two, small
groups with placard, the most conspicuous one waving over the crowd’s heads a
banner with the crude device, "OJ not guilty".

That seemed to be as far as anyone went by way of protest at the verdict which,
to be precise and careful about it, seemed to repudiate the acquittal in the
criminal trial. For just as in a criminal trial, they never bring in a verdict
of innocent; in a civil trial, no jury brings in a verdict of guilty.

They found Simpson “liable”. For what? For damages to compensate for – I quote
– “wrongful death”.

The pundits on every medium are hastening to explain to us peasants the subtle
differences between a criminal and a civil trial. But before we go into that
maze, let me sum up what people have to say about the contrast between the
tumult of black jubilation after Simpson’s acquittal in the criminal trial and
the comparative calm, almost resignation, of the Santa Monica community and the
inquisitive people who went there.

First, Santa Monica is a suburban seaside town of about 90,000. Comfortable,
middle-class whites are in the majority. The civil trial jury was ten whites,
one Hispanic, one Asian-American.

Los Angeles is geographically the widest city on earth, has eight million
people. The jury in the criminal trial was eight blacks, two Latinos, two
whites.

A popular theory is that after two years and eight months of every sort of
exposure to the case – millions of tabloid words, days and months of TV trial
coverage, uncountable TV interviews – the country is finally saturated or
satiated to the point of nausea.

This is a popular theory and terribly attractive to people who ache to mobilise
all the facts running one way and ignore the awkward facts running the other.

So far there have been scores of audiotapes for sale, 17 books on the case, and
at least six more are in the works. The four leading counsel lawyers in the
first trial have got themselves lucrative jobs on new television shows,
analysing either real or fictional cases. Three or four of the early witnesses
and a lawyer have turned to television acting.

Witnesses of at least challengeable credibility have been signed up for books,
including the girlfriend who left Simpson just before he was first charged. She
never appeared as a witness. She got an advance of three million dollars. And a
fringe or bit player, an alleged friend of the dead woman, who is a former drug
addict, has now appeared in the centrefold of – how shall I say – a soft porn
magazine.

Somebody wondered if there has ever been a trial in American history that made
millionaires of half a dozen reporters who covered it.

Of course I should warn, me as much as anybody, that as I speak the case is not
finished. The civil jury awarded compensatory damages, even though the family
of the murdered young man never asked for it. Civil trial lawyers say that the
figure of $8.5million is exceedingly high. Usually it’s in the hundreds of
thousands, with the big sum assigned as "punitive damages", which the jury
started discussing in mid-week.

Which brings us to the difference in California law between a criminal trial
and a civil trial. The main one is that in a criminal trial, the verdict must
be unanimous. The first, the acquittal verdict, did not say that the defendant
was innocent; only that, as the case was presented by the prosecution, the
defendant’s guilt was not proved beyond a reasonable doubt.

In a civil case trying a murder charge, only nine of the jury have to agree to
produce a controlling verdict. In the result, they were unanimous. Reasonable
doubt is not the criterion; the jury must simply believe that the weight of the
evidence leads them to conclude that he did wilfully perform the acts of which
he was accused. And then they bring in a verdict – as they did – that the
defendant was liable.

I’m talking to most listeners in several countries over the weekend, and if the
jury has not yet assessed an amount of punishing damages, presumably the Santa
Monica calm will be prevailing.

But a hint of what, so help us, might stir old rebellious passions came at the
end of the week when it was reported that the two families – the parents of the
murdered young man and the parents of the murdered wife – served notice through
their lawyers that they intend to take not only what Mr Simpson has in the bank
but a goodly share of what he might earn in the future.

I should have said earlier that punitive damages are the limit of a civil
jury’s power to punish. He cannot again be jailed. To be tried again on a
criminal charge would constitute a violation of the "double jeopardy clause" in
the Constitution, which says no person may be tried twice for the same crime.

But whichever way it goes, the case is by no means over and done with. There
will be appeals. And there’s even been a strong suggestion that, in view of Mr
Simpson’s own testimony on the stand (he chose not to testify in the criminal
trial) somebody – maybe the district attorney, maybe the families – might want
to set up a third trial for perjury.

Surely the day will come when a majority of the American people, even those
convinced of his guilt, will cry, “Hold! Enough!”? The impulse of the families
for ruinous revenge could be (let’s hope not) could be the trigger of another
black uprising.

As for the question of whether the civil trial did or did not repudiate the
verdict in the criminal trial, the New York Times editorialised, "There seems
little question that the majority of Americans will salute this verdict as a
reasonable response to the facts."

May I, as the English barristers used to say, may I, my lord, beg to differ? I
think there’s a very big question. That the majority of Americans might agree
on the second guilty verdict is true only because there are ten times more
whites than blacks, but the fact is that a national survey finds 75% of whites
believing Simpson to be guilty and 77% of blacks believing him to be innocent.
Almost the exact proportion as in the first trial.

So I’m afraid the consensus must be that if you have a nearly all-black jury,
you find a black man not guilty; a nearly all-white jury and he’s found guilty.
This is, alas, what three blacks in four of every level of education believe.

If it proves anything, it is that after over 40 years of legally enforcing the
integration of the races, the fear and suspicion between the races is still
what President Clinton called the other evening “a curse on the land”.

  • 
    OJ Simpson guilty