Admiral William J Crowe - 25 March 1994

I'm told I've hung up some sort of record by never mentioning an issue, a
topic, a scandal that has been obsessing Washington, the media and the Congress
for a couple of months or more Ð Whitewater.

Well, I've deliberately ignored it, in the belief, firm but perhaps temporary,
that the president is being hounded by people itching to smell mischief. So
far, I agree with an American humorist and with a former Republican senator.
Old Senator Goldwater says, let the president get on with the presidency.
Russell Baker says, so far it don't amount to a hill of beans. Well, maybe two
hills. If and when it amounts to more, there'll be lots of time to say so.

Meanwhile, there's something better to talk about Ð good news. Good news for
Britain, indeed good news for NATO and for Europe. On Wednesday an announcement
from the White House received all of three short paragraphs at the bottom of an
inside page in the New York Times. The announcement of a new American
ambassador to Britain. There was a time, I have to admit, it was before the
Second World War, when this sort of announcement was front-page headline news,
supplemented inside the paper by a six-column biography of the great man. But,
I have to say, those were also the days when the British New Year's Honours
were also front page American news. Today they go unnoticed, unreported, unless
a rock star has got an OBE. Why, a newly arrived and observant young Englishman
asked me, why this down-playing of the UK? He'd not been here long. It's not
down-playing, I said, it's entirely benign neglect. And the reason?

The reason was given to me, I now realise, over 30 years ago, down in Palm
Beach, when the newly elected President Kennedy announced to the White House
press corps that he was going to visit Paris, Ireland and Berlin. That evening
I was having a drink with one his three or four closest aides, one of the
intimate bunch of old Boston cronies we used to call the Irish Mafia and I
asked him, why isn't the president going to London? He wasn't in the least
embarrassed to say quite blithely, well no, let's face it, London doesn't
matter that much any more. That is a line which then, and ever since, any
president and/or any presidential aide, would rather cut his throat than admit
to saying. However, since then there has developed a new, not special, but
necessary relationship with Britain, as with Germany, as the reliable ally and
especially with Britain in the Gulf, in NATO, in Bosnia and I believe in the
coming re-grouping of the power structure of Europe.

So now, the announcement. In the New York Times the first sentence reads: a
retired admiral has been nominated to be ambassador to Britain. Designating the
new ambassador as a retired admiral is rather like describing Lady Thatcher as
a former woman MP. The man is Admiral William L Crowe, spelt like crow with an
'e' but rhymes with how and he is, has been, a giant behind the scenes, behind
the scenes of the military-political complex. I must say at once that he's
replacing the best ambassador Washington has sent to Britain since David Bruce
of 30 years ago. With respect, as private secretaries say when they are about
to advise the king to abdicate, with respect, there have been one or two men
who turned out to be surprisingly good but London always attracted storms of
arriviste, wealthy, pushy types and succeeding presidents, Democrats and
Republicans, but mostly Republicans, gave the London post to men, businessmen
usually, with absolutely no experience in diplomacy or of reporting one country
to another, but they had contributed whacking great sums to the election
campaign of the new president.

Career men hardly ever got a look in until what, three years ago, a first-class
career diplomat, Mr Raymond Seitz, was appointed and is there now. I talked
about him soon after the election of Mr Clinton and said what a good thing it
was that the new president had chosen to keep him on. These congratulations
were, I'm afraid, premature, for I learned later that president Clinton had
offered the job to Mr Walter Mondale, former senator, former vice president of
the United States under Jimmy Carter. He, it seems, turned it down. He wanted
more exciting or more exotic fish and is now the American ambassador to Tokyo.
However, Ambassador Seitz has won golden opinions from the in-people who matter
and his service in London will be remembered by more people than the men and
women who man or woman the desks at the State Department.

The great thing is that Mr Seitz's departure will not mark a reversion of the
old habit of rewarding a party fat cat. Admiral Crowe's most conspicuous office
was as chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, America's top brass. His
appointment came about in a rather dramatic, rather typically Reagan way. In
1984 Admiral Crowe was appointed commander of all the Pacific and Indian Ocean
services. This is such a colossal job, one that both Alexander the Great and
Napoleon would certainly have had to turn down, pleading incompetence. That
well it was too enormous and complicated and specialised to describe, so I
don't remember it ever appearing in the papers. We never knew and no profiles
were ever written about the man who now commanded one hundred million square
miles of ocean, about half the globe.

Well some time in 1984, President Reagan called on the admiral to give a
briefing to him and to the secretary of state and the secretary of defence and
the head of the National Security Council. Tell them about the strategic and
political status of the Pacific, particularly the South Pacific today. The
admiral, this placid, massive bulldog of a man, talked quietly and fluently,
without notes, for 90 minutes and at one point President Reagan leaned over to
the secretary of defence and whispered, if we're ever going to need a new
chairman of the joint chiefs, here's our man. Well the need came quickly. Next
year the chairman retried and President Reagan promptly nominated and got
Admiral Crowe. He was the first joint chiefs chairman who had not served in the
Second World War, for the simple reason that while the equally phlegmatic
Admiral Nimitz was running the largest naval battle in history, little William
Crowe was a 16- year-old, which makes him now 69.

So, William Crowe, son of a Kentucky lawyer who moved, in the boy's childhood,
to Oklahoma. The son saw enough of the law to not to want to follow his
father's footsteps. He applied for the United States Naval Academy, was
accepted and graduated in June 1946, along with his classmate, Jimmy Carter. He
seems to have decided on his concentration or major early on, went, I suppose
with Carter, to submarine school and soon was a submarine commander with the US
Atlantic fleet.

Then in the early 1950s he did, what for any sailor or soldier, was an
extraordinary thing. He requested a leave of absence to get a wider education.
He took an MA in education at Stanford University and then took a PhD in
political science at Princeton. His dissertation, by the way, was entitled
Policy Routes of the Modern Royal Navy, so the Admiralty boys had better start
boning up. Back in the service, he commanded a diesel submarine, became the
naval adviser in South Vietnam and after the Vietnam collapse, took a big leap
as deputy director of Naval Strategic Planning in East Asia. Subsequently he
commanded a task force in the Persian Gulf and then was Commander-in-Chief of
the NATO forces in Southern Europe. And so on to look after those hundred
million square miles and the chairmanship of the joint chiefs.

He had firm ideas about what was wrong with the power structure of the armed
forces command. The chiefs of the army and of the navy and of the air force and
the marine corps were chiefly occupied in protecting their own turf, by way of
prestige and defence contracts. This led, Admiral Crowe felt, to wearisome
duplication of everything Ð effort, paperwork, vanity. He was successful in
seeing, with the help of the Republican Senator Goldwater and the Democrat Sam
Nunn, seeing that a new bill made the chairman, not the first among equals and
the only Chief Military Adviser to the President, the Secretary of Defence and
the National Security Council. He was consequently in on all the arms reduction
talks, after he's been ignored at Reykjavik. He was also privately irked to be
kept in ignorance, as so many top people were, except Colonel North, of the
whole messy Iranian arms for hostages deception. In a historic moment in 1988,
Admiral Crowe had a visit and many meetings with the chief of the Soviet's
Armed Forces and they made the first joint enquiry into the ways of their
avoiding military confrontations around the world.

Admiral Crowe, giving the lie to his rather fearsome bulldog appearance is an
affable and modest man, deceptively wary and learned. He likes to con naive
Brits by professing innocence on many matters in a broadened Oklahoma drawl. He
also is fluent in French and German, his favourite sports are chess and tennis.
I'm not saying he built the Panama Canal single-handed but if you ever need a
man to command by day a hundred million square miles of ocean, and by night
play chess with the French ambassador to South Korea, Admiral Crowe is your
man.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP