Permissive California - 6 December 1996

Everybody knows that California is not only the home but the cradle of
eccentric movements, religious, pseudo-religious, political, educational, the
declared aim of most of them being the offer of a shortcut to wisdom or utopia,
or heaven, or peace and serenity.

My first trip out here – I shouldn't say "out here," a phrase that can be as
offensive to Californians as "he's gone out to the states," is offensive to all
other Americans, "out" suggesting "out" from the centre of civilisation.
Alright then, my first trip to California a very long time ago, was enlivened
and sometimes enlightened by several cults that were then in their heyday. It
was the depths of the Depression and for many people Roosevelt's massive
deficit, borrowing and spending on huge public works was not enough.

A famous novelist ran for Governor of California on a ticket known as EPIC. End
Poverty In California. And a doctor had a similar plan to abolish poverty by
giving everybody $60 a month. Both these campaigns are long forgotten. For one
thing, nobody explained where the federal government or the State of
California, or any other philanthropic body, was going to get the money to
disperse. The population of California was then 5.7 millions which I calculate
would require some good Samaritan, who never showed up, to dispense just over
$40 billion a year. Today incidentally, the population is not 5.7 millions but
29.7, involving a handout of billions and billions that would boggle the mind
even of the United States Secretary of the Treasury.

On the spiritual side, apart I mean from the wealth of genuine established
religions, apart from the legitimate known religions, there flourished, even
then, some very odd and very popular cults created and run by usually a large
lunged orator. I forget the name of the man who ran a fervent religion of
self-affirmation known as "I am". So these cults were presided over either by a
resounding orator or by a mysterious or charismatic woman. Such a one in the
early 1930s was the transplanted Canadian Aimee Semple McPherson, who really
was a gorgeous creature and also had the evangelists' gift of making people
believe that if she beckoned you, you would no longer be blind, crippled, or
whatever. I personally saw her perform her peculiar miracles, the miracle being
that when she summoned the lame and the old, they pattered up to her, she
blessed them, and they went back in a euphoric daze even though they were still
on their crutches.

Well there've been many cults, many movements that promised the great good life
and they've come and gone. One of the most pathetic was recalled the other day
by a cab ride through Haight-Ashbury, the very staid looking San Francisco
district which promised the young for a decade or more, a blissful release from
the aches of the flesh and the grief of the soul. Which in some cases was no
more, no less, than the ability to stay in school or get a job. Peace through
the holding out of flowers, especially under the influence of drugs, by now
universally well-known, which blighted the lives of too many youngsters in the
1960s.

I just looked up Haight-Ashbury in the Yellow Pages of the San Francisco
telephone book and I recalled that not so long ago there were more than a few
entries under the district's name, all for drug care, rehabilitation,
detoxification. Today there is only one number, one entry, which can only mean
not that there is less drug addiction but that the junkies are now widely
dispersed. For there are I'm sad to say, under other numbers, at least, I'd say
40 different entries for emergency or regular or long-term treatment for drugs.
Sometimes called substance abuse programmes or chemical dependency.

It's quite a legacy that those children of the 60s left us. Though I have to
say that as far as San Francisco is concerned it was always from the, well the
1860s on, a tolerant town, hospitable to every sort of weirdo and eccentric. To
new forms of poetry. To pioneer, and sometimes barmy, medical research. As well
as tolerating a population of winos and junkies. No other city in America has
accepted so readily a whole tight knit homosexual population, in one district,
with its own congressman.

So San Francisco has survived many fads, many liberation movements, from the
emancipated so-called "flappers" after the First World War, to the present
population of baby-boomers, products of the warriors returning from the Second
War. The generation that asserted in the 60s the counterculture and that now
finds itself in its late 40s and early 50s with teenagers and sprouting college
kids, and is discovering some painful home truths that were denied or defied
through the 20-odd years of resisting wars, avoiding the draft by taking off
for Canada, defying their parents with great rock celebrations in huge meadows,
dense with the haze of marijuana.

At least the baby boomers are now facing their own generation of rebels – their
children – with the unexpected result that they are just as baffled by their
children as their parents were with them. Just as baffled but angrier. Lately,
a dozen books or more and the success of men and women going round the country
giving hundreds of lectures, testify to a problem that has always been with us
but in small doses. The problem of defiant, rebellious, out of control
children. In a small town in Maryland last week a psychologist, unknown to
national fame so far, was being lovingly greeted and cheered by swarms of
baby-boomer parents, who, having found themselves at their wits' end over the
raucous or defiant or troubled behaviour of their children, have at last, heard
the message. The new, exciting, healing message of these books and these
lecturers? Simply there must be, in a family, as in a nation, rules, chores,
discipline. A very old message surely, rediscovered after a very long period of
what, 40 years ago we called, and boasted of as "permissive parenting".

It was a late outgrowth of the progressive educational theories of John Dewey
who lived from the middle of the last century to the middle of this one. In
this country at least, he had an immense and far ranging effect on teaching.
The teaching of practically everything. His theory was a revolt against
learning by rote and having information and dates forced fed. Undoubtedly he
let a shaft of light into schoolrooms darkened by dull teachers producing
mechanical answers to everything. Undoubtedly too there was a minority that was
over-responsive to the new ideas and acted in the foolish belief that nothing
should be taught a child that didn't excite it, that there was no tedium
involved in learning and that maybe children should, themselves, choose the
subjects they wanted to learn.

This trend, this distortion of Dewey, in some universities overwhelmed the true
faith. One dreadful result was the campus riots of the 1960s and early 70s in
which students wrangled over which subjects they'd be taught, tried to rewrite
the syllabus, maintained that classroom discipline was a form of
totalitarianism and, most fatuous of all, here, across the bay at Berkeley, the
Athens of the counterculture, troupes of students bearing obscene banners,
chanted four-letter words to express their understanding of what the
Constitution called freedom of speech.

Well the storm and stress of the 60s has died down, the adolescent rebellion
against what somebody called "the silent majority", which meant aggrieved and
bewildered parents, not saying much. But what has lasted I think into our time
is a sort of settled acquiescence in new standards that the young baby boomers
set for themselves for their generation and, under protest, for the older
generations.

There were more offhand, casual standards of manners, drastically more casual
dress, for once the inspiration came up from the working class to the upper
instead of, what had been true for centuries, the other way round. In education
a more relaxed, less demanding standard of scholarship which is now being
exposed, to the alarm of the government, in an international study that puts
the average American way down the list of industrial nations in science and
mathematics.

An early critic of American public education, a friend of mine, racy, funny,
young, unpompous man, once wrote, and this was in the 30s that: "The trouble
with American public education was its standards were easy and dithering." A
famous American educator recently put it another way: "We had easy expectations
of our children and they have met them".

But if there's one thing on which each succeeding generation in all countries
is cocksure, perhaps I should say in all countries that have freedom of
religion, it's knowing the proper way to bring up children. Now that the baby
boomers of all enlightened, liberal types, are taking a beating from their
children, they should know one thing, that by whatever method you brought up
your children, by religious rule, by Dr. Spock, by Dewey's permissive system,
by strictness, by looseness, by smothering protectiveness, or by distant
approval, you have one consolation.

Whatever you did, you were wrong.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP