Helping the homeless - 2 January 1998

The other evening we were having drinks with a couple of old friends who live
in the most elegant apartment where the 18th-century walnut surfaces glitter,
where the portrait of an early 19th-century uncle glares brilliantly from his
restored surface, where, though there is an amiable loping dog somewhere on the
premises, no sign, no whisker of the animal defiles the exquisite sheen of a
vast blue and white carpet.

No sooner had the four of us raised our sparkling glasses and given the usual
American toast, a merry Christmas (the huge Jewish population of the city
wishes you happy holidays) when in padded two orphans of the storm. That's what
they looked like. A girl, sorry, feminists, a young woman of about 19, hair
down to her waist, wearing green and white, once green and white sneakers, an
anorak.

She was the baby daughter of our hosts and with her was a young man they'd
never seen before. If I'd been alone and drowsing, that's to say not alert to
the huge social changes of the past 30 years, I should have sprung up and said,
yes, can I help you? I should have assumed he was the house plumber arrived to
mend a leaky tap or whatever. Padded, unzipped leather jacket over a T-shirt,
fraying jeans, bulging cross-striped sneakers, shaggy hair, shortish, brownish
beard and very large, very brown eyes, a gentle manner. He was not the plumber,
he was the new boyfriend of the daughter.

And then I realised that today he might just as well have been a professor of
economics at New York University, in which case perhaps his clothes could have
been his cover, the cover of a cagey, wealthy man. On third thought, that was a
contradiction in terms, for no one has ever explained to me why famous
economists, even the Nobel Prize winners, are not multi-millionaires. Anyway,
when I later enquired what he was in, he gave a simple, startling reply. I take
care of the homeless, he said.

I prodded him about this and that because I don't often run into people
actually in the caring business, although never a week goes by when we don't
see, as a prominent feature on one network or another, an investigative piece
about how badly or negligently some city or town is dealing with its homeless.
And because showing you these things is more impressive than telling you, the
picture expands and gets more depressing all the time, of the homeless as
outcasts.

Americans, American journalists in any medium, seem so determined to ferret out
not the truth so much as the scandal which they assume must lie hidden beneath
every great event, every social problem. And it is to the great credit of the
best of them that they do much good in exposing fraud and incompetence and do,
indeed, fulfil the prescription which one old crusading editor set up almost as
a mission for journalists, to comfort the afflicted and afflict the
comfortable.

But the worst of so-called investigative reporters far outweigh the best, I
suppose, in all countries and turn into nothing but smut hounds. I don't need
to go on about that type because, for some reason no sociologist I know has
ever explained, the English-speaking countries are as bad as any for breeding
the tabloid private eye. Still, there is so much good and worrisome exposure of
fraud and double-dealing and political chicanery in this country that it
becomes natural to assume America has more of it than other countries and after
all these years I find I can still fall victim to this preconception, which is
very strong, by the way, in the English.

Foreigners tend to accept the result of some American survey without having the
passing thought: I wonder what a similar survey would show here? I remember,
years ago, Franklin Roosevelt's second inaugural address. None of the usual
rhetoric, no familiar reassurance that this was a great country, if not the
greatest, no claiming special American credit for ordinary and well-distributed
human virtues, like courage, endurance, grit. He began "I see one-third of a
nation ill-housed, ill-clad, ill-nourished". I recall the shock wave that
passed over the politicians, the press and indeed the public of Europe when the
lead sentence of that speech was published. No comparable survey came out of
the effect of the Depression on the poor of Europe, so far as I know, until a
friend of mine in the BBC talked to a friend of his in Geneva, a man who
subsequently was to be an architect of the Beveridge Plan and the welfare
state. This man in Geneva persuaded the League of Nations to make its own
comparative survey of poverty in the countries of Europe. It was, so far as I
can remember, never published or if so, never seized on and publicised by the
European papers. But when it was done with, the Geneva man who directed the
survey, said dryly to my friend: if Roosevelt had been talking about the United
Kingdom, he'd have been nearer the mark in saying, "I see one half of a nation
ill-housed, ill-clad, ill-nourished".

Similarly, I recall my shock only a year or two ago, when the newspaper –
though it's a weekly, it insists on calling itself a newspaper – when the
Economist alone among the British press, reported the shocking numbers, well
into the thousands, of teenagers who slept in boxes or wrappers under the
bridges of the London river. I mentioned this to an English doctor at the time,
who immediately said, surely not, they must have got their facts wrong. In
America, yes, but... Well, this mental safari is not a digression, it's what
the young beard and I went through on the way to my finding out what he had to
say about his job and what he thought it was to be. He chose it, it was quite
clear, for idealistic reasons. On leaving college his immediate impulse was not
to extend his bookish days by going into graduate studies or off to law school.
He wanted to help the poor and he went off to small institutions he'd heard of
and then to parents of friends, to give himself enough money to be able to
visit alleyways and railroad stations and street corners where the homeless
sleep, to talk to them, to try and connect them with shelters and, after a
while, to get to know the workers in the city shelters and perhaps, in time,
run one.

He admitted that the first problem was not with the homeless, but with most
common attitudes of you and me about them. He found out something every good
politician finds out once he gets into government, that most problems are
actually hampered, not helped, by a party line or ideological approach.

He has found out that there are conservatives who think of the homeless as
people who are bone idle or mischievous from birth, natural freeloaders
(American term for spongers) who've brought it on themselves and opposite them
– and my young friend was surprised to discover this – were self-declared
liberals who could be just as useless as helpers, people who instinctively look
on the homeless as sad, ill-used, good people whom the government, that has to
mean the city in question, is not doing enough about. These two standard
attitudes, my friend was to find out, are both enemies of a solution. Perhaps
solution is the wrong word. Decent accommodation to the life around them,
that's surely the best that can be done.

This young man rejected a party or an ideological view because he'd already
learned how many human types and problems hide under the blanket term,
"homeless". How many of the gentle, ill-used homeless are psychopaths, either
released or never diagnosed. How many who will be, sooner or later, a physical
danger to their neighbours. Then there are young people who've left a home they
swear had abused them. On enquiry, either that's true or shockingly not true.
And then the type of child who seems to be born a chronic liar flourishes among
the homeless and they emerge in their late teens as people who are going to
exploit the well-publicised epidemic of child abuse, by claiming to be a
victim, by true or false memory. And then there are the hopeless alcoholics,
especially among the old and the young, the junkies. On balance he was to
discover there is no typical, no archetypal homeless.

I greatly admire the spirit of this young man in wanting to make a life of this
complicated care. I congratulated him and then he said, I suppose, in your
time, it was nothing like the problem it is today. I said, in my time we had no
idea of the problem. The most knowledgeable, the most educated people couldn't
possibly tell you how many or how few homeless there were, it never came up. He
was even more amazed. Why? Because, I said, there was no television and there
was no Gallup poll. On all such questions – poverty, illegitimacy, the
incidence of chronic disease going around unnoticed – we believed what we
wanted to believe. The only people who knew and deplored these dirty secrets
were social workers, Catholics and Methodists mostly, who went out of their way
to find the poor and homeless and then do something about them. I imagine that,
for a story or whatever, every time I've looked into the available statistics
of such horrors – teenage homelessness, boy prostitution on the streets of
London, Manchester, Birmingham in the 19th Century for instance – the figures
were devastating. Hundreds of thousands in all the big cities. Decent people
kept away all their lives from districts that housed, or failed to house, the
poor.

So what was the upshot, he wondered. The upshot was, I thought, that the
general condition of the poor is far better than it was 50 years ago. There was
no social security then, no welfare, heaven knows, no free medicine. But
television brings it home to us every night and, at the very least, we feel
guilty about it. At the best, we do something, either by joining a society or a
city agency or by individual charity. This idea struck a chord with him. That's
right, he said, I've noticed people will come through with help or money if you
tap their guilt. He went off cheerily. The New Year, not a bad time to start
tapping.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP