North Korean nuclear development - 30 September 1994

The word went out over every New York City television and radio station: if you
intend to drive into New York tomorrow or around New York, don't do it, stay
home.

Forty years ago that sort of message would have been an air raid alert, 40
years ago in the '50s? Yes, everywhere we went in those days, we could see
bright yellow stickers on the walls of office buildings, subway stations,
street corners; they said simply air raid shelter and carried an arrow, usually
pointing down. That's when we did not think a Russian air raid was an
impossibility, when we lived in what was called a balance of terror.

That condition is so long-gone as to sound now like the delusion of a lunatic,
but last Monday's alert signified something quite different, it meant, it means
and it happens several times a year that the president of the United States is
coming to town and the town had better be left free for him. I suppose there
was a time when a president travelled with only a couple of secret servicemen.
Woodrow Wilson used to pop up here for an evening at the opera and nobody
except a clapping audience at the Met knew anything about it till the next day.
Come to think of it, much much later Harry Truman took a regular walk, a brisk
mile or so on the streets of Washington every morning, he did the same thing
for a time when he came to New York till people learned about it and crowded
him off the sidewalk.

Well, there haven't been more presidential assassinations in the last 60 years
than there were in the previous 60, though there have been four scary attempts,
the closest to a president's sudden death being I suppose the time down in
Miami in the winter of 1932-3, I think February 33, three weeks before Franklin
Roosevelt was even inaugurated when in a split second a woman nudged the elbow
of a man with a pistol so that the bullet killed not Mr Roosevelt but the mayor
of Chicago who was standing next to him.

However, I think the assassination of President Kennedy in Dallas and then of
his brother in Los Angeles set for ever a new pattern of protection. Today, a
week or two before the president goes anywhere, the secret service and the
local police scanned, case, probe every street he'll go along, every rooftop,
every shop and department store, church entrance, every manhole cover. There's
a university town I can't remember which, where the police would have to search
under what the university insists must be called from now on "person hole
cover".

Well, that done, the evening before the president flies into New York, the city
police put LaGuardia airport on what they used to call red alert, no Russian
reference intended. The next day, half an hour before the president's plane
arrives, all outgoing and incoming plane arrivals are delayed, the route about
12, 13 miles to his Midtown hotel and all the United Nations headquarters is
patrolled by several score radio cars and here's where the ordinary citizen
comes in or rather is begged not to come in, three or four street blocks around
the hotel and the highways and blocks leading to the United Nations and any
other street the president might go along all closed off. Pretty much the whole
of Midtown on the East side barred and banned to you and me, the resulting
traffic freeze everywhere can be imagined.

However, if you manage to get into the General Assembly auditorium you looked
down on a glittering assemblage of 184 ambassadors and delegates, any meeting
of public men is glittery these days because of the television lights. A
first-time spectator must have felt last Monday that the United Nations was
more impressive, more powerful than ever. Impressive in plenary session, yes.
Powerful, it's doubtful if it's ever been less powerful in critical
international situations because of a fatal challenge to its authority first
tried out I believe in Somalia but bracingly practised as a military routine in
Bosnia.

Throughout the long and honourable history of United Nations peacekeeping, the
warriors have always apart from accidents held their fire when they saw the men
in the blue caps. UN forces were always looked on as a cushion of neutral
policemen and latterly in Rwanda and Somalia and Bosnia as humanitarian
peacekeepers, but the Serbs, perhaps they were not the first but they are the
boldest innovators of a new policy, the policy being to look on the United
Nations forces as combatants to be fired on.

The first time they did that was a sad day in the history of the United
Nations, which was never meant to be a separate fighting force. What's more, if
a majority of 184 nations decided it ought to be, it can't be it has no money
and its forces, which according to the 1945 charter ought by now to be
overwhelming, exist only as a collection of companies voluntarily offered by
different countries. The theory, the promise of the charter we all applauded
way back there in the summer of 1945 was Article 43. Today it's a wonderful
thing to behold quote, "all members of the United Nations undertake to make
available to the Security Council on its call armed forces assistance and
facilities including rights of passage, such agreement or agreements shall
govern the number and types of forces their degree of readiness and general
location and the nature of the facilities and assistance to be provided",
signed at San Francisco, 26 June 1945.

Did we really believe then that this would be done? I can't remember but the
fact is that in 49 years it has not been done, no nation has told the United
Nations it can call at anytime on its armed forces. And certainly if all
members had obeyed the charter, the UN today would have a vast insuperable
array of military forces.

General Sir Michael Rose, by the way, has objected to the constant use of the
word "forces" because it suggests a function they are not allowed to perform.
Some people have learned this sad fact of life very slowly and so when there's
a threat to the peace that they fear might involve their own nations they say,
"oh no, we shouldn't go in, let's have the United Nations vote the sanctions
instead". That gives us a very comfortable feeling of having faced a nasty
situation without in life facing it at all.

We always hear that sanctions will ruin the country their imposed on and they
never do, namely because of the Achilles heel of sanctions transshipment.
Saddam Hussein did very well during the desert war by receiving through Jordan
and other countries goods and weapons never on the manifest assigned to him. So
every time the UN appears to be unable to cope in wars with which it was never
meant to cope, we have reluctantly to admit that the United Nations has not, as
one of its early and the secretaries wrote 40 years ago, helped man's capacity
to shed the habits of the jungle.

And it seems to me that the presence of the United Nations as an alternative
answer to any threat to the peace has had a wholly lamentable effect on the big
powers on the Western nations anyway, not the fault of the UN. But when things
get tough and nasty – the Balkans, the supreme and devastating example – the
reflex of a troubled leader is to say, "well, if we go in hundreds perhaps
thousands of our boys might die, so would it not be more civilised, more
humane, more enlightened to put it up to the United Nations?"

So when the defence of Bosnia fell solidly on the shoulders of France, Britain,
Germany and the United States, Russia too in theory but never a chance of there
deserting their Serbian allies, we all jibbed. The NATO members ceased to be
the policing powers they were meant to be. The United States yet again showing
their terror of committing its soldiers to the possibility of death or as
United States Senator say "putting them in harm's way" refused to put in ground
troops. All parties rewarded the Serbs for their conquest by ethnic cleansing
by putting in peacekeeping forces into a situation where there was no peace.
Well it's too late now to save Bosnia just as at Munich it was too late to save
Austria and Czechoslovakia.

You may have noticed this new reflex of making a bargain with a tyrant under
the guise of writing a peace treaty is being practised in this country almost
as a profession by former President Jimmy Carter. He did it in North Korea,
where President Clinton had said "we cannot allow you to make nuclear weapons
it must stop" whereupon North Korea just went on about its nuclear business.
Enter Mr Carter, he gets promises out of them, they don't keep them, they're
back to business as usual. Haiti, Mr Carter like a man of God refuses to judge
the character of any tyrant he talks to, he finds General Cédras an honourable
man with a lovely wife. He makes an agreement at the last minute before the
United States Calvary goes in.

Well, we shall see maybe it's too early to say whether Mr Carter's hair's
breadth intervention was a desperate wise move or a super Munich surrender,
either way there's one certain loser poor President Clinton whose being called
"Jimmy Clinton" and the "assistant president" and many other demeaning names.
The first ripple effect on his party's chances in the November congressional
elections is from the evidence of the primaries devastating. If Haiti works, it
will be Saint Jimmy Carter; if it fails Mr Carter can go into retreat, it's Mr
Clinton who will have the ashes on his head.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP