The Kennedy Family - 28 October 1994

We're in a bar, an old pub in Boston. Not old perhaps by the standards of
English pubs, Doyle's Bar set itself up in business in the early 1890s and as a
combination saloon, town meeting, political gossip corner, it has never looked
backwards. Although Doyle's is packed most weekends and never lacks for
customers at any time, it is today a much-loved artefact, a mellow reminder of
the last century and the turn of the century, when the transatlantic ships
deposited in Boston, in Boston harbour, a never-ending troop of disembarking
Irish immigrants.

Why did the Irish head mostly for Boston? Because their fathers and
grandfathers had done it. So why did they choose Boston? Because they had it
chosen for them. The first great wave of Irish emigrants to America were
desperate and desperately poor, refugees from the 1848 potato famine and if it
had not been for the arrival on the shipping scene of one Samuel Cunard, they
would have had to go and probably expire, under sail. But in 1840 Cunard
instituted the first regular transatlantic steamship service. His partners were
men from Glasgow and Liverpool, with connections in Boston, so Liverpool was
the sailing port of choice and since Mr Cunard's early, regular route was
Liverpool to Cobh to Boston, that's the way the famished Irish went.

One of those famine victims was one Patrick Kennedy, who left New Ross in 1850,
settled in East Boston, started a saloon, got into politics, begat four sons,
the eldest of whom was a very early and mightily successful example of what
came to be known as a go-getter. He also got into the liquor business, though
on the side, call it on the wholesale sideline. His main interests and
conquests were in banking, real estate and the motion picture industry. His
name was Joseph P Kennedy and he begat John Fitzgerald Kennedy, who became the
youngest man and the fist Roman Catholic, to be elected president of the United
States.

Doyle's Bar is well-stocked with such memories, President Kennedy's picture
hangs in two rooms, one room of which is the Honey Fitz room, named after John
"Honey Fitz" Fitzgerald, the former president's grandfather on his mother's
side, who was also a quick and ready politician. Between them, the Kennedys and
the Fitzgeralds took over Boston Irish politics and began a very rude
intrusion, which at one time was laughed at by the people they were intruding
on, namely the Boston Brahmins, the Cabots and Lowells and Saltonstalls and
Adamses and Lodges, the old New England families who had run Boston and New
England politics back to the colonial days. Came, however, a day they will
never forget, 1952 to be exact, when John F Kennedy, the grandson of an
impoverished Irish farmer, defeated the patrician Henry Cabot Lodge and took
his seat in the United States Senate.

It's because of another senator, another Kennedy that we are on this Tuesday
evening in Doyle's Bar, looking up at a grainy old television set. Mr Burke,
the owner, normally keeps the set off. Saloons, bars, he believes are for
social intercourse, happy talk and elbow bending among congenial customers. But
tonight is very special. There's a battle going on up on the little screen, so
once as exciting as a Boston Red Sox game and the customers have names like
Burke and John Fox and Jack Lynch and Jimmy Barry, Ellen Reagan. The battle is
a television debate and it's between an astonishingly handsome young man named
Romney and a rather bulbous, overweight, white-haired man named, of course,
Kennedy. It is none other than Senator Ted Kennedy who has, more than any other
member of his family, borne an enormous family burden.

The oldest survivor, who became the surrogate father to many children, after
his brother, the president was murdered and five years later, his other
brother, Robert, a presidential candidate, was murdered. There's been too, the
massive stroke that immobilised his father, an elder brother killed in the war,
a sister killed in an air crash, the other put away years ago, as a retarded
child. For his own misfortune there was the overnight incident, 25 years ago,
when a car tumbled off a bridge on a tiny island off the Massachusetts coast
and a girl was drowned. The driver escaped. The driver was Senator, even then,
Senator Edward Kennedy and he did not show up and report to the police for
another eight hours.

All this background and these melancholy memories were no doubt stirring in the
minds of the cluster of customers around the bar, looking up at the little
screen, heads tilted back as if gazing at an eclipse of the moon, and I think
it's necessary to mention this almost Eugene O'Neill aspect of the Kennedy
family and the stoicism and courage with which this remaining brother, Ted, has
coped with all the following responsibilities because this audience and its
comments after the show, played only lightly on the objections to incumbent
candidates that are being heard everywhere around the country.

Time for a change, get the old rascals out, time to set term limits. Four
terms, eight years, are enough for a cCongressman, two terms, 12 years, for a
senator. These are the slogans chanted monotonously at election rallies from
coast to coast and most resounding of all, and in places where the men who've
been running the Congress are running for re-election, is the cry, he's been
there too long.

Senator Ted Kennedy has been there 32 years, five terms, but there were more
solid reasons why it did not seem to help the senator's opponent and he is the
astonishingly handsome young man I mentioned, Mitt Romney. In another state he
might be called, he has been dubbed by his supporters, a dream candidate, He's
47, six foot tall, an effortless, easy dresser and he has a pretty blonde wife,
his high-school sweetheart, naturally, five sons, he's a Mormon, he doesn't
drink, smoke, nor according to the strict church rules, touch tea or coffee. It
doesn't say in his resumé whether he follows Brigham Young's compulsory order
to dance at least once a week if you want to get into heaven. Old Brigham held,
the only way you could get there, all things being equal, was to dance in. A
professional pollster in Boston, looking over Mr Romney, saw him as an
inevitable winner. He's younger, well-spoken, good looking, in good shape,
doesn't smoke, drinks milk, he's the perfect anti-Kennedy.

Well, just to recite these attributes immediately brings to mind, in even the
most fair-minded person, the burly figure and the sometimes bloated face of
Senator Kennedy. Apart from the disaster at Chappaquiddick which, never forget,
doomed forever his hopes of the presidency. The senator, down his 62 years and
certainly through his later years in the Senate, has weathered some unsavoury
domestic storms and lapses. Drink. Women, bar-hopping with a young nephew
subsequently charged with rape, many episodes his supporters would rather
forget. But the most remarkable thing about Tuesday's debate, it was going on
in a famous 18th-century Boston City Hall, was that at the end of it, the
general impression implanted deeper by a later roving poll, was that the two
candidates had come out even.

One supporting fact should be remarked on, in an election year in which all the
experts agree that dirty negative television ads garner more votes than
statements of fact, however shining, Mr Romney happens to be too much of a
gentleman even to mention the senator's indulgent past. His positions are
eminently liberal Republican. Abortion, yes, but the state should not be forced
to pay for them. No discrimination against homosexuals in the workplace but no
legal homosexual marriages either. Welfare recipients should be required to
work and have regular tests for drugs, followed by compulsory treatment. He did
add, according to the usual requirements of an opponent, a note that may, in
fact, do him harm. The Senator, he said, is tired, obsolete, his influence is
nothing but pork. Well getting pork, domestic favours for your district, isn't
that what it's all about, cried a neutral onlooker.

Everybody in the hall or the pub or in front of a television set, anywhere in
Massachusetts knows, that accusing Senator Kennedy of tiredness, of obsolete
policies, was a bad line to take. Even his worst political enemies in the
Senate, and I can think of several westerners, Republicans, will tell you he's
one of the best informed, hardest working and effective senators of his time.
There's no doubt about that. Unlike most of his party, he's not jibbed at the
liberal label, he flaunts it and he has left, so far, a large and impressive
record of liberal legislation.

During the summer, when Mr Romney appeared, it was as if God had dropped on
Massachusetts a demi-god. In no time, he rolled ahead in the polls. Senator
Kennedy woke up, he roused himself, he started to campaign and today he seems
to be pulling away with a handsome lead. But nobody, not the experts, the
pollsters, the candidates themselves, will ever know what gave the election to
Senator Kennedy, if he makes it. But if he does and if, as so often happens in
crucial elections, votes can turn on the resounding echo of a single phrase. It
could well be an unforgettable line that the Senator spoke on Tuesday, in
response to an imprudent suggestion of Mr Romney that Senator Kennedy had done
financially well out of politics. The Senator fixed him with the gaze of an old
Roman. He said, Mr Romney, the Kennedys are not in public service to make
money. We have paid too high a price.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP