Averell Harriman (1891-1986) - 1 August 1986

Let us now praise a famous man, who, early in the morning of Saturday 26 July,
died at the age of 94, retaining, until a month before the end, apart from
increasing deafness, his health and his reason.

Averell Harriman was the most enduring diplomat statesmen of the middle and
last half of the 20th Century. More than anybody, I think, outside the heads of
government he shaped the political relationship of Europe and America, and the
west’s relations with the Soviet Union. As much, at any rate, as his old enemy,
Mr Molotov, who endures, long banished from the Communist party, into his 97th
year, and was quoted only a month or so ago as enjoying my old age.

Averell Harriman seemed to lack every attribute that goes to make a successful
politician, every attribute but one – he was spectacularly handsome in the
smooth, but chiselled, way of Gregory Peck or better, Frederick March, for whom
he was frequently mistaken by the people on the streets.

He could chuckle, in a grudging way, at other men’s humour but had none
himself. His voice was a rambling monotone, he was a dreadful public speaker.
Somebody – it may well have been me – once wrote about him that when he was
thinking aloud, before two or three, or two or three thousand, he gave the
impression of a bloodhound munching on his food with great care, in case some
of it was mixed in with paper and glass.

But then, he really wasn’t a politician, though he was smitten by the
presidential bug at one time, got over it, and ran for the governership of New
York State. He squeaked in once, but on the second try was massacred by Nelson
Rockefeller. It was just as well he had other gifts which had nothing to do
with bloodshot eloquence or wheeler-dealing or reciting every other week that
he passed a bigger budget for housing or for education for crime prevention,
etc etc.

His service was to the United States and Europe in the second war and well
beyond and it spanned just 50 years. In 1934, at the rather late age, for a
starter in politics, of 42, he was recruited by President Franklin Roosevelt to
bring New York state into Roosevelt’s national recovery administration, a
sweeping experiment in national socialism which dictated strict codes of
competition in business and fixed wages for everyone from steel workers to
burlesque comics. It was declared unconstitutional by the United States Supreme
Court.

In 1983, at the age of 91, Harriman went on a personal mission to Moscow to
press Mr Andropov to do something to prove his declared sincere and fervent
desire to restore normal relations with the United States. All the obituary
tributes that I read or heard casually threw in the word "patrician" to fix him
in the social structure.

I imagine that an innocent Italian coming on the word in connection with
Averell Harriman would be surprised to learn that he was a descendent of one of
the noble families of the Roman republic before the 3rd Century – Harriman
would have been surprised himself. But, in a 200-year-old republic which is
also the oldest democracy, the genuine aristocrats have to lie low.

They are there, they are the seventh- or eighth-generation descendants either
of the founders of New England, or of colonial country squires who live quietly
now on their acres in Virginia or Georgia or Maryland. The word patrician is a
handy label to apply to the sons or grandsons of the first generation of
plutocrats, like the Vanderbilts or Rockefellers, and Harriman was certainly
one of them. His father’s story is an 18-carat American story.

His grandfather was the humble, genteel rector of a Long Island church, but his
son, Averell’s father, was a smart boy who chose to seek salvation here and
now. A broker's clerk in his teens, at 22 he bought a seat on the New York
stock exchange, in his prospering early middle age he fixed his gaze on the
national railroads, just when they were being slammed across a continent by
entrepreneurs who suffered from no legal restrictions except the restrictions
of their own capital, or conscience, of which they had little.

In his 50th year, Father Harriman and a New York bank rescued the Union Pacific
from bankruptcy – he turned it into a thunderingly profitable enterprise and
began to collect railroads as other men collect stamps. He took over the
Southern Pacific, which for 50 scandalous years or so owned – that is
controlled – the California legislature.

Then he went after the Northern Pacific, but he came up against an equally
rapacious tycoon, James J Hill. Together, by raising competition bids with
rival banks, they precipitated a financial crisis that rattled Wall Street, and
shook the nation. The freewheeling ways of these railroad barons and their
bankers, their unchecked habit of forming holding companies to evade the
antitrust laws, was too much for the president, Theodore Roosevelt, who did
something shocking and unheard of on behalf of the government of the United
States – he sued Harriman's and the Hill's and the mighty banker, JP Morgan.

Morgan was outraged. He rushed down to Washington, and threatened the president
with a countersuit. "You get your lawyer," said Roosevelt, "and I’ll get my
nine lawyers." And in the end, it was the nine old men of the Supreme Court who
broke the monopolies, but not before Edward Harriman had accumulated a personal
kitty of just under $100million. When he died in '99 he could boast that he
ownerilled 60,000 miles of railroad lines. He left behind also a son and heir,
and eight-year-old Averell Harriman.

And what could you expect of him? What you got from scores of the breed –
spoilt, loitering sons but loiterers on grand scale – who were sent to the best
schools and from there picked up the strings, or the dividends, of their
fathers' incomes, built capacious summer homes, did the grand European tour,
married a loitering heiress to other fortunes, spent the rest of their lives
trying to banish boredom.

For a while, a remarkable long while, Averell Harriman seemed to fall easily
into the mould; Groton and Yale from which he graduated with a lowly C average;
met the right girls, married one, the daughter of a banker. But this languid,
handsome young man lacked one fatal characteristic of the type – he did not
enjoy boredom. He loved to work, he worked like a sweating pro at games and
became the fourth-ranking pool player in the country.

Just out of Yale he was, naturally, you might say, elected to the board of
Union Pacific, but he had the sense and the decency to recognise that he was
there as his father’s son. So he got out of railroads, into shipping, and
pretty soon was a shipping magnate. He moved into Wall Street, formed his own
investment house and then a private bank and then, in the early 1920s, took a
surprising interest – considering his bloodline and his presumed prejudices –
in making a deal with the new Bolshevik government of Russia to finance
manganese mining.

He went off to the Soviet Union and had a long session with Trotsky, and
appeared to be impressed by his intelligence and business sense but after that
visit, Harriman showed to his associates an inconspicuous gift that would
surface time and again in his later life, and tell why this apparently slow,
phlegmatic man would become the cherished advisor to five presidents.

Nothing to do with knowledge alone or intellect – he had a gift for being
unimpressed by impressive people. He was unstartled by brilliance. He acted
from wary hunches and, in this instance, he defied the expert wisdom by
deciding that Trotsky would not win an endurance contest with Joseph Stalin. He
withdrew from the deal.

Throughout the 1920s, and on into the '30s Depression, Averell Harriman was
unheard of in political circles. He was, he had always been, an automatic
Republican, but when the country and the capitalist system was floundering in
the pit, Harriman was roused by the energy to restore them of the paralysed
Franklin Roosevelt. He must also have been flattered that when businessmen were
anathema to the New Dealer Democrats, Roosevelt chose to call on the
businessman’s son of a robber baron. He was a Democrat for the rest of his
life.

And from then on, you can count the steps by which he went, onwards and upward,
first as an administrator in the department of commerce and then in charge of
production, on to Britain to organise lend and lease, then to see that
everything possible was shipped to Britain and Russia, and once America was in
the war, he blossomed – though outside the public knowledge – as the supreme
special presidential envoy.

Ambassador to the Soviet Union, then to Britain, then – for Truman – the
coordinator of the Marshall Plan to try and restore the industrial and economic
fabric of western Europe. He was Kennedy’s roving ambassador and Johnson’s and
negotiated the Geneva Accords, on the civil war in Laos. When he was 72, he
spelled out the treaty with the Russians that banned above-ground nuclear
tests. When he was 76, he started the Paris talks with the North Vietnamese to
end the war in Vietnam.

He went everywhere and everywhere leaders as different as de Gaulle, Chiang
Kai-shek, Adenauer, Stalin, Benes, Churchill were astonished that this slick,
methodical, well-bred man slowly revealed a mastery of their problems and his
own. Show him everything, Churchill once said, as he opened the file on secrets
to which most British Cabinet members were not privy.

On his 90th birthday, Harriman gave $10million to Columbia University to
promote American studies of the Soviet Union. American ignorance of the Soviet
Union, he said, is very dangerous. So, not an intellect, not an ideologue, he
waved no flags, he took no irreconcilable positions, he was a slow, grinding
negotiator of almost endless patience.

The North Vietnamese in Paris were irritated at his unruffled attention to
their daily introductory denunciations of the American imperialist beast. When
they got down to brass tacks, he would then turn on his hearing aid. He had no
illusions about the foreseeable prospect of the bear lying down with the eagle,
but, in the light of that explosion that illuminated the morning sky over
Hiroshima, he thought they’d better try.

Most of all, he had a sixth sense for guessing, against all the barometer
readings, how the political weather in any capital he visited might change.
Hence, five presidents decided, a precious man to have at their elbow.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP