Japanese trade - 10 January 1992

Here, in a little book that gave off a billow of dust when I took it down, is a
sentence which today carries almost a morbid interest, quote "The cotton
industry ranks second to silk reeling in importance and Japanese competition in
cotton manufactures is causing acute alarm in Lancashire and other centres of
the industry in Europe. Until quite recently much of the machinery in the
Japanese mills was antiquated but increased commutation of small concerns and
the introduction of the Toyota automatic loom have brought marked changes for
the better." That sentence was written in 1933.

It was no revelation to me. It recalled in a bland sentence or two what an old
Lancashire cotton man called a second misery of the cotton trade. The first was
the untold misery of the cotton famine during the American Civil War, when the
Union forces blockaded the shipment of raw cotton from the South to Lancashire.
The second misery was the Depression of the early and mid-1920s. In America,
that was the great age of the Coolidge Prosperity but in Lancashire it was a
time when small, neat, oriental men bustled into the mill towns, buying at
auction the machinery of the mills, dismantling it, packing it and taking it
off home, where I remember unemployed mill workers saying they wouldn't know
what to do with it. They knew.

That sort of incident has no part in the American national memory of the
Japanese, I should guess that for most old Americans, except on the west coast,
where the Japanese had settled, the first recognition of the Japanese as a
nation is something they learned in a history class in school. And to Americans
about as familiar as the charge of the Light Brigade is, or used to be, to
Englishmen. The date is high summer, July 1853, when the people at that time a
very unknown people who lived in Tokyo looked out across the bay and saw a
covey or snort of huge sea dragons belching fire and smoke and headed towards
them. The Japanese had never seen anything like it and we're always told, were
petrified with fright. The sea dragons were ships of an American armed
squadron, including a steam frigate under the command of one Commodore Matthew
Perry. In all the school books, the American school books, this is known as
"The Opening up of Japan to the Western World". But as the old waggish Mr
Dooley said, "We didn't go in, they came out".

The story of Japan's deliberately chosen isolation from Europe and from all
their explored and colonised lands is surely unique in the history of any
modern power. What the Japanese shutting themselves off in their islands knew
about us was that we had invaded native lands, enslaved their peoples, educated
some of them, but mainly in the service of new empires. Old documents show that
the Japanese in the 17th century were particularly sensitive to the way the
Spaniards had conquered Central America and stamped out the native cultures and
religions.

So, imagine for close on 250 years they expelled incoming Europeans, they made
them give up the early trading posts. They told their own ship builders not to
build anything big enough for overseas trade. They massacred the remaining
Christians, native and foreign in the islands. They – they means always the
ruling clan – forbad all foreign travel. They successfully excluded nine-tenths
of the human race, until the middle of the 19th century when the British, the
Americans and the Russians – yearning for the resources of the Pacific lands to
which the Japanese had unique access – begged Japan to begin to trade abroad.
No sir, was the answer.

Then Commodore Perry took the risk of steaming into Tokyo Bay, not knowing what
he'd find. He was not invading or challenging, he told them he was there on a
short visit which he hoped would lead to a trade mission later on. They
exchanged gifts and the rich irony of the exchange is in what they gave each
other and how they marvelled over it. The Americans received splendid brocades
and lacquers, the Japanese we are told were ravished by the extraordinary
examples of American mechanical genius, things they'd never dreamed of.
Telegraph instruments, ingenious farming gadgets, a miniature locomotive – oh,
ah.

I won't press the painful story stage by stage, suffice it to say that 50 years
after they'd been petrified by the sight of a frigate the Japanese had thrashed
the Russian Navy. Briefly for four years when they were our allies in the First
World War they were, if not heroes, at least our brave little oriental
brothers. But soon after that war they began to make noisy demands for a navy
pretty much on a par with Britain's and America's. When the 1929 depression
reached them and ruined their silk trade, the military came rough riding in,
invaded all of Manchuria and detached it from China, and when the League of
Nations condemned the action, Japan withdrew from the League. And from then on
we the British, and the Americans more so, thought of Japan as at best a
powerful nuisance a long way off. Then 50 years ago last month with Pearl
Harbor, Japan became for Americans particularly the arch villain, finally after
nearly four years, extinguished we believe as a world power by the bombs
dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.

It's often struck me as an extraordinary and unpredicted turn of history that
at the moment when hatred of the Japanese and contempt for their military
government was at its peak, the day of their surrender was also the moment when
Japan would begin its swift climb as a supreme industrial power and the ladder
to climb up was placed there by the American commander they surrendered to on
that battleship in Tokyo Bay. General Douglas MacArthur was at that moment the
reigning American hero. To many something just short of a god, to many others a
flamboyant theatrical poseur but a fine soldier, and American Caesar.

Of course he was conservative, right wing, an American Tory if ever there was
one, but it was MacArthur who wrote the constitution that the Japanese were to
live by, and it's a remarkable document. One that I doubt any American
politician let alone a viceroy could have had the liberal imagination to
conceive. It respected what the Japanese revered in their feudal society, it
accepted the peculiar tradition of business conducted between ancient families
but it was a democratic blueprint, it created unions with rights of collective
bargaining Americans had fought for for 50 years. It gave a degree of equality
to women in the workplace that was then beyond what American women had. In all
the recent retelling of Japan's moves onwards and upwards to her present
economic pre-eminence, nobody I know has mentioned MacArthur as the founding
father of modern Japan. All that was remarked in a television series on the
ambivalence of the Japanese-American relationship today was that the movers and
shakers of the present Japanese generation do not remember Pearl Harbor, and
have forgotten if they ever heard of him General MacArthur.

Today, the United States is faced with what appears to be an insoluble Japanese
trade problem. And although Japan's markets are fairly wide open to various
American goods, especially in electronics, what we hear about most is the
enormous discrepancy between the sales in the two countries of the other's
automobiles. And that's because for 40, 50 years Detroit was the showplace of
American know-how and the barometer of American prosperity. Now its three
giants are collapsing, United States manages to sell 55,000 cars a year to
Japan, the Japanese sell to this country one and three quarter millions and
will make another half a million inside the United States. So, one of the many
galling facts the American divisions of the Japanese car industry are vital to
maintain American jobs. The recent brief visit of the President to Japan
generated more telly talk, more punditry, more bad feeling, but most of all it
seemed to me more writhing evasion of two simple truths which Americans on the
street – if they were or were not employed in the motor car industry – are
frank to confess.

First, the Japanese are going to go on selling their cars to one American in
three because their cars are better and cheaper. The other truth which greatly
pained the President and his team to hear, finally, is in all the years of
losing the Japanese motor car trade, no American company has made a car
specially for Japan that does not guzzle petrol. That is small enough for their
roads, and that has the steering wheel on the right, since they drive on the
left. Well the talks are over, only the President says they are, he says very
doggedly, they were a success. The big tycoons who went along with him
denounced them. The New York Times says the talks were a fiasco, the Democrats
threaten a quick very high tariff war.

In the meantime, the bad blood between these old enemies, old allies, stirs
again. The prospect for a real trade agreement seems to me to be remote,
because the emotions that get in the way of it are so contradictory and
complex. If we adored the Japanese, or hated them, it might be much simpler.
But we admire them and resent them, we pretend to despise them but envy them.
We can't bear the secret discovery that while we go on prating about the old
traditional values, the Japanese practice them. Hard work, thrift, family
loyalty. We blame them for the downfall of Detroit, but still harbour the
sneaking suspicion that Detroit doomed itself.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP