Christa McAuliffe and the Challenger disaster - 31 January 1986

There came a moment that, to a normal ignoramus like me, was at the same time
most beautiful and most baffling. A colossal, never before seen, firework
display.

The puzzle was the tone of NASA’s public relations officer, the man calling off
the technical process of the flight, was he not seeing what we saw, this huge
spray of colour, against the very blue sky? He was not it was not his job to
look at the monitor, he was watching the maze of ticking numbers, the lightning
calculations done from the thousand sensors they are called, that the shuttle
feeds into the telemetry, so while the enormous horror of the fireball was
sinking into our numbed minds, he was saying his last words, "Obviously a major
malfunction, we have no down link," surely the most leaden understatement of
the year, for the shuttle has totally disintegrated in an instant and we have
no word from the crew.

I doubt that many of us would have been watching this launching if the
schoolteacher Christa McAuliffe had not been aboard, there had been 56 manned
space missions and in the past few years, only the manned flights had been
televised and then, not always live. The lift-off is taped at the launching and
then replayed briefly on the evening news.

For several years now the work of NASA, the national aeronautic and space
administration, has been no big deal to the ordinary citizen, it’s become a
familiar subject of special articles in magazines by such famous popularises as
Isaac Asimov and Ray Bradbury, and gets into the newspapers mainly when the
space sub-committees of Congress, are arguing over the budget.

But the missions have become so routine that I suspect only space buffs, could
call off many names – or any names – of the astronauts of the past few years.
To most people, John Glenn, who has long been Senator John Glenn, is the one
unforgettable name, the first American to orbit the earth, and that's coming up
24 years in February.

And I suppose a lot of Americans know by now, the name and face of Frank
Borman, a later astronaut but only because he is the president of, and does the
television commercial for, Eastern Airlines which, incidentally, is in dire
financial trouble.

But it was the president's idea of putting a schoolteacher in space that
galvanised and drew the popular interest. When the invitation went out over a
year ago, there were over 11,000 applicants. Now, obviously, when you consider
the rudimentary science skills required, and the length of the special
training, and the physics and mental stamina that's called for, I imagine they
could easily knock out 10,000 of those first eager applicants.

In fact the selection committee which combined a national council of school
officers with a half-dozen experts from NASA went quickly through those 11,000
letters and chose only a 114 teachers to interview. All of them then submitted
to thorough physical examinations and psychiatric screening, and were reduced
to ten finalists.

Christa McAuliffe was 12 years old when Alan Shepard launched America’s manned
space programme in May 1961 with a 15-minute sub-orbital flight that was
inspiring stuff at the time, but dimmed nine months later by Glen’s complete
orbit of the earth. Christa McAuliffe watched the Shepard lift-off, and in her
letter of application she wrote to NASA, "I watched the space age being born,
and I would like to participate."

She was not by a long shot the most brilliant intellectual of the applicants,
or even of her high school class in small Roman Catholic school in suburban
Boston. She graduated 75th out of a class of a 181. But her teacher added a
note to her graduation report, "Tops," it said "in emotional stability, and
seriousness of purpose." And that would outweigh the claims of many a
high-strung applicant who was, say, a whizz at mathematics or physics.

In school she had been a long-distance runner, played tennis, volleyball, was a
star baseball, softball player, she went on to a Massachusetts state college,
not particularly science minded, though her father worked with an electronics
firm and I imagine that the shop talk would come in handy later on. She took a
bachelors degree in American history and secondary education and, having
married a college friend, a lawyer from Maryland, moved there and taught high
school English and American history.

And then, she took a masters degree in education and moved back with her
husband to New England when he set up a law firm in the small town of Concord,
New Hampshire, where she settled into teaching and where all the pupils of her
school and the teachers would gather in the auditorium with whistles and
blowers and little flags and bubbling high spirits, to watch the launching and
the triumph of their Christa.

She was gone from Concord on a proudly granted leave of absence for six months
of training with the crew of Challenger. And when she went off there she said,
just as the pioneer travellers of the Conestoga wagon days kept personal
journals, I, as a pioneer space traveller, will do the same.

She had, of course to bone up on the basic mathematics, physics and electronics
involved in any space flight, while picking up from the rest of the crew, the
residue of their considerable experience of the theory and practice of flying.
The black man was a veteran test pilot, the Hawaiian was an air force flight
test engineer with one space flight behind him. Three of them – a physicist who
was going to launch a science platform to observe Halley’s comet, an air force
aerospace engineer and the other woman, Judy Resnick, an electrical engineer,
who was on a space mission in 1984 – all three had been astronauts since 1978.

This left the pilot of this mission, Michael Smith, a navy man who had never
been in space but had logged well over 4,000 hours of flight time in jets
mostly, and flown in 28 different kinds of civilian and military aircraft.
Living and working with this crew for six months, Christa would obviously
absorb a lot of practical expertise, but of course she had to go through the
180 hours of training manuals, learning to manoeuvre through weightlessness in
training jets, and the way that daily habits of a human being are adjusted to
life in orbit. And many many rehearsals of procedures for dealing on the hop
with space accidents and emergency landings.

She had come through all this so well that she was going to give, from space,
two science lessons over the public television system to schoolchildren and
then to stay with the space agency till September, as a lecturer around the
country to schoolchildren and civic groups and the like.

Most of all this we learned about in the weeks before Challenger was to take
off, and if not the space star of the crew she became the vivid human link with
all of us, for while the senator who had completed a space mission was a
veteran fighter pilot in Vietnam, Christa McAuliffe was the first ordinary
citizen to go into space. No wonder President Regan, when he had the appalling
news, was dazed for a time and said, "I can’t get that schoolteacher out of my
mind."

The broadcast, the telecast, began with the crews' jolly breakfast together and
went on with their being rigged up in space suits to boarding the shuttle, to
lift-off, the cataclysmic explosion and after that, on and on through the whole
sad day.

Frank Borman the ex-astronaut, the Eastern Airlines president said, now, a
thousand experts will come out of the woodwork who don’t have the faintest idea
what they are talking about. Well it didn’t happen. The anchormen of the
network, many independent stations, were anchored to their microphones for
something like eight hours, but they are not the chosen half- dozen for
nothing.

In this country, anchormen and women are not pretty faces, if they are that's
incidental with charming voices, they are not and are not known as newsreaders.
They are, even the youngest of them, early forties, veteran reporters, the
first generation that went from radio to television, men like Walter Cronkite
and Ed Murrow were war correspondents in the second war.

The next, the present, generation – and I am thinking of the half-dozen
familiars every night on NBC, CBS, ABC and the public non-commercial network –
between them can log up many years, as war correspondents in Korea or Vietnam,
have been newspaper and/or TV correspondents in Moscow, Paris, London,
Budapest, Tokyo. All of them have covered many space flights and learnt the
elements of the game, and of course, they were backed up by a flock of network
science correspondents, and the staff correspondents – each network assigns to
the three space headquarters in Houston, in Pasadena and at the launch pad
itself, Cape Canaveral.

Naturally, the first thing and the second thing, all of us onlookers wanted to
know, was, what went wrong? And since NASA itself quite rightly wasn’t saying,
it was up to the anchormen and their back-up specialists to speculate. They
didn’t, they tapped experts from former astronauts to space scientists and John
Glen and the flying senator, and research scientists, and nobody the first day
and the second day, certainly, had a dogmatic theory. They knew too much, they
all stressed that the astronauts know at the start that the perfect shuttle has
not been invented. And they all know, and don’t talk about, the fairly certain
prospect that one day what had never happened, a crew killed in space, would
happen.

And if there was a consensus among the old astronauts and the new and the space
experts in Congress, it was that safety first, second and third, is NASA's
obsession, and that while the manned flights are frozen for the time being and
likely to be so for a long time – no early take-off for the sun or Jupiter –
the space programme will recover and push on.

To me, when the nightmare sharpness of the horror has blessedly blurred with
time, there will be, I am afraid one picture that will retain its piercing
clarity. It’s the picture of an inquisitive, innocent couple, middle-aged woman
and her affable big husband, Christa McAuliffe’s parents, craning their necks
and squinting into the Florida sky and watching the sudden fireball and looking
a little puzzled, as first-time spectators might. As if this were part of the
show. All part of the unexpected magic.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP