Third parties - 1 September 1995

A golden evening, last weekend San Francisco, the white city rising far across
the bay like a pyramid of confetti and the white fog just beginning to drift in
across the Golden Gate Bridge, an evening when every prospect was pleasing but
we decided only politics was vile, perhaps vile is a strong word, but just now
anyway, disturbing in many ways.

We were sitting round, five of us rambling on about the state of the union and
deploring much of it, when the news came in that a famous United States senator
who combines intelligence, public spirit and personal decency as well as anyone
in Congress, had decided he would not next year seek re-election, on the stated
ground that he's totally disillusioned with the behaviour of both parties. He
says that his own party, the Democrats, believes government can solve
everything and the Republicans believe that the free market is the solution to
all our political and social woes. He has himself – labelled a moderate
Democrat first elected to the Senate in 1978 – he's been there ever since. He's
52, handsome, modest, a graduate of Princeton, Rhodes scholar, Airforce
Reserve, but before he went into politics he was a figure of national fame as a
brilliant basketball pro.

And in case you live in a country in which basketball is slightly less
prestigious than ladies hockey, may I remind you that in this country it is the
number one sport in the television ratings, most watched by most people,
followed by football, American of course and trailing further and further
behind, the so-called national sport of baseball.

It's very likely that Senator Bradley would never have been elected to the
Senate if he'd not acquired this prior fame as a top basketball player, but
what has distinguished him most in his career in the Senate, is a gift for
weaving acceptable compromises out of tough material and fractious opponents. A
patient, reasonable, temperament may not be what the voters look for in a
political candidate, but when it's combined with high intelligence and a
determination to see the minority fairly represented even when it loses to the
majority, that is indeed the ideal temperament in a real world for effective
politics and it's very rare. The bombshell of Senator Bradley's statement
immediately prompted prediction, speculations, rumours that he was thinking of,
or ought to think, of running for the presidency as an independent not of
course as a Democrat. I say of course, because the mere expression of his
complaint about his party – that it's obsessed with federal government and the
bureaucracies that feed it – is true enough to hurt the Democrats who will hate
discovering that they have the cap on because it fits.

The significance of Senator Bradley's sad but voluntary departure goes way
beyond the prospects in his own state of New Jersey of a bright up and coming
Republican winning his seat, the significance quite simply is that Senator Bill
Bradley speaks for many millions of Americans who find themselves in
disillusion, many in despair about the Congress itself. I was going to say
about the politicians who represent them but there's an odd contradiction come
to light in several national surveys, most voters think their congressman or
woman and their senator are honest enough, it's the others the other 99 in the
Senate, the other 434 in the House. In the past year or two, I went through a
period of believing that what ailed Americans was political indifference, of
apathy. I now feel the affliction is something that has not appeared in my
time: deep disillusion with the system and fear of the future.

As if to underline the force of the emotion in Senator Bradley's withdrawal,
what should happen this week but that a Republican, well known Republican,
youngish former governor of New Jersey and, happily, a man who equally combines
intelligence and decency, a man who is immediately touted as the inevitable
successor to Senator Bradley, one Thomas Kean, came out to declare at once he
would not run for the Senate for Bradley's seat for the same regretful reasons
that Senator Bradley says he no longer wants to keep it. Mr Kean's bare
statement said only: "I have decided not to seek the Republican nomination for
the US Senate." But the next afternoon he broke his statesmanlike dignity and
he came right out with it. It was not party friction or an ideology that
troubled him, it really comes down, he said, to the Senate itself: "It has
become no place for a political moderate, it has become a place dominated by an
eye shade mentality looking only at the bottom line, which is to say money!
Washington," he went on "is not a civil place these days, it's mean spirited
down there. That it's difficult to sit down and find compromises to get things
done for the public." He thought his party was just as guilty as the other one
for not realising what the country's priorities were. I doubt you'd find
another Republican who would put these priorities ahead of cutting spending and
balancing the budget. Governor Kean's priorities are quote: "The need to care
for pregnant teenage mothers, the need to educate kids that's the future".

Now of course down through American history at least from the time the
Constitution was about 50 years old, there's been rumbling throughout the
country, enough impatience or frustration with the two leading parties to breed
from time to time a third party. It's happened many times. The loyalists, the
farmers union, they tried, once even the Labor Party got nowhere. Most
interesting of these third parties, and the most politically threatening, in
the 19th century was the Know-Nothing party, a good deal more mischievous than
its name, and I believe it quite possible we could sprout a Know-Nothing party
today. It rose like a meteor in the 1850s when the nation was shaken by
political turmoil, huge quarrels about the right of the new territories to the
west to have or not to have slavery, and by millions who, during a tide of
immigration, believed the country had lost its early certainty about who an
American was.

The Know-Nothing party fell back on old slogans of a remembered paradise. They
were radical Protestants, they hated the Catholics, they hated and were
frightened by the German immigrants, they organised in secret societies and
whenever they were questioned in public about acts of arson, hooliganism or
violence they were expected to reply: "I don't know, I know nothing." This
often clownish but brutal party almost took New York in the state elections of
1854 and did take Massachusetts. Its next convention was dominated by
southerners who passed a pro-slavery resolution, which sent the Know-Nothings
happily home, and then, unaccountably, the party collapsed. A distinguished old
New York politician wrote at the time: "Anything more low or obscene, the
manifold heavings of history have not cast up." Mr Choate died before the rise
of Ku Klux Klan and of course knew nothing of our new-formed state patriotic
bands called militias.

The pro and anti slavery conflict of the 1850s was so bitterly fought and in
the end so short of men like Bill Bradley, Thomas Kean, who could contrive
brave, good, workable compromises that, as we all know, the country lurched
irresistibly into the Civil War. Six years before that catastrophe happened,
the Democrats were so split that the radical wing, the anti-slavery block,
broke with the party leaders, went off to a convention in Michigan and founded
a third party: new, vital, progressive, fervently anti slavery, determined to
shake off the Democrats' southern leadership and the loyalty of the populists
and the Know-Nothings.

The new party named itself The Republican Party. Five years later it nominated
a gangling Illinois lawyer for the presidency and he won. The first Republican
President Abraham Lincoln. All previous third parties had been formed by people
who didn't like the methods or the present policies of the two main parties.
What we saw in the 1850s and I think we're seeing now in the extraordinary acts
of Senator Bradley and Governor Kean is a revolt, not against the methods or
policies even of the present parties, but a rebellion against the parties
themselves, as being unfit to recognise and meet the essential needs of
society.

So many Americans feel this way that talk of a third party is mushrooming
throughout the country and there could well be a third and a fourth party. That
has happened in 1948, the segregationist wing of the Democratic Party, of
mostly Southerners revolted, stomped off and formed the Dixiecrat Party.
Truman's former secretary of agriculture under the spell, not only of the
Soviet alliance during the Second War, but of its political principles, started
a so-called progressive party. So Truman, in whom the country we were told, was
thoroughly disillusioned, had to fight not only the Republican Party but two
others as well. His opponents got 25 million votes, he astonishingly, held them
off with 24 million but more electoral votes, he consequently sneaked, snug in.

And remember, last time it was a third party, the 19 million votes of Ross
Perot, that robbed President Bush of a second term. Or put it another way, Mr
Clinton got only 43 percent of the total vote, 57 voters in 100 didn't want
him, so considering in what low esteem Mr Clinton and his party are held, he
might well wish for a third and a fourth party. How about a party of
disillusioned senators, governors and other statesmen, another party crying
"General Powell for president," and the new mighty rabble, a no Know Nothing
party. With these three armies of rebels nibbling away at the Republican vote,
President Clinton too might just sneak back into the White House.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP