Perils of the welfare state - 10 April 1992

We can, I can, say something now about the state of things in two countries, in
Britain and America, that I could not say during the past month, for fear, as I
mentioned last time, of being thought to try and influence, in however tiny a
way, the preferences of the British voter. Listeners who did not hear last
week's talk may justifiably ask who I think I am, to have the slightest effect
– impact is the modern buzz word – on a foreign election.

Have I ever requested that a talk not be played in India or New Zealand when
they are having an election? No, but they don't have the long record of mutual
suspicion that countries like Britain and America enjoy in the intervals of
their mutual admiration. Apart from recalling the lamentable story of how a
British Minister in Washington was sent back home for suggesting who ought to
win an American election, I also had on my mind, last time, the striking
similarities between the mood of the British voters and the American voters
that have been reported this time around. Lassitude, indifference on the part
of some voters, there's always that. But this time, a restlessness, an anxious
feeling that none of the parties seems to be able to meet and overcome the
really crucial troubles of our democratic societies in their present state.

And what state is that? Well I'm thinking in the main of the seemingly
insoluble problem of the periodical and ruinous slumps in the economy. I
mentioned some time ago that for the past several months, maybe a year, my
bedtime reading has been in the, I think, 40 volumes – six months to volume –
the 40 volumes of Punch between the two great wars, a nightly ritual all the
more poignant now that that once great institution is on its death bed.

I got into the habit of following a regular feature called Essence of
Parliament, reports on the daily doings in Westminster in the '20s and the
'30s. What sadly was brought home to me was the absolutely dependable
emergence, under any government, of the same conflicts. Free trade versus
protection, labour versus the employer, but more, the same promise, sworn by a
Conservative government, by a Socialist government, by a coalition government,
to achieve full employment and low inflation. And apparently it cannot be done,
not in a democratic system, only by dictators, who if they don't manage to put
everybody to work and absolutely control prices can, if there are too many
people and too few resources, as we say – too many people chasing too few goods
– then the dictator can stifle and has stifled inflation, by reducing the
numbers of people, liquidating, that is murdering several million surplus
consumers.

I suppose these fundamental problems will always remain. There is however
another big one which is new. Since the Second War and the rise of the welfare
state, there has spread throughout the nations of Europe and through North
America, a general concern for a whole range of what you might call
compassionate services, which before the Second War either didn't exist or were
far more limited. I'm talking, of course, of services by way of help, if not
money, for the old, the sick, the disabled, the unemployed, the student, young
children, the homeless, services provided by the state in the European sense of
the nation.

Put as simply as possible, what in this matter Britain and America and the
industrial nations of Europe and Australia and New Zealand have in common, is
this problem: how to be able to afford all these services which the people have
come to take to granted. In every national budget today, there is a big
irreducible chunk that no party dare cut down, call it social services or
welfare or social security, pensions. Entitlements is a good word that
Americans use. It's those forms of social help once left to the workhouse, the
Salvation Army, the local charity, the generous passer-by, to which people now
feel entitled.

How these things, along with everything else in the budget come to be paid for,
has been masked, in Britain and the United States, certainly, by endless
dogmatic arguments about taxes. Whether the way to continuous prosperity is by
setting such low taxes that business will have lots of extra money to invest in
new plants, new tools, new methods and so stimulate new jobs and continuous
prosperity, which by the way, we've never had. The other school says nonsense.
What happened when Reagan's Congress drastically lowered income taxes was the
big business became bigger, big corporations merged into monoliths. On one
truth everybody agrees but never in public. How did we afford all the old
services and the new? And the answer was, by borrowing abroad.

I think it was Jerry Brown, the one-time, two-time governor of California, one
of the two mavericks of this presidential campaign, he said the other day: you
want eight years of growth and low unemployment and lots of Medicare and
Medicaid? Easy, I'll give to you the way Reagan did, borrow $300,000 million a
year. And yet, with all our spending of somebody else's capital, the real
income of the average family is lower than it was 10 years ago, one American
child in five lives in poverty, one black child in two lives with one parent,
more millions of American children than ever are illiterate or semi-educated,
the several hundred bankrupt thrifts have tossed an insupportable burden on the
taxpayer and so on.

I believe that the mood of a great many of the American electorate is more
frustration than anything else. When I said last time that a little more than
half the electorate has lost faith in Congress, I was wrong. The figure in a
more recent poll is 83%. The ironic thing is that the people seem to see the
essential things that have to be done more than the politicians who are not
doing them and none of the candidates from Mr Bush on one side to any or all of
the Democrats on the other, offers any programme, radical or conservative, for
cutting the deficit and somehow making the compassionate social services
affordable.

All except one man, one extraordinary figure that this campaign, this
frustration, has thrown up. Name of H Ross Perot, Perot, he's a Texas
businessman. He scorns a party label. A poor boy who borrowed a thousand
dollars 30 years ago to found an electronic data system which turned out to be
a godsend to the government, for the first time copying all the records and
printing all the literature of the welfare system. Eight years ago he sold it
for over $2.5 billion. He's a wiry, red-eyed, flap-eared little man who decided
one day early last month to run for the presidency, or rather to see if enough
people wanted him, by getting his name on the ballots of all 50 states. The way
he did this was to set up a telephone bank with a hundred lines and an 800
number, that's a number that the caller gets free, Mr Perot has paid for this
bank and everything else to further his campaign. He has set no limit, he's
ready to spend, he says, 28, 38, 40, more million dollars. He has no paid help
of any kind. There won't be, he said, a handler anywhere within a thousand
miles of me.

Sounds like a crackpot imitative but within 24 hours of the opening of the
phone bank in Dallas, Mr Perot had over a million supporting calls. What is the
appeal of this active, downright squeaky-voiced, not very prepossessing man
It's the appeal of one of those populist heroes in an old Frank Capra film,
except Mr Perot looks nothing like Gary Cooper or James Stewart. He's fed to
the teeth with the government, he calls the Congress gutless and pampered with
perks. He would cut most of them – free medical care, free parking, he'd cut
also their salaries. He has a peculiar notion of taking away from Congress the
power to imposes taxes. Since that is its chief power, given to it in the
Constitution, the Congress, the House anyway, which has the first and last word
on all money bills, the House might just as well cease to exist.

But apart from his disgust at the establishment, at the president, the
Democrats, the Republicans, his two big promises are the ones that touch the
two big problems that most Americans say have to be met and solved. Namely, Mr
Perot would begin by dramatically slashing the deficit, saying it's only going
to go so high and then cutting services that have been for the past 20 years or
more, sacrosanct – social security, pensions, so on – and he would make rich
old Americans, the wealthiest top third of the over 65s, forfeit their right to
Medicare, under which the government pays most of the sickness costs of
everybody over 65, rich or poor.

Now every test of these two reforms in local and national elections has
guaranteed the political suicide of every man and woman who proposed them. The
message may be sweetened a little by the fact that Mr Perot is financing his
own campaign to the tune of, I don't know, maybe $100 million. It's a crazy
sort of version of Mr Perot Goes to Washington and it may not get him the
presidency but he has scared the White House and maybe fired the Democrats with
the thought that the country this time is ready, not for a Bush opponent at the
centre, but for a more radical one, on the left, liberal, you might say,
provided he's one who would not – of course – not raise taxes and not cut, in
any way, all the welfare entitlements we have come to regard as our due, for
better for worse, for richer, for poorer, in sickness and in health.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP