US cruise missile strikes - 28 August 1998

Last Wednesday evening, just when those of us whose job is to keep one eye
peeled for the news feel free to close it and listen in relief to what EB White
called the most beautiful sound in America, the tinkle of ice at twilight, a
bulletin came in. President Clinton would make a public speech on Thursday the
27th in Worcester, Massachusetts.

Let me put you in the mood, the very wary, watchful, the almost morbidly
suspenseful mood in which we heard about that coming speech. Only eight days
before, a very chastened president had made what everybody hoped would be a
full liberating confession about the squalid Lewinsky affair. Yet it was to all
but a handful of Senators and politicians and the media and other public
figures, deeply disappointing, tricky, legalistic, evasive. For Mr Clinton the
social aftermath was grim. He was going away for a holiday, up in
Massachusetts, on Martha's Vineyard, a small, triangular island off the elbow
of Cape Cod. That surely would provide a blessed haven.

Only half a century ago it was classically described as a small land of old
small towns, new cottages, high cliffs, white sails, green fairways, salt
water, wild fowl and the steady pull of an ocean breeze. The tumbling centre of
this island paradise, Edgartown, population 1,399. Well, very old residents
possibly dream of this sanctuary, but when they wake up they see the sort of
reality that has overtaken similar heavenly islands everywhere: as many people
as cobblestones, the summer invasion of tourists who suffocate as they jostle
each other through the quaint old showplace houses.

Luckily, for presidents in retreat, there are people rich enough to swipe and
buy as much as 50 acres and make it their own. To such a borrowed place, the
Tuesday morning after the sad Monday evening, the Clintons repaired – trudged
would be better. They approached the presidential plane, not as usual waving at
the crowd, if any. They were photographed from behind. Young Chelsea Clinton,
holding her mother's right hand, her father's left, he holding on to his dog's
leash, they ambled into the plane. No waving. No waving at the other end. The
president embraced his old and firm ally, Mr Vernon Jordan, suspected by
Prosecutor Starr of having arranged a job for Miss Lewinsky, so as to get her
out of the White House and what you might call out of harm's way.

Mrs Clinton was not seen then or for days, nor was the president. All the press
corps, bedded down in various spots on the island, most on the mainland, all
the press corps could report was nothing, no golf, no swimming, no sign of the
almost compulsory ritual for a president on holiday – a walkabout through the
quaint old streets, pressing the flesh with one and all.

The general surmise about this odd decision to go into seclusion was perhaps
incorrect but it was fairly understandable. Mrs Clinton was surely trying to
get over the shock of having heard only the day before the president's
confessional, that he did, after all, have a thing with Monica Lewinsky. This
inference has been firmly denied by the many people who remember how Mrs
Clinton went off round the country to speak up for her husband, right after his
January sworn declaration that he'd never had a sexual relationship with Miss
Lewinsky. How, therefore, the confession, after more than six months, must have
a been a cruel emotional blow to Mrs Clinton. I've heard more people say, I
don't believe for a minute she didn't know. But this was not a vicious rumour.
It was a plain statement from Mrs Clinton's own press secretary. A sympathetic
Senator, an old ally of Mr Clinton's mused, "What a vacation this is going to
be. I'm sorry for both of them".

Well then the president dined with the Jordans, Mrs Clinton dined with other
friends off along the island and then, swift as an incoming tornado, which can
take your mind off anything, came the Cruise missile attacks on the Sudan and
Afghanistan. Only a momentary pause here, I must say, for the unworthy thought
that the president had invented a mighty distraction from his troubles. This
idea never really got going, even on the sleazier talk shows. Most such gossip
seemed to come from abroad, from Muslim countries.

The Allies, to a man, seconded the attacks and nobody here paused to doubt the
rightness or wisdom of this tactic. Effectively, whether by luck, design or the
grace of God, the name of Lewinsky vanished from the front pages, the top TV
spot, for the first time in months. The full-throated support went up from the
Congress; they're scattered on holiday just now, but they cried in harmony with
all the unison of a Hallelujah chorus.

In a few days, of course, since there were no more exploding missiles, there
were no more exploding headlines, just what they call investigative pieces
about the likely suspects, "think" pieces. Meanwhile the White House press
corps, lolling around Martha's Vineyard, heard a new sound. A new hunch was
launched, from where I don't know.

The president was thinking of responding to the shabby notices he'd had for the
first confessional, by going before the public once more and making a second.
For several days he would, he wouldn't. That precious fount of news known as
"sources" kept saying that the White House staff were, weren't advising the
president to make the grand gesture now, while our minds were on other things,
like the Sudan and hurricanes. And then, Wednesday evening, the president is
going to make a speech tomorrow at high noon, in Worcester, Massachusetts.

The president had made up his own mind and would bare his soul. And we learned
he would be introduced by the last of the old-style liberal Democrats, the
famous Senator from Massachusetts, who'd had similar troubles of his own and
weathered them all, except the first – the fatal drowning of a girl off a tiny
island off the coast of Massachusetts. Chappaquiddick, remember? Almost 30
years ago. Still, who more fitting than Senator Ted Kennedy to stand in for a
penitent president?

So, came Thursday noon and heaven alone knows how many people skipped the lunch
hour, how many oldsters delayed the golf game, how many journalists in how many
states, sat with pen and paper or tape recorder, to hear the grand confession.
The occasion, a Massachusetts town, and the first shock was the joyous,
stunning reception by a small audience of parents.

Mr Clinton did not deign to mention Whitewater, the FBI, Miss Lewinsky or any
other inappropriate houri. A young news editor, coming on the tape of this
speech 20 years from now could have dated it 1993, or since it gave a
breathtakingly impressive recital of all the splendid things the Clinton
administration had done, maybe it was a triumphant speech at the end of his
first term. Maybe it was a campaign speech delivered in October 1996, just
before he went thundering back into the White House? And that same editor,
looking at the tape, would have said, no wonder they re-elected him. What
bounce, what confidence, what intelligence, what a range of knowledge tossed
off quickly and lightly on top of all the detail. And then he'd see the date –
Thursday 27 August 1998. Impossible.

This a marooned, a besieged president? Where, how? Do you remember the film,
The Three Faces of Eve, for which Joanne Woodward, oh 40 years ago, won the
Oscar? I hope some people recall it, not of course because I introduced it and
did the running commentary. It was about a famous case, reported by two doctors
in Georgia, of a young woman who had two separate personalities and woke up
each day to be, and act out for the day, one of them. An austere, painfully
shy, hesitant, young Puritan and next day a saucy hoyden, sashaying around
nightclubs and raunchy young men. This famous case established the fact of
people with two or more personalities, which emerge and subside at different
times.

Well, in a totally non-clinical way, Mr Clinton gives the impression of having
two characters. The tricky, sly, deceptive, engaging con-man and the public,
conscientious, truly concerned, engaging, eloquent, sympathetic statesman. So
the unreal spectacle on Thursday, which for an hour or more made me think we
were living on two planets at once, there was this ruddy-faced, engaging,
cheerful, funny, eloquent president reeling off impressive stuff about a
balanced budget, lowest unemployment ever, more own home ownership, smaller
government bureaucracy, determination to make every school in the country safe
for children, to free every parent from the haunting menace of guns, robbers,
drugs. The small audience gave the cue to all of us and rose with a collective
shout of praise and wonder.

Meanwhile, Russia was stumbling into bankruptcy, Islam was starting protest
marches against the outrage of American attacks on their soil, Saddam Hussein
was chucklingly telling the United Nations inspectors to get lost and Secretary
Albright was almost saying Yessir. The Stock Market, as Mr Clinton spoke so
rapturously, so cheerfully, was plunging down 300 points, as deep a drop as any
since the Black Monday of 1987. Surely, in the hour we need him, he will
survive.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP