John Lennon’s assassination

It may be, I say it may be, that the Carter administration is overreacting with
a violent dying kick when it warns us, and the Russians and the Poles, of the
gravity of a situation in which Soviet and Czech and East German forces are
massing in response to the labour troubles in Poland.

We read, too, that several of the Western allies are... – exasperated is the
word – by the arrival in Brussels of the Secretary of State, Mr Musky, and the
Secretary of Defence, Mr Harold Brown. Mr Brown, in particular, will not be
received with love and kisses since his very frank public statement about the
way in which America's NATO allies are, in his opinion, dragging their feet in
their own defence. Mr Brown would never have talked this way in public a year
ago, but he's only going to be in his job for another six weeks and he
evidently felt that he had nothing to lose or fear from a bout of brutal
honesty.

The sentence that must have riled the allies was the one in which he defined
the shared responsibility for Western Europe's defence. Too often, he said, the
NATO allies seemed to be saying, "We agree to share the responsibility, we'll
sell goods and arms to the Soviet Union and you defend us". It was predictable
that Mr Brezhnev would say in India what he's been saying to his own people,
namely that the Soviet Union poses no sort of threat to Poland or, for that
matter, to any country in the Persian Gulf and that the Americans are being
hysterical in thinking so.

However right or wrong, for better or worse, the Americans constantly look back
to the late 1930s, they recall, as one timely reminder, the way a groan used to
go up in the House of Commons whenever Winston Churchill got up to call off the
statistics about the scope and pace of German rearmament. And we've not heard
of anyone in the present Congress of either party who has accused President
Carter and Secretary Musky or Secretary Brown of overreacting.

This whole issue of threats and counter-threats, especially as it applies to
Poland, is one of the two issues that most trouble most Americans: certainly
the outgoing and the incoming Congresses. The other, of course, is the economy,
the tumbling of the stock market, partly – the experts say – as a reaction to
the news from Poland, partly as a response to the alarming rise in the banks'
prime lending rate to 20%, which is putting manufacturing firms out of business
and has led responsible people in and out of the government to declare that a
new recession is already underway.

This has so alarmed the Reagan transition team, which is working on plans for
the economy, that two of Mr Reagan's closest advisors and Senator Dole, the
incoming chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, have urged him the moment
he's sworn in as president to declare a state of economic emergency.

Well, until last Monday night then, there was little doubt in my mind as to
what A Letter from America ought to be about. But just before we went to bed,
the television networks interrupted or suspended their regular programmes as
they haven't done, to my recollection, since the assassination of President
Kennedy.

And for the rest of the night and on Tuesday and Wednesday throughout most of
the nightly news programmes, Poland and the crime rate and the new recession
were either forgotten or tacked on to the end of the overwhelming news story.
The cameras roamed over crowds around an apartment building on Central Park
West and then on more crowds around the Lincoln Memorial in Washington and out
in Hawaii and in London and Amsterdam and San Francisco and Tokyo. John Lennon
was dead.

Since I don't belong to that generation that spent so much of its energy and
idealism crying "Make love, not war" and tramping in protest marches against
the tragedy of Vietnam, I cannot pretend to understand the phenomenon of a
singer whose death has produced, as it undoubtedly has, a worldwide outpouring
of grief, a grief of identity with the lost cause of peace and brotherhood
through the simple chanting of peace and brotherhood.

But John Lennon's murder came on the heels of an equally senseless and casual
murder, that of Dr Michael Halberstam, a distinguished doctor and writer who
one night last week walked into his home in Washington, tangled with a burglar,
and was shot on the spot.

President-elect Reagan was in New York the day after Lennon was shot and was
stopped long enough for a reporter to ask him if gun control wasn't the answer.
He said, "No, if somebody commits a crime and carries a gun when he's doing it,
add five to fifteen years to the prison sentence; it may be a way out." At any
rate, I don't think there's any doubt now that one of the first Bills that
somebody will put up to the new Congress will be yet another proposal for a
federal gun control law.

It has happened, and always in the first shock of a spectacular murder – John
Kennedy, Martin Luther King, Bobby Kennedy – that Congress is momentarily
outraged, a strong Bill is drafted, it is weakened in committee, it's
feverishly debated on the floors of both Houses, it is as vigorously opposed as
it is advocated and, in the end, it is shelved.

Now, since the United States is the most lax of all the Western nations in
controlling the possession of guns, of handguns especially, you may wonder at
the strength or the rationale of the opposition to a federal law. Well, first
throughout at least two-thirds of this country, everywhere in the South and the
south-west and all across the west, shooting or hunting, as it's called here,
is an immensely popular sport among all classes.

And there is by now a huge and profitable gun industry. The National Rifle
Association is one of the most powerful lobbies in Washington, its slogan or
text is taken from the Second Amendment to the Constitution, which says, "The
right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed". Many a good
American parrots that line with a kind of wry fatalism, as if to say, "I don't
know why it's there, but it is there and we should respect it".

What these patriots never point out, and rarely seem to know, is that that
quotation is only the second part of the sentence, the first part gives the
reason in full. It says "A well-regulated militia being necessary to the
security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall
not be infringed". This prescription was written for a nation that did not yet
have a standing army; it relied on a citizens' militia to be made up of every
male householder who could snatch the gun by his fireside whenever the call to
duty came.

The founding fathers thought only of that threat to the security of a free
state, they were not thinking of individuals, or of any right to shoot a
pheasant or defend yourself against a burglar, let alone to go out and shoot a
popular idol, whether a president or a singer.

However, while there are otherwise intelligent citizens who like to hunt and
who, in passing, mumble about a Constitutional right, they strongly support the
National Rifle Association and its concern with rifles and their use in sport.
It is handguns that cause something over 10% of the homicides in the United
States and it's the control of handguns that has been the issue in the many
fractious debates in and out of Congress since the assassination of John
Kennedy.

Congress acted for the first time in 30 years within a year of the
assassination of Bobby Kennedy. At the urging of President Johnson in 1969, it
passed a Crime Control and Safe Streets Act, which banned the mail order sale
of guns across state lines, forbade the sale of rifles or shotguns to anyone
under 18 and forbade also the sale of guns to out-of-state residents, but it
fell far short of Lyndon Johnson's appeal for the national registration of all
guns and the national licensing of all owners.

It was and is still easy, deadly easy, to buy a handgun if you want it and any
criminal, any disturbed person, anybody can still, in many states, buy one of
the so-called "Saturday night specials" on the most offhand showing of a
driving licence.

The laxness of this federal law moved various states and cities during the
1970s to pass their own, harsher laws. In Kansas and Maine a prison sentence is
compulsory for anyone committing a crime with a gun irrespective of the damage
done. Mississippi, denies parole to people convicted of using gun. In Utah, the
penalty for any use of a handgun is entirely at the judge's say-so.

Among the city remedies, two are worth mentioning since they have proved a
striking decline in shootings. The city of Cleveland, after a police battle
with an irregular Muslim sect, passed a Bill banning the sale under any
circumstances of cheap handguns and required the registration of all others.
Baltimore, Maryland, I think, can claim the most effective law, one that banned
the private possession of handguns. The police department paid $50 for every
gun turned in once the law was passed and $100 for information leading to the
arrest of possessors.

I questioned whether one's own safety as an informer is worth only $100, but as
for the other provision, 7,000 handguns were turned in the first week and
Baltimore maintains that there has been a dramatic drop in what it calls
"gun-related crimes". But the laws vary greatly in toughness and in
enforcement; it's probably true that anybody who wants a gun hard enough can
get one and across the whole country, there is a vast silent opposition to gun
control from householders who believe their first duty is to protect their
families.

Like it or not, great numbers of Americans are closet vigilantes. Until this
uncomfortable fact is recognised and exposed as a form of fear breeding fear, I
don't think there's likely to be a national gun control law.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP