US power and responsibility abroad - 13 March 1998

I'm sitting up in bed on Thursday morning, unfolding the paper and sipping my
tea and, as Damon Runyon would have said, wanting no part of any trouble with
any guy or doll, when a four-column headline gets up and startles me because
it's about a place I never heard of and yet the heading and the sub-heading
assume I know all about it.

"Threatened Red Cross pull workers out of besieged province!, dateline Prekaz,
if that's how it's pronounced. I climb out of bed and creep into my study and
take out the encyclopaedia. The encyclopaedia which, by the way, is I hear is
going out of business – the book business, that is. But then, books are going
out of business. The encyclopaedia, all 24 volumes, will be available on a
CD-rom and you can get all the information you seek, if you're nimble enough
with your mouse.

Well this remote, unknown place, where it says scores have been killed and
thousands have fled to the winter wilderness, Kosovo, that's the name of the
besieged place. I look it up in the encyclopaedia. It's not there, not as a
separate entry.

But I wade through the history of the recently-named country Yugoslavia and
eventually learn that Kosovo is a province where the Serbians established their
medieval kingdoms before the Turks pushed them to the north. It mentions what
perhaps should come first in any mention of these belligerent Balkan countries,
that about six languages are spoken by different peoples and, like the Balkans
since time immemorial, they're fighting to decide who, which, is the ethnic
minority.

Why do I bring this up? Because a Serbian professor says it's all the
Americans' fault. He doesn't want to fight, but he's furious at being
outnumbered by so many ethnic Albanians. People don't have pensions, the
Americans have frozen our money.

Does any member of the class remember or has heard tell of a forgotten English
statesman who asked aloud, unfortunately in the House of Commons, what sort of
responsibility Britons could possibly have for a remote little country called
Czechoslovakia?

At that time, 60 years ago, most Britons were well acquainted with all sorts of
remote and quite often unpronounceable places, provided they lay within the
British Empire. I was riffling, the other day, through a squirrel's hideaway of
papers, letters, faded brown photos, the refuse of a happily-spent boyhood and
I came on a map of the world which at some time I must have pinned up in my
attic bedroom.

It was the standard map we were expected to learn geography from. A third of
the map was coloured red, that was the part we were supposed to know about. It
was the one-third, or more, of the physical globe that we owned, according to
my first history master.

A cynical soldier, returned comparatively unscratched from four appalling years
in the trenches, he used to point to some distant, massive province or a sliver
of an island and say, "This is another part of our proud empire that we annexed
in the natives' interest".

I knew about Bangkok before I could accurately pin Berlin on a map. Ceylon was
where our tea came from and if, like me, you were a banana freak, you well knew
what was the tastiest export both of Jamaica and the Canary Islands.

But Czechoslovakia? Perhaps not to most of us in 1938 quite as remote as it
evidently was for Mr Chamberlain, but then foreign affairs was not his bag.
Yet, Czechoslovakia was the immediate cause of the Second World War. How about
a name and place remoter still to most Britons, Bosnia-Herzegovina and that, no
less, was the cause of the First World War.

By the time I'd learned the name and location of some of those remote lands I'd
also learned on my first trip, a walking trip, to Europe, I learned to my
astonishment that Britons and the British Empire were not universally revered.

In the first year or two of my time in this country I remember a hale, blustery
tycoon whom I later got to know and like, turning purple in the face when he
upbraided me for not giving India her freedom. I told him, I never owned it and
was not even a collateral relation to Clive.

During the Second World War we used to say, it's really very complicated, total
independence is very unlikely and didn't the Prime Minister, Mr Churchill,
memorably say, I have not become the King's first minister in order to preside
over the liquidation of the British Empire. Proud words, defining exactly what,
in fact, he came to do.

Well, just as Englishmen felt, way back, when Americans blamed them one and all
for the oppressions of the Empire – there was a song, by the way, very popular
here, banned by the BBC in the 1930s, it was called Bang, Bang, Here Come the
British – today I notice that Americans sitting in the evening and meaning no
part of any harm to any guy or doll, get challenged or chivvied about Bosnia or
Iraq or Beijing.

"Why are you protesting to the Russians for sending weapons to Iran?" Either
their eyes glaze over with weariness or they stifle a burbling protest.
Tomorrow there'll be another headline and another remote town or province
somewhere for which the world will assume the Americans ought to be
responsible.

Ever since the end of the Second War, every American president has warned the
country about lapsing back into the isolationism of the 1920s and '30s, when
the Senate refused to let this country join the League of Nations.

Every president has anticipated or later echoed, if in not quite such
all-embracing rhetoric, John Kennedy's ringing inaugural sentence, "Let every
nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price,
bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe, to
assure the survival and the success of liberty". Probably the rashest promise
ever made by any President.

In fact it was true then and made abundantly truer, later, that neither America
nor any other country in history for that matter, would support any friend, pay
any price or meet even the hardships of foregoing a motor car and a weekly
baseball game, let alone fight any foe to come to the aid of 43 nations to whom
this promise had been made by treaty. Vietnam was the one debt paid and heaven
knows, enough.

I think the president's astonishing popularity these days springs from a
special sympathy for him in his present ordeal. Here he is, being drowned in
the daily outpourings of the media gone berserk over the White House intern and
the woman from Little Rock, long ago, and he confessed the other day that
sometimes he feels like a punching bag.

And yet, he has to go on gamely pretending that he's high and dry and cheerful
while he hands out orders about Bosnia, contrives a trade trip to China which
must turn a blind eye to their prison labour camps. Every day he must decide
which terrorist dictator to embrace and which to deplore and all the while he
must wonder, as some of us have wondered, how long those 30-odd thousand troops
and the men and women on the battleships and planes and two aircraft carriers
are going to stay watching a chuckling Saddam without working up a grumble
short of mutiny.

Americans might well say, as I did about India and Burma and other places, I
didn't promise neither to free the Croats or to save Haiti and Nicaragua for
democracy and pay any price and bear any burden. That was said by a young man,
he'd now be 80, who would promise anything to get to be president.

An old diplomat mused the other day, it's a proud time to be President of the
United States. But it's not a good time and sooner or later, when our resources
and our fighting strength are overstretched, as in the later days of the Roman
Empire, the question the country's going to ask itself is, am I my brother's
keeper?

So far, Congress keeps saying, look, we can't be the policemen of the world.
But then, when the pinch comes, they act as if it was their duty.

And now, as if all this weren't enough, the next morning's headline was bigger
still and more scary. An asteroid is hovering over the earth and might brush it
on a Thursday, we hear from the leading astrophysicist of the United States.

It's about a mile in diameter, could set whole continents on fire and drown the
others in a massive tidal wave. But, says this expert, it would not necessarily
wipe out the human race. I like "not necessarily". Also, he tells us, there is
no immediate cause for alarm. The Thursday he has in mind is Thursday 26
October 2028, when I'll be 120.

This reassurance reminds me of the late, great Robert Benchley's comment on a
similarly frightening scientific piece he'd read, about what a famous eye
specialist called the drift to one eye. This doctor said human eyes are
gradually growing closer together till the day will come when there'll be just
one big eye in the middle of the face. But it will take some years for this
unpleasant change to take place. Countless ages, was the way the good doctor
put it.

But, as Mr Benchley noted, there'd be a disagreeable period of narrowing of the
bridge of the nose with the eyes getting closer and closer every day and,
warned Benchley, that might very well come in our time. My eyes are so close
together as it is, I bet I win. I bet I'm the first one-eyed man in the world.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP