The End of Civilisation - 25 July 1997

I don’t know which cliché to avoid and which to fall back upon. “The end of an
era” – that’s shopworn for centuries.

During the second war, we used to be told, “If we don’t fight Hitler, it will
be the end of civilisation as we know it.”

Well, last Friday, the bell tolled and it sounded the end of civilisation as I
(and I’m sure many of you) came to know it. In a simple, brutal phrase, last
Friday FW Woolworth’s announced it was closing down all its 400 stores in the
United States. Whether the paralysis is to spread to Europe, it didn’t say.

For once, some older people may be shocked to notice that I’m able to use a
trade name without the risk of a scolding from the powers that be. To younger
people, that sentence will probably be double Dutch.

But I went into journalism when – when and for many years thereafter – it was
forbidden to use a trade name in an ordinary descriptive piece either in your
newspaper, if it was a serious paper and not a rag, or over the air when the
BBC was the air.

Once I covered the very rare event of a cricket match got up between Yale and
Harvard. There were three spectators in a field until there bounced on to the
scene, just to show that some corner of a foreign field is forever England, a
parson carrying (it was a chilly spring day) carrying a Thermos. It never
crossed my mind that in the very upright (in those days) Manchester Guardian,
you could not outrage the readers by writing a trade name. I frankly had
forgotten that "Thermos" was one, if I ever knew. But the alert AP Wadsworth,
an editor never to be caught napping, saw that it was changed. In the published
piece, what the parson was carrying was a "vacuumatic container". I must say my
sentence sort of lost its swing.

Another time, I innocently wrote that someone applied (for some good reason) a
smear of Vaseline. Old AP was again on the alert. What the man smeared in print
was a dollop of "petroleum jelly".

Happily, that austere custom has died. Anyway, I would not be able to do this
talk at all if I were forbidden to use trade names. So again, I remark to
everybody over, say 45, the bell tolls and it tolls for thee. No more
Woolworth’s.

They’re closing those ancient, incomparable discount stores for the most
obvious reason: they’ve been losing money for years. Last year they reported an
operating loss of $37 million.

Anyway, 117 years was a long life for any institution and, considering the
revolution that’s happened to the business of making and marketing household
necessities, it’s astounding that Woolworth's survived so long during a
half-century in which discount stores were absorbed by larger chains, by
shopping malls, by huge stores built not in town (since an actual majority of
the population cease to live in cities) but on highways close to thriving
suburbs.

And the same thing happened even to Woolworth’s bigger competitors, not to
mention what one writer memorably dubs as, ‘hundreds of local chains that have
faded into the collective memory of a nation warmly nostalgic for old stores,
but not willing to shop in them anymore".

However, this is not to be a nostalgic piece. It’s to recall a special American
impulse, of which Woolworth’s was a prime example.

Let’s recall something of the world in the year that Woolworth and several
other bright boys started something new: 1879. I’m skipping, if you’ll excuse
me, the enormous events recorded by all historians like the war between Chile
and Bolivia, the founding of the Irish Land League to campaign for independence
from Britain, the founding of Christian Science, the collapse of the Firth of
Tay Bridge in a winter storm.

I’m thinking of America only, and of smaller things that would have a bigger
influence on more people everywhere. So 1879. A Scottish American immigrant,
Robert Gair, a paper bag maker, invented a machine to produce cheap cardboard
cartons already cut and creased. It raised Robert Gair’s normal production of
50 paper bags an hour to 7,500 cartons.

A saloonkeeper in Dayton, Ohio, Jake Ritty, took a sea voyage for his health,
and he noticed a device on the steamship that recorded the revolutions of the
propeller and so gave an accurate daily record of the ship’s speed. Hmm, gave
him an idea. He patented this idea as "Ritty’s incomparable cashier", the first
cash register to keep a cumulative record of the day’s transactions, which
later elevated a plate so both the clerk and the customer could see the figure.

An early electrical engineer thought the telephone shouldn’t remain a company
luxury. A multiple switchboard, that would do it. First in Newhaven,
Connecticut – it would make the telephone available to small stores, to
families, perhaps soon to everybody. In 1879, there were 50,000 American
telephones. By 1890, a quarter of a million.

In 1879, Brooklyn, New York, a dairy company delivers milk in bottles instead
of measuring it from barrels into housewives’ jugs. Wow! It took over 30 years
for the practice to start in England.

In December, one Thomas Edison announces he’s invented a light bulb that will
burn for a thousand hours. To the jeers of the gas lighting experts and the
intelligentsia, he says electric lighting will become so cheap that only the
rich will be able to afford candles.

And in 1879 in a small town in upstate New York, a shop assistant, 27 years
old, urged his boss to install a single counter at which all the goods were to
be priced at five cents each. To pacify this lunatic, the shopkeeper agreed.

So this young Frank Woolworth borrowed from a businessman the vast sum of $400.
He opened his own store in which everything was priced at five cents. It
failed.

But the same lender liked Frank’s courage and staked him to a store in a
Pennsylvania small town, which would, however, have two divisions of goods: one
at five cents, another at ten cents. It was the first of its kind. It worked.
Young Mr Woolworth had one ambition: to build a chain of stores where the poor
and working people could find open-shelf self-service, everything to buy for a
nickel or a dime. It came to be called the Five and Ten. It started with a
five-cent fire shovel and went on to egg whips, pie plates, moustache cups,
puzzles, clothes, locks and keys, galoshes, a soda fountain, chirping household
pets, full meals, everything.

In 1913, Frank built the world’s tallest building, 60 storeys high. He died in
1919, leaving over a thousand Woolworth stores in the United States and
hundreds more in other countries. He thought, as everybody did, it would go on
forever.

What these half-dozen men had in common was not merely an inventive spirit.
What I’d call a common impulse was the idea of enlarging the possessions that
working people could afford.

The 35 years after the end of the Civil War – that’s to say, from 1865 to 1900
– was the golden time of American inventiveness; half a million patents
granted. But it’s also true to say that many, if not most of them, successful
or not, were attempts to do something that half a century later was best summed
up in a sentence by a poor boy from Indiana who ran for president and lost
against Franklin Roosevelt: Wendell Willkie. “It is the destiny of America,” he
said, “to turn the luxuries of the rich into conveniences for the many.”

So George Eastman didn’t want to invent a camera that would make the Germans
envious. He wanted to make a cheap family camera, and did it; and everywhere,
in many languages, it was known as Ein Kodak. There was Isaac Singer’s cheap
home sewing machine.

It’s worth remarking on that most of these what you might call popular
inventors were originally poor – a one-room schoolhouse or none. Edison’s total
education was three months in an elementary school.

They knew in the flesh what it was like to lack the finer necessities, so there
was a special pride in (as Woolworth put it) “applying democracy to human needs
and desires.”

Automobiles were for the rich. Is that so? Henry Ford invented the assembly
line and made the first Volkswagen. Cheap cars for everybody.

An American clockmaker was just as appreciative as you are of the delicate
workmanship of a Swiss watch, but what he wanted to do was to make a dollar
watch. “Yes, but does it work?”, facetious Europeans would ask. It did.

Hotels were for the rich. So how about motor courts, later motels? Same with
paper napkins. And now, with half the workforce women, frozen dinners, take-out
food, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.

So what were first known as variety stores gave birth to Woolworth’s and then
to bigger chains still, and more mail-order catalogues offering more and
cheaper goods – cheaper than (if possible) the blessed Sears Roebuck catalogue,
another casualty.

And later the deep freeze in every home eventually killed off the beloved soda
fountain. You could make your own sundaes, parfaits, milk shakes.

And now the huge shopping malls on the highway are beginning to tremble.
Computer systems are leading, at a breathless rate, to computer shopping. Soon
tedious grandfathers will bore their kin with tearful memories of the days when
they got in the car and drove off to the supermarket on the shopping mall on
Highway 58.

In the meantime, there is no pause in the unstoppable movement, as Woolworth
said, to “apply democracy to people’s desires”. This is a prospect that doesn’t
alarm me. For one, what I’ve called the “American impulse” has lifted more
millions out of a threadbare living and given them a better material life than
all the generations before them.

So, on the demise of a famous one, I say let’s hear it for Frank Woolworth and
Robert Gair and Jake Ritty and George Eastman.

And remember what the teacher said, "Never forget, children, that if it hadn’t
been for Thomas Edison, you’d be watching television by candlelight.”

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP