Gangsters in Chicago - 5 October 1984

It used to be liquor, bootleg liquor, that made vast illegal fortunes for
underworld characters in Chicago.

They’d once made handsome incomes from robberies, various sorts of petty crime,
most of all, from organised prostitution rings. But when Congress wrote in an
amendment to the Constitution making the manufacture, sale, and transportation
of alcoholic liquors illegal everywhere in the United States, the eyes of Al
Capone, his buddies and his rivals, bulged at the thought of the money that
might be made from supplying the whole continent with the forbidden fruit of
the grain and the grape. Mostly the grain.

At first they hired crews from the waterfronts of the eastern ports, they
leased ships and imported the genuine article, and ran the cargos on to lonely
beaches on dark nights. But this was slow and tricky and dangerous work and was
foiled, often enough, by the coastguard or by crews willing to be bribed by the
port authorities. Then the obvious grand plan struck them. Why not make the
stuff right there in Chicago, and then in the suburbs, and eventually illegal
stills throughout the country. All you needed to make gin, for instance, was
distilled water, juniper drops, and crude alcohol.

Well, as we all know, throughout the 1920s and right into 1933, until the
dreadful 18th amendment was repealed, the country was awash with alcohol
precisely because it was forbidden. When the colossal mistake of prohibition
was rectified and liquor was legal, America drank less and the gangsters went
broke. Crime, a whole series of movie shorts reminded us, crime does not pay.

I suppose the social document that perfectly expressed the popular legend was
the movie, The Roaring Twenties, in which Jimmy Cagney was an honourable
veteran of the First World War, came home to breadlines and no job, got
involved with the gangs, started trucking alcohol, moved up to run one gang
against another, grew rich and flashy till the end of prohibition was in sight,
and he sank back into poverty. He was on the run, he shot his big-time rival
and was himself fatally shot and fell sprawling to his death on the steps of
the church he was staggering into to repent him of his abominable sins.

This film was among the last, if not the last, of the Warner Brothers
profitable cycle of gangster films. It was made in 1939 and by then liquor had
been legal for six years, there were other headlines on our minds and we
thought of Al Capone, if at all, as a melodious little fat man, well and truly
behind bars, who was, as an old colleague who visited him said, nutty as a
fruit cake and well on his way to a syphilitic's death.

For all we knew the gangs had dissolved, the rivals had long ago stopped
shooting each other and then giving each other expensive ironic funerals, so
they were not news. In fact, they had, as the division commanders say,
regrouped for other exercises. Now this, as I recall, never really came out. I
happen to stumble on it one bright, dry day at West Texas at a cattle auction
in 1943. I’d been taken there by a friend, a district attorney, who’s
preoccupation in those days was the first trickle of illegal Mexicans who waded
across the Rio Grande by night, the so-called, wetbacks.

I was waiting for the auction to begin, along with the DA and one or two cattle
men and goat ranchers, and I noticed on the fringe of the small crowd some men
in strangely smart clothes. Cowboy hats and string ties, and rather
well-pressed trousers and fancy shirts. These could not be cattle men, surely,
they looked like what Americans then called drug-store cowboys. If they had
been transported by a time machine into the 1970s, they might have passed for a
rock band in transit. I suggested to my friend that they were a little too
genuine to be genuine. And he said, through the ghost of a smile, they’re
cattle men all right, from Chicago. They’ll buy up the whole herd. And so they
evidently did.

I followed up this story and found that these men, who are much less
ostentatious in their bidding than their clothes would have led you to believe,
saw that the cattle got to a railroad siding, were put aboard a train once they
had been stamped by the agents of the United States bureau of agriculture. The
Chicago somehow saved the federals the trouble, I don’t know how, but they had
their own food stamps, so to speak, which authorised the flesh as healthy and
fit for shipping up to the feed lots of Iowa and Missouri and other lush
pastures, where it's fattened for you and me, via the Chicago stockyards.

They used to say that a cow came into Chicago as a cow, and went out as a steak
or a tennis racket. Steaks were what the fancy cattle men or their Chicago
bosses had in mind, steaks for the tables of the rich, the bad the beautiful
and the sleazy who could afford to flaunt the war-time rationing laws and pay
outrageous prices for prime cuts and steaks that were supposed not to be
available. It came out, after the war, that Americans during the war years of
strict rationing, were eating more beef than ever. For exactly the same reason
that during prohibition they had drunk more than ever – the stuff was scarce
and, in any quantity, forbidden.

So what we are talking about is the black market in beef. A year after the
Texas cattle auction I was going through Chicago on another story, and with the
help of an old politician, I had a date with an ageing relic of one of the old
gangs. He had a handsome office with all the high-toned fixings of a
corporation president, panelled walls, gleaming files, trim secretary, and
several young assistants as suave and well pressed as junior law partners. They
were family, and a son, cousin, all related, the second generation of the old
gangsters.

The boss man, on the understanding that I would never reveal his identity or
write a story told then – on pain, I was given to understand, of being cut
dead, an idiom that took on a very lively meaning at that moment – he told me
about the system, the auctions, the entraining, the control, or the
acquisition, of the feed lots, the connections in the stock yards and so forth
and so on. I wondered idly at one point, how the revenues from the black market
in beef compared with the good or the bad old, bootlegging days. "Sonny," he
said – this was 40 years ago – "Remember, sonny, prohibition was a rehearsal."

Well, since then the ordinary American has paid little attention to the gangs,
because they don’t shoot each other in public, their whole social aim is not to
be in the news. From time to time we read big scary pieces about the Mafia and
its links with parent Mafia in Sicily. We are aware that at various times there
have been a rather well-publicised arrests for organised prostitution and
intimidation of longshore men and tricking the speedometers on rented cars, and
more and more we have been hearing about complicated links between drug
producers in Colombia and mobsters in Miami with uncertain links to Italy.

There was, in the '50s, a very conspicuous televised Senate committee hearing
on organised crime. And there was, it must be, quarter of a century ago now, a
well, er, sensational raid on a lavish hideout in upstate New York, in which
something like 90 members of the reigning mob families were seized. I think we
assumed, then, that the Mafia had been broken. Of course it hadn’t.

Over 50 years the riches of the bootleggers could be used to have children who
could go to college and emerge into the life of respectable businesses looking
nice and dressy. There had been rumours and lurid pieces in magazines and even
books claiming to document, as a fact, that today the Mafia is a stronger,
immensely more powerful institution than ever, and that there is practically no
profitable business, from amusement arcades and video games to motel chains,
and banking, in which the Mafia does not have a firm, but invisible hand.

Well as I said it used to be liquor, now it's heroin. Last weekend, Italian
police went out with over 300 arrest warrants and took in 60 Mafia suspects
and, in a well coordinated move, officials of the US department of justice
ordered the arrest of 28 Americans and Italians whom the Italian officials have
asked to have extradited under a new treaty. The chief US attorney here in New
York described them as top figures in organised crime, who are involved in an
international heroin ring, which earns not millions, but billions of dollars.
These particular 28 are wanted in Italy on charges of murder, drug trafficking
and racketeering.

Well, this sounds like a routine newspaper report, except it takes in more than
the usual suspects and according to the department of justice, has revealed an
international conspiracy, on a grander scale than anyone had imagined. It all
emerged from the second thoughts, the accumulated bitterness, of one man, one
Tommaso Buscetta – as one headline put it, "Godfather turns stool pigeon". He
was not, to be exact, a godfather. A much smaller figure, but the father of a
criminal family. He is 56, born in Sicily moved, in his teens, into cigarette
bootlegging. It was a time, believe it or not when the Mafia’s main interest
was buying up huge quantities of cigarettes and bootlegging them at cut prices,
probably the most innocent operation of its long history.

Buscetta came out of jail, came to the United States, journeyed to Brazil and
got into the drug business by way of starting here in New York the useful cover
of a chain of pizza parlours. He was arrested here 12 years ago, jumped bail
and settled in Brazil, extradited to Italy, jailed there and enjoyed the
unexplained luxury of jails for Mafia men, out again he was back in Brazil.
Extradited again last July and they gave the signal that he was ready to talk
about the heroin ring, an enormous crime in the honour code of the Mafia. He
had broken the code of silence.

He must be, after a few presidents and sheiks, the most closely-guarded man on
earth. We can, at present, only speculate on why he broke down but there was a
crackling gang war in Sicily last year, and the year before Mr Buscetta’s
family lost seven of its members, including two of his sons. It was too much
for him. He broke the code, as one outraged family man put it – there’s no
honour left any more, anywhere.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP