Hurricane Hugo, Galileo, and the cranberry scare of 1959 - 24 November 1989

Well, finally winter is a-comin' in.

After a prolonged Indian summer that had us, only 10 days ago, frolicking –
strolling anyway – in 70F, the icy winds came whistling in from the west and
the snows, which have been confined till now to the High Sierra and the peaks
of the Rockies, came slamming across the country, so that on the Wednesday
before Thursday's Thanksgiving, my daughter telephoned me from Vermont – which
is the site of the family pow-wow this year to warn me, "It's all white here
and it's on its way down below zero. Winter wrappings and snow boots will be
worn".

Zero, may I add, in America, means always "zero" Fahrenheit, namely 32° below
freezing.

The first sign that the iceman cometh blew in in outrageous gusts last Monday
evening. All was calm, all was bright when we went to bed. At about four in the
morning, I was wakened by an express freight train hurtling through my bedroom.

Such is the marvellous adaptability of the human mind coming out of sleep, that
before I had time to wonder what a train was doing in my bedroom, I knew it was
nothing less than the wind. The weather boys had promised us plunging
temperatures, clear skies and winds gusting to 35mph. Such gusts usually hit
our windows like sacks of wet sand. Bap!! But this was quite different.

I got up and went to look out over Central Park and another train came roaring
till I plugged my ears and waited for the brakes to go on. The window bounced
in an inch or two and then, thank God, bounced back. The only time I'd seen
that was a couple of times over the past 40-odd years in an apartment in San
Francisco.

Well, it wasn't The Big One, the earthquake, which the dreaded seismologists
have promised the east coast – our coast, mind you – some time in the next 10
years as against a 50-50 chance of its hitting California in the next 50 years,
a piece of information which easterners either don't know about or ridicule. I
mean, look what happened to the much-damaged Watsonville, California and, to a
lesser degree, to San Francisco.

Well, next morning, all, as Mr Churchill used to say, was made plain. The paper
told us that the north-west wind had come blowing and cracking its cheeks
across northern New Jersey, trees falling everywhere, on over the Hudson and
bang across Manhattan with gusts, and here was the nitty gritty, the bottom
line, with gusts from 55 to 85mph.

A cab driver I hailed later in the day who'd been talking about baseball, said
casually, "I seen where they brought back Hugo". Hugo? I didn't recognise him.
I knew that Mr George Steinbrenner, the owner of the Yankees, was thoroughly
upset by his team last season, as well he might be and might have brought in
another manager, maybe. Billy Martin, again.

"No!", the man said, "Hugo! You know, from the Carolinas!"

I couldn't think of a player, coach or manager down there. He must have thought
me very dense.

"You know? Hugo, man!! I just come from downtown, round Christopher Street. I
mean, man, they got several blocks all roped of! Winders blown out, cement all
over de place! I tell you, it was nobody but old Hugo!"

Of course, I finally got it. But if it had been another hurricane, unheard of
anywhere in the United States at this time of year, it would've had to be Iris
or Ida or Irene, some female name, for one of the minor triumphs of the
feminist movement, and one of the earliest, was the successful campaign to have
the Weather Bureau, through the Hurricane Centre in Miami, change the age-old
custom of naming all hurricanes after females – I remember with a shudder Carol
and Diane in the '50s – and name them, alternately, male and female.

So this past season, for example, it would go Alice, Bernard, Caroline, David,
Edna, Frank, Gertrude and Hugo. The cab driver, a big, handsome man, 25 years
out of Jamaica, took an impressive pause. "You wanna know why we had Hugo
again, right on top of that warm weather? You wanna know?"

He was at the wheel and I said, "Sure!", I wanted to know.

"Well", he said, "it would take a Harvard degree to figure it out. But I
figured it! And I got it all written down here to give to the papers. I got it
in the form of poetry. And I call it 'The Satellite Scenario'. Like that?"

I thought it was fine.

Well, it seems that everything went wrong with the weather the moment the last
astronauts released the satellite on its way to Galileo.

"Now", said the driver, as you would begin to tell the secret of the scriptures
to a class of very small children... "Now! This is the way it goes! They
released that satellite and they sent it on its way, and, bam!! We got this
warm weather. Right?"

Suspiciously warm, I thought, very good.

"And wham! Hugo! And maybe... maybe I'm jumping to a conclusion, but maybe the
San Francisco earthquake. Maybe. But it all has to do with the transmissions
from that satellite. You know it's transmittin' back to Earth? But not all the
time. On and off! You follow me?"

I was following and also watching his index finger and thumb on the steering
wheel.

"Well, now", he said, ready for the big news, the punch line, "when it's
transmittin', it's going to be warm. When it ain't transmittin' – wham! Big
winds! And cold. But big winds! I mean, man, bigger than what you'd ever guess!
I got it all down right here."

He pulled out a sheet of green paper from his pocket which evidently contained
his enlightening poem. He told me that on the coming Thursday, he was going to
eat his Thanksgiving turkey and on Friday morning was going down to the office
of The Daily News and hand over his poem to the editor.

As I left him, he wished me a Happy Thanksgiving and shouted, "Watch out, man!
That satellite's gonna take six years to reach Galileo and for six years, we're
gonna have a heap o'crazy weather! Winds, hurricanes, hot spells, the whole
ball of wax."

It is true that since the big blow, the weather men have been stumped for an
explanation. They're fiddling around now with variations on the Greenhouse
Effect and not getting us very far. So I thought I ought to bring to their
attention this fascinating new theory. I hope to keep you posted. So far, the
Satellite Scenario has not appeared in The Daily New.

To most people who don't really care where the big blow came from, the
immediate question last Wednesday was, would they safely and on time to their
mother, aunt, in-laws, children, grandparents? For the day and the night before
Thanksgiving, which is always the fourth Thursday in November, the day before
Thanksgiving, is the worst possible day to travel anywhere in the United States
because everybody's doing it. Much worse than Christmas, which is, I should
remind you, a Christian festival and not one celebrated like Thanksgiving, as a
national family festival.

At this time of the year, in the early days of this talk, I used to describe
the origin of this unique American festival. Its accepted myth, anyway, which
dates it either from the moment the Pilgrims touched the weather-beaten shore
of Massachusetts and fell on their knees, or, more plausibly, and now generally
accepted, as being the feast of thanksgiving that they threw after their first
harvest.

It's very unlikely that this is the truth, for the Pilgrims didn't approve of
feasting or merrymaking and it's a fact that the day they got off the boat and
began to dig the foundations of a colony, it was Christmas Day, when all
merrymaking and even sacred rituals were forbidden on the dour ground, reported
by their most famous chronicler, William Bradford, a Yorkshireman, that what
day so-ever our Lord was born, most certainly it was not 25 December.

So, for at least 240 years, Americans did not make a point of taking a holiday
or celebrating Thanksgiving. Abraham Lincoln was the one who had the idea of
putting out a national proclamation, but few states took him up on it. By the
end of the century, however, more and more states thought that another national
holiday was a good idea but they celebrated it on different dates.

Only in our own time did a president dare to suggest – proclaim, rather – that
it should be an immovable American feast and should be celebrated on the fourth
Thursday in November. And that president was Franklin Roosevelt, and the
Republicans, especially those who were used to their own date, raised Cain,
denounced Roosevelt as a tyrant, on the model of Adolf Hitler, and foresaw the
end of the Republic. But it's been so, ever since.

Two items of Thanksgiving – no, three, are standard throughout the country
since they were discoveries of the Englishmen who settled on the Massachusetts
coast. Turkey, a strange and delectable beast, cranberry sauce, made from the
cranberry bogs of Cape Cod, and pie, made from the pumpkin that the Indians
grew.

One day, during the reign of President Eisenhower, there was a terrible scare
about the cranberries. The Food & Drug Administration suspected they were
tainted with an acrid element identified as amino-triazole. The secretary of
health found two tainted shipments. The other seven million pounds of
cranberries preserved for the Thursday consumption were declared safe. Even so,
President Eisenhower served apple sauce and was promptly damned by the
Democrats as a traitor.

This year, there are no warnings, except about the likelihood of excess
consumption of cholesterol and what with all the hounding of the people over
the past 30 years about the terrors of cholesterol, you'd naturally expect that
the annual consumption of turkey had declined as drastically as, say, that of
milk.

Well, in 1939, the per capita consumption of turkey was 2.5 lbs. This year, it
will be 17lbs.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP