The Day After - 25 November 1983

This was a sombre week in which to return to America. It ought to be, and it
usually is, a festival week, when Congress has gone home, and everybody else
downs tools on Wednesday and drives, flies, buses or trains to the family
hearth, to settle in to the turkey and the corn pudding and the sweet potatoes
and the pumpkin pie and the other tasty memories of that first harvest, which
signified to the first Puritan settlers of New England that they would survive.

Thanksgiving in this country – and especially because it’s a country without a
state religion – Thanksgiving is the family festival, even more than Christmas.
This year it was darkened by two happenings or rather by two events, created by
the media.

The first, as you may have heard, was the television programme that attracted –
perhaps attracted is the wrong word – that drew then, as to the scene of a
crime, the second largest national audience since television began.

It was a vivid, unflagging nightmare of a programme, the fictional filming of
the town and people of Lawrence, Kansas going about their business and their
play before the nuclear missiles hit it, but mostly about what the same people
did and looked like after they had been reduced to cinders or radiated beyond
walking, eating, beyond any condition that can decently be called living.

For most of two hours we saw, simply and appallingly, what it would be like for
one town making a brief, hopeless attempt to survive. The reminder, that in
fact, a nuclear attack could not possibly target on one town alone was provided
by the grimmest pan shot in the history of the movies, a slow panning back to
reveal, on the horizon, the dead and silent ashes of what the day before had
been Kansas City.

This programme is so publicised, so hyped ,so far ahead of its showing that the
battle lines of controversy about it were drawn up and furiously engaged,
before most people had seen it. And we have to ask how it came about,
especially on one of the foreign national television networks which is, most of
the time, most devoted to what we call escapist entertainment.

The idea came from a Yale graduate who was in charge of the motion picture
division of ABC, the American Broadcasting Company. Practically nobody high up,
or low down, on the staff would hear of it. Eventually though, two men were put
on to it as a tentative project. They went about it in the conviction that the
programme, as they conceived it, would be softened beyond recognition.

They enlisted most of the population of Lawrence, Kansas, they sketched a vague
outline, and fleshed it out not from their imaginations, but from research
studies available from the government's department of defence. I think it’s
worth mentioning this point, since so many of the people who cheered the movie
both before and after its showing implied, when they didn’t insist, that its
great value would be to wake up the defence department to the realities of an
Armageddon it was coolly preparing for. These studies went into such horrors as
the many varieties of radiation burns that would instantly disfigure and soon
kill off the victims.

Well, before the showing, people were fearful of what it would do to children.
As a protective measure, literally thousands of schools and hundreds of
thousands of families, arranged to round up school classes or groups of
neighbours to watch the whole show in the company of teachers and parents. For
several days after the showing the papers and the television networks let us
read or hear what scores of children had felt and thought.

There was very little in this that you could not have guessed, except we saw,
we heard of, no hysterics no inconsolable weeping; I suppose that, and the
nightmares, would come later. What was striking to me, and infinitely pathetic,
was the gravity, the careful sadness of so many childlike responses.

Many, I noticed, harped on a note sounded by those Russian children I mentioned
a few weeks ago, who were asked to ruminate on nuclear war. This note was one
of steady anxiety about losing their parents, the childlike implication being
that they would be whole and alive, but the parents would be dead.

Well, there is no point in going on about the glumness, the solemn awe with
which so many of Americans must have watched in this appalling film.
Immediately afterwards statesmen old and new, commentators, were on the air,
arguing about it, ought the film to have been made at all? Was it made with a
political purpose? If so, what? Practically no opposing groups can agree about
that.

The most vocal of the groups who hailed the film were those who can be fair
lumped together with the unilateral disarmers, as that international army of
so-called crusaders for peace.

Obviously the film was also strongly approved by the nuclear freezers, the
people who want the nuclear arsenals of the two superpowers to be frozen at
their present level – an argument that instantly provokes another argument
about whether the arsenals are, in fact, level at all.

The Reagan administration and its supporters responded by saying that the
practice, the continuing build up of deterrents, had kept the peace for over 30
years, and is the only way to prevent the fictional tragedy of Lawrence, Kansas
becoming fact. The governments of Britain, West Germany and, obviously, the
United States, are wedded to that doctrine.

The people who have plainly gained most from the film, whether or not its
makers had this in mind doesn’t matter, are the marching members in this
country, as in so many other countries, of what is called the peace movement.
And I think it has to be said that the peace movement has acquired and exploits
a great and unfair advantage by so calling itself.

It suggests many of its members actually assert that it alone has a monopoly on
compassion, on a humane imagination, on the longing for peace as if peace was
something positive, and identifiable like Buddhism or roast beef that you can
choose to like or dislike.

I am quite sure that Mr Reagan and Mrs Thatcher and Secretary Shultz are not
indifferent to the future of their children and grandchildren. They, too, know
that nuclear power, once discovered, will not go away, and that its use in war
is certain to doom the planet. The same must be true of Mr Andropov and his
colleagues.

What none of us, of any contesting group, seems able to think through is some
way of introducing the notion of mutual trust to the superpowers. He or she
would be a blessing to the human race. Who could do this, who could discover
and empower, at the centre of the Soviet and America governments, a nucleus of
sane men, willing to begin again, to scrap the arsenals of overkill and achieve
that minimum and equal deterrent force that would still make a nuclear war not
feasible and unwinnable?

The second cloud that hangs over this year’s Thanksgiving is, however, one that
has a fringe of a silver lining. The cloud itself was also manufactured by the
media. It’s the immense billowing cumulus of words and pictures and films and
discussions that have been given over this week to the memory of John F
Kennedy.

It is, as everybody knows, the 20th anniversary of his murder in Dallas. No
such memorial outpouring marked the 10th or the 15th anniversaries, but
somehow, every magazine and newspaper and television network in a score of
countries felt obliged this time to make, as Kennedy himself would have said,
to make a judgement, of the Kennedy presidency.

Now when, in January 1982, the 100th anniversary of the birth of President
Franklin Roosevelt was coming up, the celebration of this mighty man and what
his presidency had done to this country, and to the world, happened almost as
an afterthought. One television network prepared a documentary. The White House
remembered the date only two weeks before and hastily arranged a small lunch
for living colleagues and old reporters of President Roosevelt.

Yet 100 or more American historians have just published a commentary verdict on
the historical standing of all the American presidents; they put Franklin
Roosevelt with only two others, with Lincoln and with Washington, as one of the
three greatest. Kennedy is rated as thirteenth among a group called "Just above
average".

I can only conclude that the circumstances of Kennedy’s death, the lurid
melodrama of it as preserved in film and photographic libraries, was too
tempting for the networks and the magazines not to unload.

Also, there is the emotional fact that in this time of great anxiety, the myth
of Kennedy as a young, gallant and blithe leader, presiding confidently over a
superpower, not yet suspect in the western world, has lead us willingly into a
bath of nostalgia.

There are, however, two things Kennedy did which it was right to remind us of
this weekend. One was the peace corps, the dispatch of wiling and unpaid young
Americans to help the poor and the disposed in many parts of the world. The
other was his handling of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis. I think this is a good
time to recall that the man who made the wise, the fatefully liberating, move
at the height of that crisis was Kennedy’s brother, Bobby.

He was the one who, on that wracking weekend, urged the president to ignore an
inflammatory letter from Khrushchev and answer a second, a reasonable letter.
And the peace corps was the invention, passed on to President Kennedy, of a
Wisconsin congressman named Henry Reuss.

It does not, I think in any way, slight the good memory of John F Kennedy to
remember too, this weekend, the names of Bobby Kennedy and Henry Reuss.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP