A Nation Of Hair Stylists - 13 January 1995

By now we've heard the last of the prophets and pundits who at the end of every
year are under an obligation to their editors, I suppose, to do a thoughtful
review of the year and, what's worse, to draw morals from it and begin to
prophesy. One columnist I greatly admire, had the gall to make a list of 15
predictions – like the good news for freedom in the world will be … and
challenging Clinton for the Democratic nomination will be ….

He offers anywhere between three and eight answers to each question, on the
American multi-choice system, and then in the small print at the bottom dares
to make his own choices. He urges us to have a go in order to, as he puts it,
hone our humility and stretch our imaginations. What he's offering you is 60
answers to 15 questions and by next January, of course, we won't remember any
of them, except perhaps the two I'm going to quote, and then we'll see. The
good news for freedom will be the collapse, or fade-out as he puts it, of Fidel
Castro, he says. Who will challenge President Clinton's second run? Sam Nunn,
Chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, a space-age wallah and always
a Southern moderate.

There was a time when I myself kept up this quaint annual ritual but I went out
of the prophecy business in a hurry after those three unforgettable days in
August 1991 when Gorbachev was arrested, the old gang took over for an hour or
two, then Yeltsin stood on a tank and the soldiers refused to fire on the
cheering people and a day and a night later, communism, that long-promised and
monotonously pounding wave of the future, broke and vanished.

I looked through at the time, a small library of the books we'd been brought up
on, from the late 1920s on. The Kremlinologists – the Soviet experts – the
good, the bad, the very good, the terribly distinguished. The last chapter of
all such histories, studies, always carried a prediction of how things would
come out or progress in the Soviet Union. Much of this writing was learned and
fascinating and enlightening but not one of them even let the thought steal
across his mind that perhaps in the '40s, '50s, '80s, the '90s, there was a
remote chance that the 70-year-old system would totally collapse. Their huge,
thoughtful writings were suddenly irrelevant.

Now, however, a very distinguished historian, a Soviet expert himself, has just
come out with a piece which alone among his kind, amounts to a confessional.
All the scholars, he believes, were wrong. Was there anyone of importance who
was right? He writhes to have to say it but he says, yes, the man who was right
for the last 15 years or so, was dismissed by scholars, historians, by most
Western politicians, Nato statesmen and generals, dismissed as an ignoramus or
a super-patriot, driven by an obsessive anti-communism. This man, whom Dr Pipes
calls, on the contrary no scholar, but a man of great discernment and
instinctive judgement, this man said that the Soviet Union, for all its
elaborate theories and its power and bluster, was a weak superpower, riding a
tiger, because its power "rested on police terror at home and nuclear blackmail
abroad." As early as May 1981, the man said, the West will not contain
communism, it will transcend communism. The communist experiment itself is a
sad, bizarre chapter in human history, whose last pages are even now being
written. That was 14 years ago.

Well, you'll have guessed by now, I hope, who his ranting innocent was. It was
Ronald Reagan, who was scolded by practically everybody except the hysterical
right, when he characterised the Soviet Union as an evil empire. He truly
believed it and 11 years later his belief was echoed in a speech to the United
States Congress. This was the key passage: "The world can sigh in relief. The
idol of communism, which spread everywhere social strife, animosity and
unparalleled brutality, which instilled fear in all humanity, has collapsed."
The speaker was Boris Yeltsin.

And still nobody I've heard or read can tell us why it collapsed. Mr Reagan of
course was a naïf, an ideologue, also an idealist and a Boy Scout. He was
saying it collapsed because it was evil. As far as I ever got was wondering,
about five, six years ago, what would happen if the KGB ever got cold feet or
for some reason got out of line. A thought that occurred to me after an
argument, a moderately hot discussion with a double-domed scholar, who would
not concede for a minute that the Soviet Union was held together by one force,
by the same threat that held Nazi Germany together – the threat of the midnight
knock on the door. The fact of the existence of a secret police that was
everywhere and was absolutely, dependably brutal.

Anyway, after those three days in August '91, I've not predicted anything and,
looking back over 1994, I don't even feel inclined to recall the big stories,
the serious issues. For some reason, they simply do not take the imagination.
When I look back, I remember one or two stories I never reported at the time
but I think of 1994 and they stand out among all the big stories, the bad, the
wonderful and the bizarre. A lady, the heroine of 1994, if only for having the
chutzpah to sue a great corporation and win. She bought a cup of coffee at
McDonald's, a plastic cup, got in her car and wedged the coffee cup between her
legs. The car moved off, the coffee was hot, it spilled, she burned, it burned
her leg. She sued, she got a jury trial and the jury awarded her $2.9 million.

When I think of the next memory, I realise that the odd anecdotes that attach
themselves to me anyway, usually have something to do with a citizen asserting
some right or other, even when that right has not before now been known to
exist, either in or out of the American Constitution. Remember the man in
Massachusetts, I believe, who had some drinks, left a bar feeling no pain, got
in his car, drove off and crashed into a tree. He sued the restaurant, well the
bartender really, the restaurant as accessory, for serving him one drink too
many. He won, too.

My 1994 favourite of a man denied his constitutional rights was a convict in
the state of Colorado. He protested to the guards and eventually got through to
the warden, that he was a member of a certain religious faction, a Satanist,
and he was forced to deny his religion in effect, by having to dress like
everybody else. The case came before a judge. He ruled that the man had been
denied his rights under, of course as always, the First Amendment to the Bill
of Rights, which says that not only shall Congress make no law respecting an
establishment of religion, but it may not prohibit the free exercise thereof.
Well the man said he couldn't freely practice his religion unless he had the
required symbols, the articles of his faith. The judge therefore ruled that he
must be provided with one black robe, a gong and a supply of incense.

I've not heard of anything so far this year, that can touch that, though there
are always good stories available in the world's most engrossing bed book, a
great volume with the score, the figures on everything, everything you've never
thought of – The Statistical Abstract of the United States. Of course, a
government publication and when I say in this context, a good story, I mean the
sort of story foreign correspondents ought always to be on the lookout for,
what you might call corrective stories, ones that correct a common
preconception. Such as … at election times most reporters by now, collect,
certainly pay attention to, the opinion polls that are taken, of a place,
particular social type, middle class, working people, the rich. In fact, I
suppose there's a generation, maybe two generations of reporters alive today
who can't remember a time when there were no such things – which was any time
before 1936 – and long after that time, you were expected to feel the pulse of
the public, as they said, by getting out on your legs, in your car, trains,
buses and doing your own poll, questioning every sort of person you came across
and calling it a cross section of America. Pretty naïve stuff. What the doctors
call anecdotal evidence, about as scientific as calling up your aunts and
cousins and publishing them as the voice of the people.

But now we can know fairly accurately how the office worker vote's likely to
go, how small businessmen, how people between 20 and 35 and so on. But even
then we tend still to choose the categories ahead of time, like how will the
steel workers' vote go? The steel workers' vote, we always noted as likely to
swing the industrial parts of the Midwest but one day a friend of mine with an
equal passion for the statistical sample, called me and said with fake
solemnity, never mind the steel workers' vote, I want to know how the
hairdressers' vote's going to go. The what? Look in the Abstract, he said. I
did. There was a whole species of human being that might well form, well, as
much of a voting block as the organised steel workers. I discovered there are
three times as many hair stylists, so called, in the United States as steel
workers.

It's too early in the new year to make a social political discovery as hair
raising, sorry, as that one, but there came out last week the results of a
nationwide survey that produced as bizarre and enlightening a result. You know
there's been recently a fearful to-do about deaths on commuter planes, those
are the smaller, propeller planes, thousands of them, that link small cities to
the main ones the jets fly from. Well, recently one airline has had the bad
luck, and it can be nothing else, to lose three commuter planes, which fired up
a big congressional hearing on air safety. One of the side effects, little
noticed, not long remembered, is one I shall leave you to ponder on. There are
fewer casualties, fewer deaths in the United States from commuter plane
accidents than from animal-drawn vehicles.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP