Electoral debates past and present - 9 October 1992

I have manfully kept my, oh dear – I was told by a very sincere young lady that
I must never use that word "manfully". Not because it's old-fashioned but
because it's macho. Male chauvinist, piggy. Sorry. I have faithfully kept my
promise to talk as little as possible about the presidential election until we
got into the home stretch. We are now in the home stretch. The election is
three weeks on Tuesday and it's in the first of those weeks, beginning this
Sunday, that we're going to get our fill of the campaigning. There are to be,
within eight days and nights, four debates between the principals – three
presidential with Mr Bush, Mr Clinton and Mr Perot up there, one
vice-presidential debate with vice-president Quayle and Senator Gore going at
each other.

Let me say something about the idea of debates and what each party has to hope
and fear from them. It's quite a new idea and was provoked, as many other
things in public life are, by the arrival of television. In 1960, somebody
recalled the most famous debates in American history, way back there in 1858,
when a candidate for the United States Senate, one Abraham Lincoln, challenged
his opponent, an incumbent, Senator Stephen Douglas of Illinois. They had
debated together twice, when Senator Douglas proposed seven more jousts in
various cities around the state. Now to jog around Illinois, jog is quite the
wrong word. Travel was pretty slow in those days and Illinois is about the size
of Scotland and the whole of Ireland combined. It would take three months to
wind up the debates.

They agreed on a format: opening speech each one hour, each have an hour and a
half to reply, rebuttal by the first speaker, half an hour. So each time,
before audiences of on average 10,000, there would be five and a half hours of
speechifying. In those days, why I don't know, all speeches, same in the House
of Commons, went on and on and on. Five years later, on the battlefield of
Gettysburg, the principal speaker, a famous Yankee statesman and orator, spoke
for just over two hours. President Lincoln followed with a very little noticed
address of just over two minutes.

Well, in the election of 1858 for the Senate, remember, Lincoln topped Douglas
in the popular vote by about 4,000 in a quarter of a million but he didn't get
to the Senate. In those days, can you imagine, United States senators were not
chosen by the voters but by the state legislatures. When the Illinois
legislature balloted, 54 Democrats voted for Douglas, 46 of the newly-formed
Republican party for Lincoln. But the debates, both to the people who heard
them and the many more people who read them, made Lincoln a formidable
presidential candidate and two years later, in 1860, he was in the White House.

In 1960 we saw the first presidential television debate. There were four
debates in all, a chairman or moderator, a panel of reporters put 10 questions
and the principals, standing apart, each at a schoolmaster's desk. Times had
changed, they were to have opening statements of only eight minutes each and
rebuttals of two minutes. Senator John Kennedy on the left of your screen, Vice
President Richard Nixon on the right. Ready, set, go. The four debates took a
month and were, of course, all in television studios, the first in Chicago.
Both sides hoped for an audience of several millions.

In the result, the first debate drew 65 million people. It staggered the
politicians, the participants and the people. Some, the Democrats particularly,
came to believe that the election was won on that first debate. Not because of
anything either man said, by election day I doubt one voter in 10 could have
told you what the debated topics were. What remained in the memory were the
very sharply different images, literally, of the two. Kennedy, who on the road
had often been nervous, touching his tie, splaying his flat hand against the
air clumsily, that night he was blissfully confident, young and handsome and
people said, boy this young fella has done his homework. By contrast. Nixon was
strangely haggard, he'd been ill and in hospital and the following two weeks
had run himself ragged on the road. He'd lost five pounds in weight, he had not
shaved. He talked at Kennedy, Kennedy talked to the listening millions.

To put it in a vivid, exaggerated form, Kennedy looked like an amazingly
well-informed choirboy, Nixon looked like Dracula. Never mind that Kennedy won
the election by an eyelash, 110 thousand votes in 60 million and there was
undeniable evidence of hanky-panky with the votes in West Virginia and
Illinois, the recollection of that first debate is indelible and every
Presidential year there's an outcry, not always heard by the incumbent, for
more Presidential debates. In two of the most famous subsequent debates, one
was lost, by President Ford, because of an incredible blunder. I can still see
him proclaiming as a fact we should not forget, that Poland was an independent
country, not under the domination of the Soviet Union. Afterwards his aides had
to explain that, of course he'd meant to say Poland was under the domination.
Another unforgettable debate was Jimmy Carter, President Carter, versus the
hopeful Ronald Reagan, won by Reagan's mock sadness at every repeated assertion
of President Carter. Reagan would shake his head and sigh and say, there he
goes again. Brought the house down.

This time it was Governor Clinton who proposed debates and president Bush for
the longest time, and on the advice of his chief of staff, former Secretary of
State, Mr Baker, simply ignored the call. Clinton wanted the two men to have
simply one moderator, no questioning reporters. It gave Bush the chance to say,
terrible format, forget the whole thing. Clinton suggested Mr Bush didn't dare
to debate and behold, wherever President Bush appeared at rallies, there was a
flock of chickens, Clinton folk, dressed up in chicken feathers. Mr Bush took
about 10 days of this and, with the chicken chorus rising in the press, he gave
in.

Re-enter, to the pain of almost everybody looking on, Mr Ross Perot. He's on
the ballot in all 30 states and is therefore, whether he had declared or not, a
Presidential candidate. He knows he can't possibly win and swears he didn't
come back as a spoiler, but that's what he can't help being. By having his name
up there, he tempts disgruntled or wobbly people to click the lever against his
name and so take the votes away from either Governor Clinton or President Bush,
in this state or that. The arithmetic of all the possible defections, which
state Perot hurts Clinton, which state Bush, is already an occult specialty we
won't go into now.

You'll notice I haven't talked abut the one subject on which all well-informed
people are supposed to decide their vote, the issues. I've hinted that
character or the perception of character may matter more and every day either
the President or Governor Clinton thinks up a new charge about the other, a new
wrinkle of doubt and Mr Bush especially is often so busy scorning Governor
Clinton's plans that he forgets to tell us his own because, the Clinton people
say, he hasn't any. I must say, so far the campaign has been conducted on both
sides with a painfully high muzzle velocity of schoolboy taunting. But the one
issue that all parties and all polls agree on has been paramount, is going to
be the deciding issue, is the parlous state of the economy which is flowering
at the rate of a century plant, a sluggishness not matched since the Second
World War.

And plainly President Bush, being the incumbent, is the one who gets the blame.
Americans are ruthless about this. If a football team loses five games in a
row, few people say, we ought to have a better linebacker or a better defence
or so and so's woefully off form, the cry goes up, fire the coach. Governor
Clinton is at present the beneficiary of this tradition and all the polls put
him somewhere between 8 and 12 points ahead, which is very handsome, but oddly
the Clinton people are more than a little scared. What they fear most, as I
talk, is what has been dubbed an October surprise. Some horrendous charge
dragged up by the Bush people that cannot be denied and that would ditch
Governor Clinton. This may be only a nasty death wish on the part of the media,
who throve most lustily on scandal. So far it hasn't happened and what
everybody's saying now is, the debates will settle it. Most of the serious
press and the pollsters and pundits are refining this hunch to say that the
debates will offer the president his last chance to pull even, that they will
make or break him.

What has been called the Second Coming of Mr Perot offers many irritations for
the other two candidates. He could trivialise the debates or defuse them like a
bad referee in a fencing match, who constantly intrudes his own foil and keeps
calling foul. It's an amazing thing that he's in there at all. The last
substantial third party independent candidate didn't appear with Reagan and
Carter. Both camps, on second thoughts believe they blundered in letting Perot
in but, on third thought, they recoiled before the likeliest consequence, Perot
beating his breast and claiming that democracy had been flouted, fairness
traduced, all those millions out there who yearn for him denied access.

If there is one good thing about Mr Perot's intervention, it is that the nub of
his message, the big plank in his platform is the deficit. The other two
mention it in passing and, frankly, the economic plans of both of them
anticipate increasing the deficit till the economy shows signs of health. Perot
may make them face the nasty elementary fact that, as in Mr Micawber's picture
of a bankrupt, we spend much more than we earn. The most surprising truth
brought up about him is that over 80% of his own disciples, his former
worshippers, wish he hadn't come back and only one in 10 is sure of staying
with him. We shall see, By this time next week, all, as Churchill used to say,
will be made plain. Or not.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP