Remembering FDR - 14 April 1995

It was the end of a barmy April afternoon in New York just 50 years ago, when
the BBC's Washington correspondent, a tall leggy man with thick glasses and a
genial almost oriental smile, was packing his typewriter and getting ready to
go home to Washington for the weekend.

I too was packing up and had phoned home to say, "Here I come," when the news
ticker at the end of the corridor let off four bells, a sound rare enough to
send Wiggin darting from the room. One bell was the signal for any news item,
two for something rather special, three for a bulletin and four for what was
known as a flash. The only other time I remember hearing a four bell flash,
when I was sitting in my office waiting for it in the middle of the night, was
in the first week of June the year before, 1944, waiting for the word of the
invasion of Europe.

This time none of us could have possibly guessed what rated a flash. Tony
Wiggin practically in shock appeared at my door and waved at me a strip of the
United Press wire ticker tape he'd ripped off – I have it still – it had
evidently been typed by a man shaken with emotion, for the first line stumbled
and said simply: "Flash, warm Georgia FDR Dad following by till this." It then
chattered down to the next open line and tried again: "Warm Springs Georgia FDR
dead." By then the man had composed himself and there followed the first of
many almost processional despatches: "This afternoon in warm springs Georgia,
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, 32nd President of the United States, died suddenly
of a cerebral haemorrhage, his last words were, 'I have a terrific headache'".

First thing was to get in a call to London – you did not for many more years to
come raise a finger and dial, you filed your call for a line and you waited –
and when London came on they told us to set up a special circuit from a relay
station at the end of Long Island – they were all radio circuits in those days
– and it was a matter of luck whether you came over intelligibly, though
waveringly at best, or like this: (distorted sound).

We got a circuit for an hour later, it must have been say, for 6 p.m. our time.
Tony Wiggin unpacked his machine and started clacking away, a brief fast
biography of Roosevelt. I took off for the streets. The BBC offices and studio
then, and for 50 more years, were bang in the middle of the handsomest pile of
modern architecture still in New York City, the towering Rockefeller Centre
project with its lofty skyscrapers and their breaking setbacks surrounding the
bronze fountain and the sunken ice rink, so there couldn't be a spot in New
York more likely to have a surer mixture of home folks and tourists.

I was down, I was 31 storeys in a flash without benefit of notebook paper – I
simply forgot – and unceremoniously stopped people and said, "Have you heard?"
I suppose in a Hollywood movie of this incident we should see beautiful women
streaming with tears and strong men blowing their noses. In life it's never
what you expect. Of the dozen or more people I stopped, half of them looked at
me dumbly in the certainty that I was crazed. One or two pushed their
companions on as you would do with an embarrassing beggar, but at least four
others resented me, one man saying spontaneously, "Better watch your language
son," and a young angry woman blurting out "Are you ashamed or what?" till I
convinced her, then she apologised and quite simply broke into tears.

By the time I was back to our office, of course the word had spread everywhere
and I had the eerie sensation of looking down on the channel that leads to the
skating rink and the adjoining sidewalks and seeing the people way down there –
a scatter of ants running and stopping and forming small groups and breaking
away and stopping other ants. The last piece I wrote and broadcast that evening
was not for BBC, but in response to a request from the Columbia Broadcasting
System and they, like the other two radio networks had abandoned their usual
programmes and spent the evening on the life and times of Franklin Roosevelt.

What I remember most about that short talk as I was walking over to the C.B.S.
studios, was to wonder how the Republicans must feel, especially those old
Republican stalwarts, whose disillusion with Franklin Roosevelt had set in
after his first year in the White House and who had loathed him steadily for 11
long years as a traitor to his class, a fellow traveller, an opportunist hell
bent for the destruction of free and unregulated enterprise. They had ached for
the end of his first term and expected to put a fine old American type a rural
Midwestern governor in his place, but in 1936, Roosevelt buried Governor Landon
of Kansas. I remember learning that year, a useful maxim about American
presidential elections. For many years it seemed the rock-bound Yankee state of
Maine, way up there on the far northeast coast had uncannily set the political
fate of the country by always voting for the man who would win in November.
Since Maine was a small lightly populated state, its returns came in early and
conventional wisdom came to say: "As Maine goes so goes the nation".

Well in 1936, the Republican candidate Governor Landon took two states only,
Roosevelt 46. Landon took Maine and its country neighbour Vermont and
Roosevelt's campaign manager – I should think one of the few in history to coin
a famous witticism – amended the famous maxim: "As Maine goes he said so goes
Vermont." Four years later, Roosevelt further enraged the Republicans by doing
something no president had ever done before and George Washington had declared
no president ought to do, run for a third term. The Republicans confidently
predicted if Roosevelt was re-elected, it would mark the end of American
democracy and the birth of a dictatorial dynasty. I myself knew several
Republicans, fathers of friends I'd made, a INAUD who announced that if
Roosevelt went back into the White House in 1937, they would immediately
emigrate to New Zealand.

Well, Roosevelt explained with moving sincerity over the radio, that he yearned
to retire to his country home up the Hudson River, how he yearned to lay down
the burdens of his exhausting office, but he felt he had a duty he could not
shirk etc. etc. chimed the Republicans, so he won again.

Four years later, 1944, in the high summer, he again appalled the Republicans –
none of whom by the way had yet emigrated to New Zealand – and amazed many of
his own party by consenting, as he put it, to run for a fourth term. He did
this in a typically artful Rooseveltian way. He got the chairman of the
Democratic National Committee, the party chairman, to write to him to give him
the news that a majority of the delegates to the Democratic convention – which
was about to meet in Chicago – were intending to renominate Franklin Roosevelt.
Surprise, surprise.

The President wrote back to the chairman and the letter was published in a
masterpiece of political rationale. He wrote: "I feel I owe to you in candour a
simple statement of my position. Everyone of our sons serving in this war has
officers who have superior officers. The president is the commander in chief
and he too has his superior officer, the people of the United States. I would
accept your nomination and serve but I will not run in the usual partisan
political sense. However, if the people command me to continue in this office
and in this war, I have as little right to withdraw as the soldier has to leave
his post in the line." In other words, not to run for a fourth term would be a
form of desertion in wartime. The splendid cunning of the man, the hypocrite of
the century one Republican newspaper called him and he won yet again.

The Republicans revenge was limp and too late. When Roosevelt had been dead and
gone only two years, the Congress, a heavily Republican Congress passed an
amendment to the Constitution, which was ratified four years later. It says:
"No person shall be elected to the office of the President more than twice".

To turn the knife in the wound of the Republicans misery, was the fact that in
the late fall of 1944, Roosevelt was pretty certain to win again. The allied
armies were beginning to close the Rhine and push back the Nazi forces west of
the river; the invasion of Germany was not far off. In the Pacific, the United
States had recaptured naval superiority in a naval battlefield that covered a
third of the globe. American soldiers and marines had kept MacArthur's two year
promise and returned to the Philippines. The smell of victory was everywhere
and Roosevelt's stress on running, not, goodness, as a politician but as the
commander in chief of all the armed forces, sworn to stay at his post, gave him
a handsome electoral majority over the lacklustre Republican of 432 to 99.

As I went up to that CBS microphone on the evening of Thursday the 12th of
April 1945, there was very little to say to Americans that they didn't already
know. The simple tremendous truth they all knew was that he had led them with
frightening courage out of a depression that could have turned in a night and a
day into a revolution and he'd led them willingly to the verge of victory in
the Second World War. But I kept thinking about those poor Republicans
indignant and uncomforted for 13 interminable years, so I ended the talk by
saying simply: "Until today, the Republicans feared he was immortal, now they
know he is".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP