Oliver North’s diminished popularity - 2 October 1987

A couple of young people I know up in Boston – well, young, they’re in their
30s – they’ve just got married.

Of course they’ve been living together for several years, but they found the
uncertainty of an alliance that might be broken next week or next year too much
to bear. They have settled for the comparative serenity of committing
themselves to a contract and they are so dizzy with relief that they talk as if
marriage had just been invented

Since I won’t get to see them for a month or more to hand over in person their
wedding present, whatever it’s going to be, I mooched around my neighbourhood
looking for some little token gift to send off to them now. I found it in a toy
and novelty shop, the sort of place that crams into the window fuzzy bears and
clockwork dogs, masks of Dracula – Halloween is only a month away – and is
stacked with greeting cards wishing you a happy birthday, quick recovery, a
bouncing baby.

I found just the thing tucked in among the cards. It was a little plastic
packet of shredded newsprint, strips of torn news reports clipped to a card
which had at the top the legend “From the desk of Lieutenant Colonel Olly”.
Below it was a small photograph of Colonel North and stamped in scarlet the
words “Top Secret” and across the card was the big title “Contrafetti”. Get it?

The girl behind the counter said, “I thought nobody would ever come and buy
it.” She’d ordered a dozen two months ago, sold 11 at once but this relic of
the order had sat there in the window unbought, unclaimed.

Now it strikes me that there might possibly be some listeners who don’t know
what I’m talking about. Well, it’s hard to believe now but it’s been barely
three months since an unknown, handsome, firm-jawed, bemedalled marine colonel,
bright as a puppy, sat at a table facing 26 members of the Senate and the
House, a joint select committee formed to investigate the Iran-Contra
shenanigans and he began, “I came here to tell you the truth, the good, the
bad, and the ugly”, a hypnotic beginning, never mind that it struck an echo in
some of us and took us a day or two to recall that it came from a Clint
Eastwood movie.

We’ve grown accustomed to that sort of inspired, stolen one-liner. A dozen or
more of President Reagan’s best exit lines have been traced – but only after
they enchanted his audience – to his favourite movies, of which he has on tap
an impressive mental file. The President can recall good movie punchlines the
way Churchill could recall single lines from Shakespeare or Macaulay.

Well you will surely recall that not long after Colonel North started to
testify, the country – and that was meant to be his audience as much as the
committee – the country discovered a marine colonel with an astonishing gift of
the gab, culminating every now and then in ringing vows to obey any order his
commander in chief ever gave him – the president, that is.

The chronic contradiction in his eloquent testimony which a handful of senators
and congressmen got across to him very sharply but without much obvious effect
was that any oath of office he’d take, either as a civilian or as a member of
the armed forces, was not, is never, to the president but to the Constitution
which the president himself – every president swears in the moment of his
inauguration – to uphold and defend.

Most of you will now recall the popular storm of idolatry or revulsion that
swirled around Colonel North. The idolatry movement was never more than a small
whirlwind around him that turned his head. Even while he was still on the stand
there were some many funny and savage cartoons done by the present young and
greatly gifted generation of American cartoonists, by MacNelly, Oliphant,
Conrad, Borgman.

Two of these young men, MacNelly and Oliphant, are syndicated in Europe and I
was pleased to see that an English newspaper I greatly respect carried one or
two of them so that the English anyway would not be fooled into thinking that
Olly North’s small army of disciples constituted the voting population of the
United States.

So imagine my distaste, to put it mildly, when I read in that greatly-respected
paper, practically bang up against a pungent cartoon, a wailing lamentation
from its Washington correspondent about the gullibility, the waywardness, the
incurable sentimentality of quote “the American people” unquote.

This man began by making his own judgement of Colonel North, a very widespread
judgement, quite early on though the man delivered it as if he were a lonely
hero, like Churchill defying the House of Commons before and after Munich.
Colonel North, he wrote, was a dangerous zealot, an ostentatious patriot who
had lied to Congress, broken loose through the chain of command and was
conducting his own foreign policy in Iran and Nicaragua on the brash assumption
that the president would surely have approved.

All right, nothing spectacular or original about that view, but the
correspondent ended on a note of pity and alarm for the American people.
“Nowhere in America,” he wrote “is there a sign of these misgivings”. This
foolish conclusion was drawn from the fact that Colonel North, during the days
of his testimony had received – how many was it? 50? 100? – say a hundred
thousand letters of praise and prayer. That left, by the way, only 240 million
Americans who didn’t write to him.

That dispatch from Washington which annoyed me greatly at the time prompted me
to do a talk in which I traced the swift upward and downward trajectory across
the graph of American hero worship of another soldier who got above himself,
General Douglas MacArthur, who after being fired by President Truman in 1951
for going beyond his orders as the United Nations Commander in Korea swept
around the country making soaring speeches that also mobilised millions this
time of disciples. He would run for president. He did. At the Republican
convention I reported he got four votes against Senator Taft’s 280 and
Eisenhower’s 845 and the moral I drew was that a year is an age in the lifetime
of an overnight hero.

Still, I fully expected then, way back there in July, that Colonel North would
have a wobbly but scary run. "North for President" headquarters would sprout
around the country. There would be rallies and, as the year petered out, so
perhaps would Olly Mania. I was wrong. Within two months exactly of the
colonel’s first appearance on the stand he was dead, not only as a political
prospect and as a popular hero but worse, as a marketable commodity, a cruelly
swift collapse not anticipated by various entrepreneurs who rushed, in July, to
cash in on this ripple of popularity which my Washington correspondent saw as a
tidal wave sweeping the entire United States and hurling young Olly maybe into
the White House.

In no time there were Oliver North T-shirts on display, buttons, bumper
stickers, a book reprinting his entire Congressional testimony, most
ambitiously a 90-minute video cassette actually showing him at it, defying the
Committee. Over 100,000 of these cassettes were manufactured. The manufacturer
reported last month very disappointing sales in New York, Washington, the south
and he groaned, “It is bombing royally in the midwest”.

I hasten to remind you that when Britons picked up the verb “to bomb” from this
country – for decades it’s been a regular headline in the show business
magazine Variety – they got it the wrong way round. In America it means to flop
in a deafening fashion, to bomb.

Well, the book of North’s testimony, three quarters of a million printed, has
sold less than 300,000. Of the 100,000 video cassettes, the maker hopes in time
to sell a half of them. A San Francisco businessman got busy in July
manufacturing over half a million 12-inch Olly dolls. He’s a shrewd business
consultant and he anticipated selling 450,000 of them. He has had orders for
200. Not 200,000 – 200.

Other smart entrepreneurs are also looking at much red ink and one at least is
consulting the bankruptcy laws, but there is one publication which has sold way
beyond its publishers' expectations. The man who thought of it crowed the other
day, “We’ve sold ten times what we expected to sell”. It’s a colouring book for
children or for adults facetiously inclined. It’s a satire on the hearings, a
joke book, whose joker hero is none other than Colonel North.

The publisher was a little nervous at first but he has sold 200,000 and expects
to reap a fat profit from sales of about half a million. Some people, he
admitted had written, early on, angry letters. They didn’t like us poking fun
at Olly, but he says, “I guess you can’t please all the people all the time”.

Well, to jump from much ado about Olly to alas poor Pat, I knew her well. I’m
sorry indeed to have to add a postscript and a sort of obituary on the career
of one presidential prospect who had stirred a good many of us, Mrs Pat
Schroeder, whom I talked about a month ago.

This gutsy, funny, no-nonsense Congresswoman who sounded as if she were going
to knock all the stuffiness and pomposity out of the running candidates, she
withdrew the other day for reasons both sad and honourable.

She had the problem from the start of being seen as the women’s candidate for
president instead of as a woman running for president. Also, she felt
frustrated by the system which has you going before cheering crowds of voters
but then learning that in that district some other candidate has already locked
up the delegates to the convention.

But in the main what decided her was the public exposure, the publicity that as
she said turned every human contact into a photo-opportunity and there was the
insoluble problem of security, of being shadowed everywhere by secret service
agents.

“I could not bear” she said “to be separated from the people I serve by people
who are well-meaning but are trying to protect me. I would shrivel.”

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP