President Bush and Winston Churchill - 6 September 1991

By now, I should think that just about every correspondent, every commentator
on American affairs has picked up the theme that President Bush, considered as
a politician, is the luckiest president to come along in some time. For the
past eight months or so his opponents, the Democrats, have been about to mount
a great campaign about the growing turmoil of American life: the banking and
building society scandals, the shambles of the cities under the assault of
crime and drugs, the really dreadful prospect for the next generation of
American professionals that opens up from the latest survey of American
schoolchildren and college graduates – in one national test 80 per cent of high
school graduates could not read an instruction sheet or compose a sentence with
more than one subsidiary clause, they were mercilessly dubbed as functionally
illiterate. Homelessness, and so on and so on.

Neither the Democrats nor any other party, needs to invent disturbing issues on
which to contest the next election. But just when, as in January, the Congress
assembles to begin its new session and the Democrats hold meetings to map out
their big 1992 campaign against the forces of President Bush, Saddam Hussein
appears on the horizon thumbing his nose and President Bush turns into general
Bush, the commander in chief of the armed forces. He manages to do something no
president has done in the 45 years of the United Nations' existence: to get
through the Security Council a unanimous resolution sanctioning military action
against an aggressor. And then into battle, and the whirlwind left hook or
football feint of General Norman Schwarzkopf, and in the din of the halleluiahs
the president, commander Bush, goes soaring up to an unreal 78 per cent
approval in the polls. And the Democrats, even those who voted against war and
in favour of United Nations' sanctions alone, they have to stand on the edge of
the cheering crowd clapping too. It was no time to say Mr Bush had been wrong
or sanctions would have done it. They are, by the way, still not doing it.

So the spring arrives, and the telly and the papers begin to resound with more
outrageous details about the savings and loan, the thrifts' scam. Two, three
Democrats announce they're running for president, and the party begins its
summer chant: George Bush may be very smart at foreign policy but what about
the shame of the homeland? Their well-rehearsed indignation is seen to be
justified by the enormous scandal of the Bank of Credit and Commerce
International, but that turns out to be a very accomplished international fraud
cheating 61 countries.

In this country, the only big public figure whose stature was diminished was a
man who did not know that the BCCI had run his bank, the bank of which he was
president, for eight or nine years. He would have been a fine Republican for
the Democrats to pick on. Unfortunately he was not only a Democrat but a
towering figure of a Democrat, intimate of and wise advisor to Truman and
Johnson, the Democrats' elder statesman in fact, so BCCI didn't give the
Democrats any ammunition at all.

By now Congress was off on its summer holiday and nobody in the Democratic
Party seemed alarmed that the national election was only 15 months away and
they hadn't a serious candidate in sight. By the way, those first two
candidates changed their minds and retired. Comes the middle of August, the
news magazines start, or continue to step up the pace and the size of their
articles on the cities. An old manufacturing city in Connecticut announces that
it's going to file for bankruptcy. And the mayor of Chicago, the great second
city of America, the mayor of Chicago, no less, surmises half seriously that
perhaps for all the cities bankruptcy is the best way to go. The national
chairman of the Democrats at this point was surely rubbing his hands.

Two other Democrats hint they are about to come out into the open and into the
fray. But they duck back very rapidly and the Democrats recoil in despair, when
they wake up on that famous morning of Monday 19th August: Mikhail Gorbachev is
under house arrest and the coup and the dictatorship, that the former foreign
secretary, Eduard Shevardnadze had warned about, seemed to have arrived. On
that day and for many many days thereafter, I don't suppose there was a
Democrat senator, congressman, governor or mayor who would have dared utter a
peep in criticism of Mr Bush.

Once again, any inclination he had to turn to what they interminably call "the
domestic agenda" was cancelled at once by yet another foreign crisis. But this
one could be described by even the most temperate onlooker as an unprecedented
crisis in world history. And once again it's agreed all round that President
Bush acted with quite extraordinary care, knowledge and alertness, and never
has to have advisors or press secretaries – as always with President Reagan –
rushing on stage after a press conference or an impromptu speech to explain,
that the president didn't really mean what he said, might actually have meant
the opposite.

To make a rather large comparison, I mean a comparison with a very large
figure, Mr Bush enjoys foreign affairs and world crises every bit as much as
Winston Churchill did. And he is similarly bored, not bored but unexcited by
the domestic front. But the belief that he's no good on domestic affairs and
that the republic is likely to go to pot if he stays in the White House, though
it's the Democrats big line, it is not widespread. Here again the polls are
pretty disheartening to the Democrats. On the question of which party can best
take care of the domestic ills, the country's about evenly split. But if the
question is put another way: which party is likely to bring prosperity to
America? The Republicans win again. And now to wind up most political polls,
the question is put – the question with which New York's former Mayor Koch used
to greet the dawn and all passing strangers, "How'm I doing?" – how do you
think the president is handling his job? The answer is a thundering, very well,
from 74 per cent of the people.

So why not, the current joke goes, skip the 1992 election or save money on the
conventions by having the Democrats put up a sporting resolution and declare Mr
Bush president by acclamation.

Well this view of things has been running for too many months along the smooth
grooves of conventional wisdom. Now in the papers and magazines, various
historians and even ordinary letter writing citizens are coming up with
warnings, reminders, and historical analogies. Here are two of them. Political
thinkers say George Bush will be invincible in the next election because of his
grasp of foreign policy. The man then goes on to deplore the handful, I mean by
now say half a dozen of Democrats who declared their candidacies and have since
withdrawn. That, says the man, shows an abdication of responsibility but also a
lack of memory. He then recalls that Churchill who led the battle was defeated
by the Labour Party almost as soon as Germany was defeated. That's it.

This Churchill analogy is now being quoted almost as often as Munich was
mentioned every time the Reagan administration hesitated to bomb Libya or go
into Grenada or stop helping the Nicaraguan Contras. The fact, which is not
likely to be known to many Americans and is anyway now rather dreary to go
into, is that by the spring of 1945 there was, by no means, a general feeling
in Britain that the great warrior was going to win the national election. By
election day he'd conducted a very tired and testy campaign, warnings of the
Labour Party running a Gestapo, and whatnot.

A better and more persuasive analogy anyway for Americans is the American
election in the pit of the Depression, November 1932. By now all popular and
even unpopular histories concur in the version that with 13 million people out
of work and President Hoover bewildered and helpless in the White House,
Roosevelt was bound to win. It was not so. Roosevelt's little core of close
advisors, what he called his brains trust, just wanted him to get the
Democratic nomination in 1932 with the prospect of winning in '36. They knew
that Hoover had kept his reputation for the tremendous job he did after the
First World War in relieving famine and starvation in Europe. Moreover he had
taken several steps, for which Roosevelt later got the credit, like setting up
a federal guarantee for a person's bank deposits, like drafting a plan, later
adopted, to police the Stock Exchange and the securities business. He also
increased the taxes on the wealthy. Nobody remembers that today. Anyway, the
point is that the Roosevelt campaign managers thoroughly expected Hoover to
follow the example of all incumbents and to be re-elected.

Only about a month before the election, when the Depression deepened and the
Democrats began to stress the popular name given to the shanty towns of Kansas
and tin roofs that sprouted and housed miserably, the hundreds and hundreds of
thousands of the homeless, they were known as "Hoovervilles". Only then did it
occur to the Roosevelt camp that they might win. They won. In a landslide.

My own feeling is that the theory of Mr Bush's invulnerability is too strong
and too pat. It doesn't allow for any extraordinary movement, crisis on the
home ground, the domestic front. Anyway Mr Bush is planning to go this fall, in
winter, into 30 states and talk about nothing but the sickness of the society
and the cures he's offered. A crime bill, a drug bill, an education bill which,
he will say correctly, the democratically controlled Congress rejected. It may
be shown that these were not very adequate bills.

But the bogey that haunts me and may come to petrify the present conventional
wisdom, is some huge, protesting outburst, populist riots throughout the
country, to demonstrate at last that crime, drugs, poverty, illiteracy, are not
just political issues on a list, but cancers, eating away at the daily life of
Americans.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP