Nixon and the oil crisis - 9 November 1973

Three months ago, if you travelled much around the United States and were
required to say, in the space of a telegram, what was on people's minds, you
could have done it easily at the minimum rate by writing "Watergate and the
price of beef".

Well in the past month I've gone from northern New England through the three
largest cities of the north-eastern seaboard on down through the south-west up
to the mile-high city of Denver in the Rockies out to Los Angeles and San
Francisco and the capsule report is different but just as terse – it's Nixon
and the oil shortage.

What literally concerns the people's heart and homes is the Arab, the embargo
on oil to the United States and what concerns their hearts and minds is the
question, which is now as incessant as a beating pulse, ought Mr Nixon to be
forced out of the presidency?

I'm writing this letter to you from the first cold climb that we've touched,
it's been balmy for almost everywhere, but last night we touched down on the
prairie in Minnesota, it was a night as clear as crystal – too cold for snow,
sharp midnight wind, the first snap for these hardy people. There were top
coats and windbreaks everywhere and before long they will have on their
earmuffs and be bending into 20 below zero and it'll be the same all across
this northern third of the country, a couple of thousand miles from the
Rockies, east across the frigid prairie cities and through all the Alleghenies
and on into New England right through Vermont.

Now, without oil for the home furnaces, the prospect for one-third of this
nation is at best uncomfortable. At worst, if the recently announced 25% cut in
Arab production does its damnedest, this winter or next could be literally a
perishing time for many millions.

It's simply not possible to stay alive and well if there's no fuel to stoke the
home furnaces. The lumbermen are all already on to this prospect, a young smart
man I know in northern California – and I mean up in the timber and snow
country, for while California has tropical desert in the south, 800 miles to
the north it has some very shivery mountain towns.

He thought he'd get the jump on the oil distributors by going to a lumberyard
and buying several cords of wood to store against the winter, he figured that
he "might need it" as he dramatically put it, "for survival". Normally he pays
$10, about £4 a cord. The man says "From now on sonny it's going to cost you
$90 – that's about £36 – a cord". Well he can't afford it and he begins to
wonder in a guilty way if he feels quite as strongly as he used too about the
government's policy on Israel. That of course is the nub of the American
problem.

In 1948, President Truman laid it down as an irrevocable principle of American
policy that the state of Israel was sovereign and inviolable and must remain so
and every administration since has renewed the pledge. Of the European
countries, only Holland has taken an equally firm stand and so Holland now is
feeling the pinch and has taken to its bicycles, but a bicycle is supremely
useless on the prairie.

So the nations of northern Europe will endure some anxiety, but so long as they
remain "friendly" to the Arabs, that's to say so long as they do not declare an
intention to protect Israel against obliteration, they can expect to get the
oil they need.

If they did assert the American principle, I need hardly remind you that the
physical prospect would be acutely unpleasant and quite possibly perilous. For
though your winters are comparatively mild, however damp and sniffly, your
dependence on Arabian oil is unlike America's total. The unbeatable weapon the
Arabs hold is the threat of darkening the towns and halting the industries of
Europe.

Well, I've been pretty pessimistic in this report so far and no question at
least, a third of the American people have the image of a bleak winter very
much on their minds, but this image still dims before the quiet nightmare that
stalks the headlines and is the prime topic of talk and speculation everywhere,
the new the entirely unfamiliar spectre of the White House inhabited by a
caretaker president in the wake of the impeachment or resignation of Richard
Nixon.

A few months ago, only the European papers and television commentators cried up
as an immediate threat the impeachment of the president. They were not by a
long shot more perceptive than the American press on the contrary, they were
selling papers by playing up an improbable melodrama. The best of the American
commentators and a majority of Congress certainly foresaw the very grave
consequences of merely punishing Nixon and thereby, through the many months of
the exhausting process of impeachment, leaving this country with a government
in recess.

But now it's on every lip and very present in the minds not only of the
president's published list of media enemies, the notion that the president's
resignation is desirable if not inevitable is being discussed by even the
conservative wing of the Republican Party, which is a very conservative wing
indeed.

This last week, the Detroit News, a staunch a Nixon supporter as you could find
throughout the past four years came out with an editorial entitled "Enough is
Enough", urging him to resign. Senator Barry Goldwater thought the least Mr
Nixon must do was to appear before the Senate Watergate committee and lay his
cards on the table.

Mr William Buckley's conservative National Review – and again you have to think
of something well to the right of the British Conservative Party – the National
Review thought Mr Nixon's usefulness was over and predicted his early
resignation.

Time, the news magazine which came out for Mr Nixon in '68 and '72 and which
has never in its 50 years published an editorial, published one this week
saying Mr Nixon has irredeemably lost his moral authority, the confidence of
most of the country and therefore his ability to government effectively.

Now the inference about public opinion on which these judgments are based is
debatable, the latest Harris poll shows two Americans in three against the
impeachment, but it also shows that only one American in four believes he's
doing a good job. That's not, however, grounds for impeachment; at one time
only one American in five thought Harry Truman was doing a good job.

What counts at this critical point more than the evidence of the polls is the
deep anxiety of the Republican party and the spreading disillusion of Mr
Nixon's oldest supporters. Why, why should they believe, along with most of the
people, that his administration is suspect to the point of disablement?

First there was a series of acts that could well be interpreted as bribery,
high crimes and misdemeanours, which the Constitution lays down as grounds for
impeachment. It is a crime for a president to obstruct justice or hamper the
execution of the laws of the United States.

If his personal aides commit crimes or obstruct justice, the president is held
accountable, a hard fact that Mr Nixon has never hinted that he might concede.
And yet at this moment, his vice president has resigned to avoid a heavy jail
sentence for a catalogue of high crimes, his old attorney general and closest
advisor is under indictment for fraud, so is his old Secretary of Commerce. No
less than 13 of its old top aides have either been convicted of crimes or
pleaded guilty or been indicted or been fired for misdemeanours.

The president himself approved of burglary to keep tabs on radicals, he himself
created his own private secret service to use wire tapping and forgery to keep
an eye on his political enemies. He personally approached the presiding judge
in a government prosecuted case and offered him the directorship of the FBI,
his own lawyer used money raised for the president's reelection campaign to pay
off the convicted defendants in the Watergate case.

Now all this has brewed an unprecedented atmosphere of alarm and distrust,
which at least embarrassed the Republicans, but two men stood above it and they
gave to the administration the only public confidence it could claim. One was
the attorney general, Mr Richardson, the other was Mr Cox, the special
Watergate prosecutor, he was appointed on an understanding between the Senate
and the president that he could track down the truth wherever his tracks led.

By the way, it's doubtful that Mr Cox's promised status was constitutional,
since Congress has no power to set up an officer under the president who will
be free to override the president;s executive authority and, for instance, take
him to court; still Mr Nixon gave a pledge that Mr Cox would be independent.

When Mr Cox, however, demanded that the president turn over the Watergate tapes
to the courts, the president broke his promise and fired him and attorney
general Richardson resigned because he would not obey the president's order to
fire Mr Cox and then Mr Nixon, that strange man, turned the tapes over to the
court. The obvious inference was that Mr Cox knew other nasty things about the
administration and would seek other presidential papers.

The last shocker, which may prove to have been the last straw, was the
disclosure that two of the nine taped Watergate conversations that Mr Nixon
agreed to yield to the courts did not exist and, as it happened, these were the
two crucial conversations which would have supported or refuted the charge of
Mr Nixon's main accuser that the president was in on the cover-up of Watergate
from the beginning.

This is what turned the Republican embarassment into horror, for the instant
response of Congress, not to mention the howling reaction of the press, was
that of course the tapes had existed and that they were too hot to preserve and
had been destroyed.

Now imagine this fog of suspicion and this train of crooks attached to any
prime minister you can think off, or for that matter of any president in
American history? And what do the people get from Mr Nixon? They've been
getting much earnest rhetoric and almost ceremonious assurances that he has a
special knack for handling the Russians and the Arabs, so the Russian say that
his worldwide alert of American forces was hysterical and the Arabs slap an
embargo on oil.

Mr Nixon goes on doggedly saying that his knowledge of foreign affairs is too
precious to be dispensed with, but what people still want to know is if he knew
about Watergate and when he started to cover up?

Most of all, they now want to know why he never said that for a month or more
he had known that two of the crucial tapes never existed or had been destroyed.
The clue to his future, as I mentioned, lies I think in the growing and the
possibly irreversible conviction of the right wing of his party that so long as
they, the Republicans, are saddled with him, they will go down to a disastrous
defeat in next year's Congressional elections and then in '76 in the
presidential elections.

So it could be that it will not be Mr Nixon's announced enemies that will bring
him down, nor the liberal press, nor the television reporters and commentators
he so detests, but his old friends.

It is, I suspect, not impeachment by the House he has most to fear, it is a
deputation of the most rock-ribbed Republicans who next week, or next month, or
next year will wait on him and say "You have to go".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP