Immigrants to America and assimilation - 29 May 1998

Last Monday, the last one in May, was a public holiday in the United States and
perhaps the most uniformly solemn one. It's called Memorial Day. Not so long
ago it was Decoration Day. It was the idea of a surgeon who'd served in the
Union army in the civil war and helped to form the first old soldiers' society.
And its head, three years after the war was over, was one General John Logan.
He called on veterans of the war to decorate soldiers' graves on every 30 May
from this time forward. And so it has been done throughout the intervening 130
years. Long ago, of course, it embraced in homage the dead of many wars other
than the civil war, through to the last one, the only war America ever lost.
Vietnam. And it's been grimly obvious at every Memorial Day ceremony since 1974
that of all the wars remembered, the memories of Vietnam quicken most bitterly
and jarringly.

On Memorial Day there are services, concerts, parades from Alaska to the
Florida Keys. The service that everyone can see, the most brilliant and moving
at the same time, is the televised service from Washington, with the National
Symphony Orchestra and veterans, both famous and obscure, performing after dusk
on a great plaza against the background of a purple sky and the immense pearly
dome of the Capitol.

It is, as I said, a solemn occasion but I have to admit the guilty thought that
I, and many more people too, find it also a rousing occasion because, mainly
I'm sure, the promoters of these tributes, throughout the land, are able to tap
the rich cornucopia of patriotic music that this country has acquired in the
century and more since the civil war. I wonder if any other country resounds so
powerfully and tunefully on such an occasion with such a fountain of marvellous
melodies, from the large portfolio of John Philip Sousa through to the two or
three patriotic gems of Irving Berlin? Indeed, the Washington ceremony ended
with what on ceremonial occasions has become a second or alternative National
Anthem, Berlin's "God Bless America". Through the sound of it and of a trio of
glorious voices and a hundred-strong chorus, the camera panned slowly across
hundreds and hundreds of sad or tense moist-eyed faces of every age and colour.

I've talked to friends of different political bias who find this scene
unbearably moving or simply unbearable. Why unbearable? Because, I suspect, it
stirs in people who do not believe in, or who deride, patriotism, it stirs in
them guilty feelings of patriotism. Of course, this is an old feeling common to
people on the Left, but now there is a new Left with a new attitude to
exercise.

A famous Leftist professor, musing on this day about what he takes to be the
sorry state of the United States, made the surprising announcement, "National
pride is to countries what self-respect is to individuals". A surprise, from a
boisterous Leftist professor. Not so surprising, however, when he follows up
with the suggestion that the present United States is nothing to be proud of
and that the best way of showing off your patriotism is to chant, all together
now, "We caused the death of a million Vietnamese out of sheer macho
arrogance".

"Come out into the public square", he urges his fellow academicians, "and make
your voices heard in a new movement, a new campaign, a patriotic protest
against America as it is!"

"America as it is", he maintains, "exists in terrible economic conditions that
enslave its workers". This will be new to the vast majority of Americans who
have to believe, from a recital of the facts, that never in living memory have
there been so few unemployed, 5 to 6%, in a population of 265 millions and
never an economy going along with such a minute percentage – 2% – of inflation.
If he's not going to feel patriotic about the real America, what's to do next?
"Be loyal", he commands, "to a dream country rather than to the one to which
you wake up every morning!" I grant that the professor is an extreme case but
our universities are full of protesting professors of his type who appear to be
disappointed ex-Marxists.

Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, there hasn't been a dream country (do
you believe it?) to believe in, in spite of 70 years' hard evidence that it was
a nightmare country based, admittedly originally, on a noble-sounding dream.

I don't remember another Memorial Day which was followed by so many pieces in
the serious media on patriotism. And they're all tied to an anxiety: how to
absorb the long, late flood of immigrants of the past quarter-century – mostly
from south and central America, and then a sizeable wave on to the west coast
from Asia – how to bring them into the American mainstream? But there's also a
new anxiety. A question whether they will all want to be absorbed, want to
become Americans. That's entirely new and that's what disturbs old Americans
who are uncomfortable with the now turbulent mixture we call multiculturalism.

Some months ago, I had to go downtown to get a document from the Immigration
Office. I was in a cab driven by a young man, a Moroccan, as it turned out.
Because of a backlog in handling the welter of applications in the city, it was
taking a wearisome long time for his papers to be processed for him then to go
before an examiner, to be given a test on this country and its institutions,
then to take the pledge with several hundred others, and so become an American
citizen.

He was glum and irritable and I thought it was over the long bureaucratic
delay. But it turned out he was very much in two minds. He didn't really like
the idea of having to become an American citizen. He was here on a work permit
which apparently he wished could go on for ever. "Why?" I asked him. "Because",
he said directly, "I would like to be a Moroccan first and an American second".

Now this is not an anecdotal item. Simply, there's widespread proof from
surveys all across the country, to show that not only is there a very lively
argument about the best ways for turning millions of incomers into literate
Americans but more and more groups of defiant youths inside ethnic minorities
who are asking why they should become Americans at all.

The Far Right really believes that there never was a melting pot, that
immigrants, when burdened with a foreign tongue, were really incapable of
becoming Americans and eventually died as strangers and left things to their
children who knew only English and so stayed afloat in the big pool. On the
Extreme Left, the New Left, if you like, the boasted multiculturalists, they
see no reason why lots of immigrants should have to become Americans. One
really barmy multicultural intellectual says, "Assimilation is nothing but a
gentrified form of ethnic cleansing". As for the barmy extreme on the
Conservative side, there is abundant proof in at least four generations of
immigrants from southern and eastern Europe to disprove the stiff notion that
immigrants are not capable of becoming American. What such complainers mean is
immigrants with a foreign tongue are never quite capable of turning into
successful Wasps – White Anglo-Saxon, Protestant Americans.

Well, these sometimes shrewd, loud, more often grotesque, arguments have been
touched off by Memorial Day and are swirling round next week's big
socio-political event in California when the people there take a referendum and
vote on the famous, some say infamous, proposition 227.

It asks if Californians want to abandon and abolish the system that's been in
force in the schools for about 30 years, namely bilingual education, that
newcomers should be taught all subjects first in their native language, which
is overwhelmingly Spanish, and on the side be taught English. The belief was
that after say a year or two, their English would be good enough to let them
swim safely in the mainstream. It was based on a false assumption that most
bilingual teachers would be equally fluent in two languages. Most, in practice,
turned out to be not very good at either. The probationary period stretched and
stretched and at the end of five years many Hispanic children knew a little
pidgin English and many also street Spanish. The overall consensus, from many
studies in the deep south, the south-west and California, and New York City
where bilingual education has been most exercised or enforced, is that it has
been a disastrous flop.

Proposition 227 would toss all immigrant children into English classes at once
for a year or more as, say, Russian or Asian children have to do. The most
hopeful omen going for Proposition 227 is the news that a large proportion,
maybe by now a majority of Spanish-speaking parents have seen the disaster and
want the change.

The historical irony in all this is that the new promised solution is the only
one that occurred to the schools, the politicians, the President of the United
States at the beginning of this century, which saw that first enormous tidal
wave of southern and central European immigrants. The first story I ever
covered for the BBC was a night class in an elementary school up in the Bronx
in a mainly Italian immigrant neighbourhood. It was a night school for the
parents of children born here who were at school, had been tossed at once into
the pool and learning nothing but English. The parents were being taught to
catch up with their children, so that their children would not mock them as
strangers. A situation full of pathos and comedy, but idealism too. For the
parents wanted to become Americans as soon as possible for their children's
sake. A long way from the superior professor who defined the process of
becoming a citizen "a gentrified form of ethnic cleansing".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP