The Soviet-Chinese Relationship - 19 May 1989

I sometimes envy the men who sit in clubs and stand in pubs – in fact anyone
who is not a journalist who can enjoy the get-together at twilight and argue
and prophesy and generally decide how the world is turning.

I can’t recall a single friend of mine, a non-journalist that is, who ever
said, “I remember all those years ago when I said that the French would never
leave NATO or Ronald Reagan would never be president or John Connally of Texas
was the coming man, boy was I wrong.”

The club man and club woman, the pub gossip, the teatime ladies and the girls
in the office can express themselves freely and lay down the law for years and
maintain a local reputation as a shrewd one – because they keep no records to
remind them that they, too, are as fallible as the rest of us.

In a word, civilians – I’m defining a civilian as non-journalist – civilians,
wisely, don’t keep records. Journalists do. They can’t help it, their expert
cogitations and shrewd predictions are embalmed in print and can be quoted
later for the amusement of the public.

The late Walter Lippmann who was, for a decade or two, probably the most
distinguished political commentator in American journalism, wrote in January
1932 – in the depth of the Depression when everybody was looking around for a
presidential candidate to elect the following November – he wrote, “Mr
Roosevelt is a pleasant man who, without any important qualifications for the
office, would very much like to be president.”

A month or two later, when Franklin Roosevelt had a setback, two setbacks, in
the Massachusetts and Pennsylvania primaries, Mr Lippmann’s shrewd doubts were
confirmed. He wrote, “The people of the east know about Mr Roosevelt. They just
do not believe in him. They have detected something hollow in him, something
synthetic, something pretended and calculated. This has been the judgement of
the great majority of Democratic insiders. It has now been confirmed by the
urban masses of the east.”

Well need I remind you that the pleasant, hollow, synthetic Mr Roosevelt went
on to win a resounding victory in 1932, a positive slaughter of his opponent in
1936, another great victory in 1940 and again in 1944 – the only president ever
to be elected four times, which caused the long-agonising Republicans to get
through a Constitutional amendment that forbids any president from ever again
running for more than two terms.

However the point of this reminiscence is that Walter Lippmann, who lived for
more than 40 years after that first clanger, was never allowed to forget it. It
was quoted – meanly – even in his obituary notices.

Well, before some small-minded librarian gets busy riffling through the Cooke
file, let me do it for him. You’ll see at once why it was this particular
passage that unfortunately came to mind.

At the end of a talk done in February 1972 a talk, I regret to say, that is in
print between hard covers, I said “The late Walter Lippmann, in one of his rare
appearances on television, I believe it was his last, was asked at the end by a
student what did he consider to be the worst catastrophe that could happen to
the world. The clock ticked audibly as he thought for the longest time, then he
said very slowly and emphatically ‘China on the loose’."

I followed on with this final comment, “To end this ghoulish bulletin I can
think of something worse, the possibility that China and the Soviet Union
deciding in a year or two that they have more to lose by being at odds than by
being together might conclude a pact as unthinkable as the Hitler-Stalin pact
of August 1939 which guaranteed the Second World War as this second
get-together would herald the end, or at best the last stand, of the West.”

So there. Now it has happened. Are we down-hearted? Apparently not. I suppose
I’ve retained this fear, snoozing away at the back of my mind through all these
17 years, but the wisdom of our pundits, our wise guys, is against me.

Let’s go back and look at what had been the critical turning points in the
post-war relations of China and the Soviet Union. The last summit meeting was
between Mao Tse Tung and Nikita Khrushchev in 1959 and it was a clammy
encounter.

They fought over ideology, which country was upholding true Marxism, over the
parts of Asia they could each claim as being within their sphere of influence,
and over charges and counter-charges about breakthroughs, incursions, of each
side into the other’s territory along the 4,000-mile border they share.

This last quarrel has remained so unhealed that in the 30 years we’ve been busy
with upheavals and changes in Europe and the Middle East and the Far East most
of us, I find, have to be reminded that to this day the Soviet Union has over a
million soldiers posted along that frontier and the Chinese have about the
same.

Yet that 1959 summit was supposed to reaffirm an alliance between the two great
Communist powers. Ten years later, in 1969, they broke the alliance, still
hotly arguing over who was upholding and who betraying Marxist dogma and hotly
engaging in small battles and random clashes along the huge border.

At that point, we in the west – all our best commentators – breathed a
comfortable sigh. The two Communist superpowers seemed as far apart as Hitler
and Stalin. Somewhere I have a faded clipping of some eminent Kremlinologist
saying as much, which was what prompted me to express that gloomy fear that the
day might come when they would find they had more to lose by being at odds than
by being together.

But nothing in foreign relations stays frozen and we noticed years later, in
the late '70s, that China began to talk about bringing Soviet-Chinese relations
back to normal – that’s to say, to a formal friendship again.

The Chinese set three conditions – the Soviets should get out of Afghanistan,
they should put an end to the occupation of Cambodia by the Vietnamese (a
Soviet ally), and they should do substantial reducing of the million-man army
on the Chinese border.

Well, Mr Gorbachev has moved in all these directions, not without some loss of
face. Afghanistan has been evacuated. In response to the Chinese contention –
unverified, I believe – that they have reduced their armed forces by one
million in all, not of course all on that border, Mr Gorbachev has promised to
start a systematic withdrawal of his military force. He’s talked about
demobilising 200,000 troops in the Far East. How many of them on the Chinese
border? I don’t believe he said.

The enormous slaughter in Cambodia is the nightmare, since the invading
Vietnamese, China’s implacable enemy, are wards and allies of the Soviet Union.
However the conventional American wisdom – spelled out with sonorous eloquence
by Mr Henry Kissinger this week – is that all of this is, on the whole, a good
thing.

Mr Kissinger admits that if a Soviet leader had undertaken such a journey a
decade ago it would have seemed like a diplomatic earthquake. Reminding us that
he was he, Mr Kissinger – and it was – who made that secret visit to Beijing in
1971 which produced President Nixon’s astonishing initiative in normalising
relations with China, Mr Kissinger goes on to say that in the '70s the
hostility between Moscow and Beijing was so ineradicable that all Washington
had to do was to position itself so that it was closer to each of the two
Communist giants than they were to one another with, however, a new tilt toward
the weaker giant, China.

Now that this period of what he calls "mechanical simplicity" has ended, Mr
Kissinger notes that the Soviet Union is troubled by domestic difficulties and
Beijing has lost its fear of a Soviet invasion. Incidentally, Moscow has at
last lost its fear of a Chinese-American alliance poised against it.

The reality in Asia, says Mr Kissinger, is that none of the major nations will
run the risk of separating itself from the United States in order to gain the
goodwill of Moscow, nor will any of them challenge the Soviet Union simply to
curry favour with the United States.

The conclusion from all this is that there is, as between the Soviet Union and
China, a new imbalance of power, a balance of hope and an admission that their
two main concerns for some time to come will be China’s attempt – now forced on
it by the protesting millions – to match the Soviets’ democratic reforms and
the Soviets attempt to copy the pace of China’s economic reforms.

These interesting thoughts were all set down before the truly astounding
protest and hunger marches in Beijing and Shanghai and other cities. A notable
Chinese expert, who had been calmly expounding such ideas, was brought into a
television studio on Wednesday night and asked what effect the seething
millions of protesters would have on the summit, on east-west relations, on the
Soviet Union and its satellites, on us all.

He said, in exhaustion and bewilderment, “This is the most alarming and
unpredictable thing that has happened in China in my lifetime. I see no
credible political alternative to the present leadership. I have no idea how it
will all come out.”

Another prospect was considered by a commentator who does not share the
majority view about the summit. He wrote, “A continued Communist split would
better serve the cause of peace and freedom if – a big if – the crowds of
freedom-seekers were to reach a critical mass or if repression were triggered
that spills blood without gaining control.

"The great Chinese counter-revolution might soon be under way and in that case,
reverberations would be felt in Warsaw, Budapest, Kiev and Moscow. That is why
Mr Gorbachev castigated Chinese hotheads.”

Could it be China on the loose?

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP