Choosing a US ambassador to London - 16 July 1993

It's not often that a piece of news is at once good and bad or, say, sad but
encouraging. Some of you may recall that earlier in the year at a time when
everyone was slightly aghast at President Clinton's early boo-boos or clangers,
I rushed with haste to praise him for a move that revealed, I thought, a gift
for diplomatic shrewdness – we'd not suspected any.

You know that one of the routine but tricky and burdensome jobs that a new
president takes on is to riffle through hundreds of memos and letters and
recommendations and reports from all the divisions of the State Department and
then make his choice of several recommended ambassadors for each country even
when the recommendation is forwarded eagerly by the man himself.

Mr Clinton was slow to fill the main posts, I'm not sure even today whether the
ambassadorships to Rome and Madrid have been filled, but then I think back and
recall that all presidents are late in appointing ambassadors, all that is
except the sainted Roosevelt, which reminds me I must tell you a story, which
had from its good taste to stay bottled up while any of the actors in it,
including the radio officer of the Queen Mary, were alive.

1936 will always be remembered by nostalgic or grieving Democrats as the year
when Franklin Roosevelt was re-elected by a landslide never matched until
Richard Nixon buried the Democrats in 1972, only two years before he was driven
out in disgrace. All right, so 1936 Roosevelt's opponent was a small amiable
canny governor of Kansas one Alfred Landon, he promised to save America from
the New Deal, which had involved dispensing vast sums of money to the poor, the
unemployed, the disabled, the dispossessed – sums of money Mr Roosevelt,
emulating the bankers, had acquired on paper. That's to say he decided to live
on the advice on John Maynard Keynes on borrowed money, a policy that became a
habit for the next 50 years. Needless to say, the people loved the New Deal and
I have to say that in the pit of the Great Depression they needed it. Well in
the result, Mr Roosevelt was returned by 46 states against Mr Landon's two.
There was an old American folk saying based on the results of many elections
that the state of Maine was a true barometer of the national mood, as Maine
goes so goes the nation, but the fact that in 1936 only one other state as well
as Maine went against Roosevelt, it caused the maxim to be revised: as Maine,
goes so goes Vermont.

In the very morning after the election, Roosevelt sat down with a piece of
paper to rearrange or redistribute his ambassadorships. In those days London,
the so called Court of St James's, was the jewel. Roosevelt had hardly had time
to think who was going to replace Mr Bingham of Kentucky, a tycoon and a
generous contributor to the Democratic Party chest when a call came into the
White House from the good ship Queen Mary, then on the high seas steaming
towards New York. The call had been put in by Mr Joseph Davies another very
rich tycoon who hearing the election results over the ship's wireless conceived
a raging lust for London, for the embassy, he too had contributed generously to
Roosevelt's recent campaign and his hopes were high. Mr Roosevelt was ready for
him, but affected to be surprised by the privilege of a call from the Great
Cunada. In those days, radio calls were pretty squawky not to say inaudible,
but Mr Davies's voice came over and its squeakiness did not distort his
message, he wanted London and he was ready to accept that call to duty.

President Roosevelt assured him and I can hear his high fluting tenor now that
Joe you're a great man and you would be a fine ambassador, but the price comes
high, I'm afraid Joe, he bellowed, you can't have London for $60,000 but it'll
buy Moscow. It was possibly the last place the high-living Mr Davies cared to
live but he took it and he fortified himself against the muscovite austerity by
sailing his great yacht across the Atlantic through the Baltic Seas and on into
then Leningrad and having its great cargo unloaded, hundreds of gallons of ice
cream, mountains of beef to keep them alive and well throughout his bleak
mission to Moscow. It's been too often the custom to put London up for auction
so to speak instead of giving this always important and delicate post to a
highly trained career man. By the way, ever since I've known Washington, the
career foreign service has always griped about the low proportion of career
people in the important capitals as against the high proportion of fat cats.

Mr Bush, I regret to say, has as bad a record as anyone, but it has to be said
that he didn't appoint a superior career man to London where he still is Mr
Raymond Seitz. I talked about him as I say earlier in the year and
congratulated Mr Clinton on having the judgement to leave him there. I learned
only a month or so ago, that good judgment was not Mr Clinton's first reflex,
he offered it first to a former vice president and failed Democratic nominee
for president Mr Walter Mondale who we all thought had gone into silver haired
retirement way out west in the big rock candy mountains, but no he wanted an
embassy. He turned down London and wanted and got Tokyo. So it was only then
that Mr Clinton decided to let the admirable Mr Seitz stay on without knowledge
of the Mondale opening, everybody praised Mr Clinton for keeping Mr Seitz on we
all hoped for the rest of his term or should I say his first term I don't know.

Anyway, the word, the news pretty reliably confirmed is that Mr Clinton has
chosen another ambassador to the Court of St James's and that he will replace
Mr Seitz in the fullness of time, which I'm happy to report is quite a fullness
soon after the New Year. I'm even happier to say that the new man is not a
wealthy fast-food purveyor or a generous manufacturer of silicon chips, he's an
old distinguished sailor, formerly chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, the
post now held by General Colin Powell who is a famous first in the sense of
being the first black man to be the top American soldier. Admiral William Crowe
spelt like Crow with an 'e' but pronounced Crowe, he is a formidable character
seen by all of us as the host and friend of the top Russian Admiral in a
memorable television programme a year or more ago and the subject too of a
television profile in which we learned that he is a very odd, I mean
refreshingly original, sailor diplomat linguist scholar and all round greatly
sensible man.

These days what with the president's hotline and the instant availability of
the presidential jet, ambassadors have nothing like the power they once had but
it would be true to say today that an ambassadorship in certain capitals is
what you make it. In the great capitals certainly the ambassador can no longer
be the sole voice of the president, but when there are difficulties of policy
with the allies, he can be mightily influential,

And today, the emergence, the difficult birth of the European Community and the
suddenly disputed status of NATO and its forces offer a large opening to just
such a man as Admiral Crowe.

We haven't talked about NATO as a vital but imperilled defence body, that there
are many experts in the United States, people knowledgeable about Europe, its
old and present defences, former NATO commanders who are much disturbed since
the new chaos of the Balkans and the revival you might say of the plot of 1913,
who are disturbed that the NATO nations have not rallied together to declare
and assert that they must be the first European line of defence and in some
places of attack. If NATO gips at the coming conflicts in Middle and Eastern
Europe, then we could discover too late that we have repeated the sin of the
1930s, the sin of appeasement. There was a a sentence came from the present
American Secretary of State Mr Warren Christopher the other day, which bore a
nightmare resemblance to a famous sentence of Mr Neville Chamberlain in the
late '30s.

Mr Christopher more or less excused the impotence of American and allied policy
in Bosnia by saying it was a faraway country in a place remote from our
essential interests. The New York Times, by the way, has called for Mr
Christopher's resignation seeing him as the rudderless skipper of Mr Clinton's
voyage into European security policy, perhaps Admiral Crowe should replace Mr
Christopher instead of Mr Seitz.

I digress; there are one or two substantial reasons why Admiral Crowe is as
good a man as the United States could summon to the London embassy. Almost 20
years ago, he lived in London to do a a doctoral thesis for Princeton on the
history and role of the Royal Navy. In 1980, he was appointed NATO Commander
for Southern Europe. Three years later, he was Commander of all American Naval
Forces in Europe. I don't know if Mr Clinton had it in mind, but the
opportunity is now Admiral Crowe's the opportunity to make the London embassy
the watch tower of European security, a stabiliser to the wobbling NATO. We
shall see.

I notice that a royal commission in London has proposed great even alarming
changes in the British system of justice, a footnote questions whether judges
should soon dispense with their wigs. This came up during the sessions of the
Philadelphia Convention that wrote the United States Constitution. Thomas
Jefferson was in Paris but he peppered the Convention with advice and
suggestions including the idea of a written Bill of Rights, he begged
successfully the delegates to abandon the British habit of judges wigs; we do
not want, he wrote, to see our judges look like mice peeping out of oakum.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP