Pan Am declares bankruptcy - 11 January 1991

It is a strange and not very pleasant feeling to be talking on the brink and
because I'm doing this talk before the weekend, before we know what new ideas,
proposals will follow on the debate in Congress, a whole historical era could
lie between now and midnight of Tuesday 15 January.

War or no war, delay, negotiation, whatever, life goes on and throws up stories
that, at any other time, would absorb or enchant or appal the country.
Following on my comments about the new fashion of businesses in trouble of
going bankrupt in order not to retire with a hangdog expression but to
straighten up and fly right, to start on the road to prosperity, a real
blockbuster fell on us this past week.

Of all great historic institutions, fenced off from disaster you might have
thought, by its prestige and its history as a pioneer, surely Pan American
Airways was sacrosanct. But, as one reporter's lead had it, Pan Am's long
flight into bankruptcy court landed Tuesday. There must obviously be young
listeners to whom Pan Am was, is just a big, well-known corporation in trouble
but to middle-aged and old people, the collapse of Pan Am is about as unreal as
the collapse of the Bank of England. That, I should say, is a figure of speech.
I presume the bank is still there, if not quite the bastion of world finance it
used to be.

A 28-year-old aviator founded Pan Am in 1927. Two years later, I can even
remember this as a surprising and surprised item in the London papers, Pan Am
started serving meals in flight, a novelty that stimulated cartoonists to
facetious flights of fancy. It was not funny, it was thought to be wonderful,
we should now say it was awesome, to hear that in 1935 Pan Am started the first
commercial aerial service across the enormous Pacific and four years later, on
the verge of the Second War it started the first transatlantic service. In
1947, two years after the war was over, the first round the world service and
after that, for over 30 years, Pan Am, one assumes, reigned supreme as an
international carrier.

The first public hint of trouble came, however, as long ago as 1981, when Pan
Am sold its headquarters in Manhattan, started to negotiate wage cuts with the
unions and lost $18 million. Next year it fired one in five of its of its
employees and lost $480 million. It would be cruel to trace the steps of its
decline and fall, the selling off of famous routes, the annual losses in the
hundreds of millions. The other night, the chairman of the company appeared at
a press conference and cited three main causes of the airline's fall. He did
not cite one cause that has doomed many other lines, the de-regulation of the
airlines nine years ago, which involved the abolition of fixed, standard fares,
saw airlines sprout like rabbits, set competitive fare prices which, over the
long run, no airline could profitably cope with. The Pan Am chairman mentioned
the enormous increase in the cost of aviation fuel since the Iraqi invasion of
Kuwait, secondly the recession and thirdly a body blow suffered only by Pan Am
– in 1988 the terrorist bombing of Flight 103 over Lockerbie in Scotland, a
curse that has haunted Pan Am and its intending passengers during the past two
years.

However, judging from the response I mentioned a week or two ago, the response
of big businesses that have just gone bankrupt, Pan Am fell into line. Its
chairman announced no flights would be suspended, no change in the schedule. It
doesn't mean, he said, we're going out of business, business as usual. It's a
new ball game, starting today. What filing for bankruptcy under Chapter 11 of
the US Bankruptcy Code does is to give the company breathing room to work out a
plan to pay its debts free of the threat of creditors' law suits. Perhaps this
procedure will suggest to you a new lease on life for your business. Get your
banker to explain it to you.

I don't know how many other airlines have gone bust, it seems to me that after
deregulation, airlines popped up all over the country, there must have been 30,
certainly. They fought each other with ludicrously low prices, each hoping to
swipe the other's patronage, but they existed, flourished, they thought on
great bank loans and by the late '80s, when the loans were called, most of them
couldn't go on. Today there are less than 10 national carriers and aviation
economists will testify that fairly soon there are likely to be only four or
five.

The Supreme Court was back in action, in session, busily listening to arguments
on cases which, since they've come all the way up to the Supreme Court, are
presumably vital to the liberty of the subject under the Constitution. That's
what the Court is there for. Not to arbitrate between state and federal law,
simply to say whether some law used to convict some person has improperly
deprived him or her of their rights under the Constitution. Somewhere in that
noble 200-year-old document will be found a sentence or a phrase, that will
permit somebody not to pay his income taxes and another phrase that will
uphold, as a sacred right, a sexy stripper's lascivious nude dance before the
frequenters of a bar, the Kitty Kat Lounge in South Bend, Indiana. I kid you
not. Those were the two main cases before the court this week.

A judgement in one case, that of John Cheek, a commercial airline pilot for the
past 20 years. On the docket, the case is inscribed as Cheek versus United
States of America. He has not filed any income tax returns for the past seven
years. He belonged to a group of tax protesters and I suppose chose to
represent their contention. Anyway he maintained that his income from American
Airlines was not taxable within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Code and
therefore the effort of the tax boys to collect it was an invasion of his
constitutional rights. Can you believe it?

Well, he was eventually prosecuted for criminal negligence, to be exact,
criminal tax violation. Now we all know, especially as 15 April draws near, we
all know that tax avoidance is something entirely proper and legal, that your
accountant helps you to perform, but tax evasion is criminal.

Well at the end of John Cheek's trial, the judge told the jurors it was
unreasonable for him to believe that his salary was not taxable income and "an
honest but unreasonable belief is not a defence". So he was convicted and could
have gone to jail but of course, he appealed. An appeals court in Chicago
upheld his conviction, so he took it to the Supreme Court. And what did the
Supreme Court say? I think its decision will be even more surprising than the
fact of its hearing the case at all. The court came out with the majority of
six to two, one judge not present, overturning the pilot's conviction on the
ground that a sincere belief about where income tax applies, however
unreasonable, cannot be the basis for a criminal case. The majority said that
criminal evasion of taxes takes place when a failure to file is wilful, whereas
Mr Cheek sincerely believed he did not have a duty to file. Of course there
could be another trial, a civil case, in which a jury and not the judge, would
have to judge the degree of Mr Cheek's sincerity. By the way, he's recanted and
he's paid all his taxes.

But this could lead to many other trials, as Justice Blackman warned in his
minority opinion. He said, it was incomprehensible to me that 77 years after
the government had set up a federal income tax system, any taxpayer of
competent mentality can assert that the wage he receives for his labour is not
income. The majority decision, he said, will encourage taxpayers to cling to
frivolous views of the law in the hope of convincing the jury of their
sincerity. I'm sure he's right. In every state there must be scores of lawyers
licking their lips and drooling at the prospects of clients flocking in to
declare their honest, their deeply sincere belief that the income tax laws
don't apply to them.

Now where in the Constitution does it say that Miss Lulu Flame, a pseudonym,
has a constitutional right to perform lascivious dances in the nude atop the
bar of the Kitty Kat Lounge in South Bend, Indiana? Well right at the beginning
of the Bill of Rights, in the First Amendment to the Constitution, it says
plainly: Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or
abridging the freedom of speech or of the press. Freedom of speech has been
stretched in recent Supreme Court opinions to take in freedom of expression,
both in visual art and in music. Most recently the court refused to uphold a
city that wanted to condemn and punish as obscene, erotic photographs and one
photo more notorious than others, which showed a crucifix sunk in a bowl of
urine. A friend of mine pointed out at the time that if you set up a crucifix
in a public square, you would be prosecuted for violating the prohibition in
that same amendment, against a state religion but if you sink the crucifix in
urine, you can exhibit it in public as art and all is well.

The court also, very recently, overturned a precious court's judgement that
filthy lyrics in a rock group's songs were obscene, whether or not, the court
said, they were permissible as a form of free speech. Well now the justices are
hearing arguments that Miss Lulu Flame and her stripping colleagues are
protected in their work by the First Amendment. The prosecutor from Indiana
said the state has a right to enforce public decency. Justice Scalia reflected
that the law would not be used against an opera that entails nudity and he
wondered how you can invoke the good taste clause of the Constitution, which of
course, doesn't exist. The court is expected to render judgement on this life
and death matter by midsummer. In the meantime, the Kitty Kat Lounge must allow
Lulu to go on expressing her version of the First Amendment.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP