Smith-Corona typewriters - 21 July 1995

A news photograph in the morning paper, a picture so routine you'd pass it over
at once if you didn't stop to wonder why something so ordinary had ever been
printed. It was a picture of a yard, a depot of some sort with seven or eight
or more vans parked at random: why should they make news?

Before I flipped the page, I thought there'd been a strike perhaps of truck
drivers, only when you looked at the caption did you discover the creepy reason
for the picture: these vans were lining up to deliver corpses in Chicago, not
an historical picture, not a nostalgic anniversary of the Capone era. We were
at the back entrance to the morgue last week and it was trying to take in and
find room for 70 odd corpses of perfectly ordinary people who'd been stricken
and killed by the atrocious heat, which across the whole Midwest and the great
plains and down from Maine to Florida, drenched and flabbergasted half the
country. It was as bad as any mid-summer heat most people could remember.

In New York City alone last weekend at the official shade temperature was 104,
but that temperature is taken from a protected gauge 200 feet up in the air
above the dense foliage of Central Park and need I say nobody lives up there.
Down below, the accumulated heat of many days radiates from the big buildings
through the canyons of the streets where the thermometers registered 114 in any
discoverable shade.

Well there's nothing more can be said about that nasty spell, which was
relieved this week by a descent into the blessed 90s, but as with an
earthquake, a hurricane, a terrorist bombing, all you can say is: isn't it
awful and say no more unless you can say something to help. That's the way I've
come to feel about Bosnia.

All of us commentators who have opinions about everything mirrored minded, us
who can tell Nato Generals what they should be doing while we ourselves
couldn't load a pop gun. Well on a trip to London an old lady asked me: "What
do the Americans feel about Bosnia?" I could only say: "What the British and
the French and no doubt the Tibetans feel and think, everything, many points of
view." And I imagine that most of all in Britain, France and the United States
there will be ordinary people who keep on remembering the day Hitler took a
very great risk and marched in town or the Rhineland. He knew that his own
future and that of the Third Reich might turn on the response of France and
Britain to this great audacity, so he checked through his London Embassy to see
if the British would make any retaliatory move. He knew so little about British
history and the structure of British government that he thought the man who
would decide Britain's policy would be the new King Edward VIII. He heard what
was never documented in English records, he heard probably from the scoundrel
Ambassador Ribbentrop, that German re-entry into the Rhineland would be alright
with Buckingham Palace. Anyway he did it, no retaliation not a rifle shot.

There was one very vocal protester, the well known among Tories and Socialists
alike, the well known warmonger Winston Churchill. He said at the time, two
French divisions would have thrown the Nazi's back where they came from and we
might never have had, what the old warrior called the unnecessary war. So now
we hear sad wiseacres say: if only three years ago in Bosnia... But if if if
will get us nowhere. Also, maybe as I talk, or I should say as some of you are
hearing on Monday or Tuesday, those scary gun ships, battle helicopters with
this missiles, and their, what is it 120 anti tank weapons? will have fulfilled
the gaudy promise of their inventors.

Anyway enough. To all of us I suppose, there comes sooner or later the sad end
of some institution we've come to take for granted. I remember Max Beerbohm
bemoaning the end of the carriage and pair and the arrival of the abominable
taxi cab with an internal combustion engine. I suppose if you pursue this
morbid vein you could go all the way back to John Ruskin who was appalled at
the end of the stagecoach and the introduction of the railroad and wrote in a
snorting sentence as I recall: "You have filled every green valley of England
with belching fire and smoke".

Well I'm not snorting, I'm just sad to record the death of an institution,
which not only introduced a new convenience to millions, but was the first
great liberator of young women that invited them to be participants in the
halls of western industry. I will tease you no more! Last week, the
Smith-Corona Company, the last company to manufacture typewriters, filed for
bankruptcy. The typewriter is dead and it surely deserves a decent burial or at
least a worthy obituary. Its only history is not so much a blank as a blur and
as with any invention that became universally used, four or five countries
claimed credit for it. Don't look up the history of the electric bulb or radio
or televisions cathay tube if you want to brush up your patriotism.

There is, in English reference books, mention of a London engineer who applied
for a patent on what he called a writing machine in 1714, but apart from the
application, no more's been heard of it since. Leap ahead 70 years and there's
a Frenchman wanting to patent a writing machine for the blind. Maybe the French
went ahead and built it and have it still, nobody it seems followed it up
across the Channel or across the Atlantic where bright boys were beginning to
dream up some, as it turned out, historic inventions: the cotton gin, same
fellow, the even more revolutionary interchangeable part, and the beginning of
the assembly line, which has totally transformed the material world even in my
lifetime.

However in the first decades of the 19th century, things started to hum for the
typewriter, or click, first an American, then a Frenchman attempted a rude
machine. Then in 1845, one Charles Wheatstone made several, which were almost
from the start interesting if not very workable antiques: they found their way
into the South Kensington Science Museum. But I think everyone's agreed – I
haven't checked with the Russians who invented everything they say even
baseball – everyone's agreed the three Americans sounding like a law firm:
Sholes, Soule and Glidden, financed by three other men, created a machine and
sold the rights to Remington Arms Company: the very same rifle manufacturers.
And this was a landmark, a clarion call – what I'm afraid we'd now call a
defining moment – in human history: QWERTYUIOP was born. QWERTYUIOP.

If by any chance I'm talking to anyone who owns a manual typewriter – a chance
of others, likely as someone who owns a hitching post – look at the top line of
keys, what do they say? They say 'QWERTYUIOP'. Q is at the top left hand corner
and it goes through W.E.R.T.Y.U.I.O and P. The second line is all consonants so
it's unpronounceable except perhaps in Polish. Third line again the remaining
consonants beginning with a Z or Zee and suggests a cousin of the former
Presidential National Security Advisor: Zbigniew Brzezinski. This arrangement
of three lines of letters remains a permanent memorial to the ingenuity of
Sholes, Soule and Glidden. Many other combinations were tried out and
abandoned, the cousin of Anton Dvorak the composer invented one and named it
after himself, thoughtfully arranged so that the stronger fingers – how did he
know – hit the most frequently used letters. It didn't work. QWERTYUIOP
remained, but improvements on the mechanism went on and on and an inked pad
gave way to an inked ribbon and eventually to a revolving sphere tantalisingly
known as a golf ball.

The history of the improvements in what to us looks like a very simple machine
is full of terms you'd think were about designing an interplanetary space
station: coiled springs, drums, ratchet, centre spindle, escapement wheel,
fulcrum wire, weighted tam, the platern. It took 44 years from the manufacture
of the first serviceable Showells, Sole and Gidden, to the arrival of the
portable 1912, just in time for my parents to decide to give me on my 21st
birthday, in 1929 my beloved Corona portable in which the bank of keys folded
over into a little truly portable box. I have it still. I treasure it because
in my last two years at the university I typed all my essays and got remarkably
high marks because I believe they were a blessed relief to the eyesight of the
supervisor plodding through the jungle of hieroglyphics of the other poor pen
squiggling saps.

The time came, some of you may remember a year or two ago, when it was getting
harder and harder to get ribbons. Kind listeners on four continents bought and
sent to me several small piles. Alas they all shared the same flaw, they'd been
made years ago and had no more ink in them than a length of string. At last,
this year I went downtown and I did something I swore I'd never do: I bought an
electric typewriter. It is at least softer to the touch of arthritic fingers,
otherwise it can run away with you.

The old man I bought it from is a true expert, he's made typewriters in 145
languages and he warned me that the electric typewriter too is on its deathbed.
I don't wonder. My two first grandsons used computers and word processors from
the age of nine, both are now in their 20s. Years ago, the number one grandson
tottered into my study and said: "Poppa is it true you have a manual
typewriter?" "Indeed." "May I look?" "Of course." He looked he said "Wow".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP