Operation Desert Fox begins - 18 December 1998

I never thought I would yearn for the good old days, before broadcasts were
recorded and played later.

It may be news to some bright-eyed youngsters, say anyone under 60, that there
was such a time, but recording started during the 1930s. There were acetate
discs, the shellac versions were what the folks at home called gramophone
records and then during the Second World War acetate, like steel, rubber,
practically any metal, was commandeered for war purposes, so we had to use
16-inch wide glass records, a perilous undertaking, as I well remember, going
through factories in the mid-West to record war workers and banging over dirt
roads in Alabama, to record the incomparable voices of black cotton croppers.

Then we went back to some superior acetate that smelt of pineapples and then
there was a real leap ahead, came tape recording, and those whirling little
reels, reel to reel, and now digital recording and cassettes the size of book
matches. That's what's happening at this moment. I mean rather, the moment that
I'm talking, which is alas, not the same as the moment you're listening, which
may be four hours from now or two days, or in the case of New Zealand, four
days later.

So why do I yearn, well not exactly yearn, but wish, once or twice a year, that
as in the olden time, I'd be given a one-minute warning by my friend the
engineer, looking at me through a glass panel, then I'd clear my throat and
wait for the second hand of the studio clock, get a big hand signal and begin
and hope that a frog didn't suddenly hop into my throat.

Why I wish for all this is that, for once, the very latest news would be the
same for you as for me because I usually record this talk on Thursdays, so the
tape can be flown over by night, properly fumigated and made ready for playing
in Britain on Friday evening. But I've always had the privilege, if something
sudden and awful happened, of delaying the procedure and then putting it over
the cable to London, which, of course, I did this time, on Friday.

Well, I decided last Wednesday that this talk was going to be a comment on the
vote in the full House of Representatives to impeach President Clinton. All 435
of them had been notified or commanded to be on hand on Thursday for the vote
and then, on Wednesday morning we heard that Thursday would be given over to
debate and the vote would be taken over to Friday. This left me in a box.

Better, at this agonising moment in American history, just talk about the
history of ice cream or the two German cities that gave their names to the two
most characteristic American snacks. (If you're on tenterhooks – Hamburg and
Frankfurt.)

But then, of all things, the impeachment vote seemed to slip out of our
consciousness when, at sundown here, on Wednesday evening, we saw something we
last saw almost eight years ago, a green screen punctuated with flares and the
cool, sensible voice of Christiane Amanpour keeping tabs on the flares, warning
New York or Atlanta rather, CNN's headquarters here, not to assume an explosion
meant an attack. Iraqi anti-aircraft got busy it seems, well before any Cruise
missiles were delivered.

When the missiles did start popping and smoke could be seen and there was much
banging nearby, a fretful reporter on this side kept wondering aloud where Miss
Amanpour was speaking from and was she protected and she kept replying, with
great patience, that she was on the roof of the Ministry of Information
building in Baghdad and no, no arrangements had been made for her protection.
All the journalists were there and not to worry too much about the frightful
banging, It might be nearby, but it was not that nearby.

This struck me as a uniquely tragic-comic start to news of a war or what the
Pentagon, the White House and all the politicians here call "military
activity". What is it about the modern politician and government official and
now the soldiers, that makes them so afraid of the English language?

It's true that the English language is, of all languages, a simple, clean,
clear instrument that can cut through muddy thought like a knife through
butter. Maybe that's its great flaw when a politician is thought to think
deeply and talk clearly or simply to tell the truth, and when I say modern
politician, official, I mean in the past 50 years, for half our century.

I recall, and always will recall with sharpness, not to say pride, a meeting of
top soldiers – the Anglo-American military staff in General Eisenhower's
headquarters in Grosvenor Square, known then as Eisenhowerplatz, in the middle
of the Second War. They were doing a post-mortem on a recent battle and after
reviewing the casualties and the tactical outcome, an American colonel said,
"How many ICPs have been counted?"

"What,", asked Mr Churchill, "are ICPs?"

Blandly, the colonel replied, "Impaired combatant personnel, sir."

"Never, " rang out the famous growl, "let me hear that detestable phrase again.
If you're talking about British troops, you will refer to them as wounded
soldiers." The Vietnamese War bulletins didn't have the guts to consider death,
they adopted the pasteurised phrase "body count".

Now this is not a pedantic fiddle or fuss. Muddy language proceeds from muddy
minds, which means simply minds that begin by refusing to face simple truths.
There was a perfect and perfectly awful example of what bog of non-meaning this
sort of thinking can lead you into on Wednesday evening, when various
Congressmen were being tapped by reporters to react to the first word of the
new war.

Needless to say, the most outspoken ones were the politicians who wanted to be
sure their constituents knew that their first thoughts were for "our boys out
there". Congressmen who were against the new war were quick to work themselves
up into artificial indignation and there was this one man who pronounced a
marvellous bit of double-talk when he said, "Our boys did not enlist to be put
in harm's way". I can hear thousands of mothers saying "Hear, hear" and perhaps
one grown-up voter saying, "Wait a minute, isn't that what soldiers are for?"
In harm's way, as you know, has become another buzzword, which really says
nothing unless it expresses a secret wish to have no army at all.

Wednesday night I stayed with CNN because it does tend to be the firstest with
the mostest, as the general said. It was the first to catch live, in our
Wednesday afternoon, Prime Minister Blair's speech at 10 Downing Street, but
once the Iraqi flak started up, we alternated between the green, green sky, the
flares, the booms, the voice of the cool, cool Miss Amanpour and direct cuts,
at minute intervals, in Washington, to the Capitol and eventually to what we'd
all been waiting for, some statement from someone in authority about the
impeachment vote.

The impeachment! We'd let that slide in the sudden sound and fury of Operation
Desert Fox. But after all, the whole House had been told to be on hand for the
beginning of the impeachment debate and most of them had flown in and got
caught by the war, like the rest of us. They were hanging around, only too glad
for the moment to get their two cents' worth in about their devotion to the
troops in the field, even though there were no troops and no field, and as I
say, one or two, it must be the same in the House of Commons, who couldn't
resist the opportunity of imputing the war to a calculating Clinton and saying
they felt strongly about putting their boys in harm's way, to save Clinton. A
mean remark, wherever it was made, and really not worth responding to.

The plan for Operation Desert Fox was put together ten days ago, when the first
gloomy word came from Mr Butler's UN team, that they were being denied access
to scores, maybe hundreds, of known sites for weapons of mass destruction.

If and when it was determined by the president, the secretary of state, the
secretary of defence, the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, if Mr Butler's
report came in and the worst came to the worst, then there would be no more
negotiations, no threats, no new ultimatums. It would be essential, then, to
deprive Saddam of the leeway he'd had, the last three times, to divert or bury
the weapons we were on to.

So, eventually, to the lingering mobs of Congress people, Mr Livingston came in
and in a 15-minute speech, staggering through the more familiar jargon of
Capitol Hill, said two things. One, on Thursday a resolution would be passed by
the House declaring its support for the American troops engaged in the new
military activity and two, the vote on the other matter, he never used the word
impeachment, would be put off maybe till Friday, Saturday or whatever.

Well since then tumultuous things have happened. But the schedule survived, in
spite of a furious campaign by the Democrats to postpone the debate and the
vote, the House leader protesting at the outrage of having 24,000 men and women
engaged in war while the Congress is preparing to impeach their commander in
chief. So, as I talk, it's going ahead and even before the House assembled just
about all the wobbling Republicans had ceased to wobble and move over to what
appears to be a certain majority to impeach. The White House was, accordingly,
now pondering its strategy for the trial in the Senate, early in the year.

But by now you will know as much as I and the way news is breaking, if you hear
that an outer spaceship has landed on the White House lawn with a crew of
invading aliens, weird men with slant eyes and pointy heads, you'd probably be
right to believe it.

Meanwhile, I leave you to write the rest of the story about a nation's capital
in a political and moral turmoil, the like of which I have not seen in the 61
years I've been watching it.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP