The first Letter from America 1946 - 22 March 1996

Maybe you've heard that this letter marks a special occasion for a series of
talks that started 50 years ago this Sunday. Somebody had the odd idea that I
should repeat the very first talk. I looked it over and it seemed a happy idea.
So here it is. But I think I ought to fill in a background, the dark, bleak
background of Britain in early 1946, otherwise you'll wonder at the obsession
in this talk with food and clothing, and food and the desperate ways of
procuring them.

In Britain the winter of 1945/6 was the hardest to bear of any of the war
years, not only because of ferocious weather but because during the war the
American government, under President Roosevelt's prodding, had voted to send to
Britain millions of tons of food and billions of dollars in loans to finance
the making of all the weapons of war. But the day after the Japanese
surrendered in August 1945 and the whole Second War was over, President Truman
suspended all this so-called "Lend-Lease" aid.

So Britain, already bankrupted of its own resources, was now deprived of the
American helping hand. My trip over to London, to set up this new series of
non-war talks, was frankly a shocker. Waterloo Station, where I came in from
the boat train, was as dark as a catacomb. There was everywhere, a dire
shortage, of heat and electricity, coal, food, soap was a luxury, napkins at
meals long forgotten, shoes worn thin, worn through, and a usually dapper
friend of mine sat next to me the first evening, raised his index finger and
ran it reverently down the crease in my trousers. He said: "I haven't seen that
for five years." Well now, purged of the obsessive detail about food and
clothing which would today drive you mad, here is the body of that first talk.
Oh, by the way, a GI bride was a British girl who'd married an American soldier
while he was camped in Britain.

I want to tell you what it's like to come back to the United States after a
sobering month in Britain and say what daily life feels and looks like by
comparison. I sailed back on the Queen Mary with a couple of thousand GI brides
and, I recall now, the great liner thundering its great horn as we slipped away
from the dock at Southampton. All the mothers were clinging to the rail and all
the babies were clinging to their mothers.

Along the entire curving length of the ship's main deck, the handkerchiefs
fluttered in an unbroken line like washing day in Manchester and then a small
coastguard cutter scuttled along like a playful puppy. A sailor stood at the
cutter's bow, he cupped his hands and yelled: "You wouldn't like to come back,
would you?" And the young mothers and wives, weeping like mad, yelled, "No!"
The ship turned about, we headed into the Channel, England faded into the night
and we all went below.

For the brides who'd just done dabbing their eyes there was a first small shock
of Americana. A meal with meat and a vegetable not easily recognisable. No
wonder, it was not Brussels sprouts, it was a cooked mixture of lima beans and
corn, translation, maize, an American Indian favourite, christened by them,
succotash. At the breakfast next day there were eggs and bacon and sausage
patties and pancakes and maple syrup. The butter was fresh and plentiful and
the oranges were to take away. This went on for five days and it struck me by
the second day out, that few ironies of peace can be so delicate as the sight
of GI brides, comparatively famished for five years, refusing most of these
goodies, not because of just the rolling wave, but because their stomachs, over
five years, had shrunk.

Towards the late afternoon of the fifth day, we were moving slowly up New York
Harbour and slowly out of the mist rose the towering cluster of the downtown
skyscrapers, crowned with a small cloud of smoke and fog. Some bright girl
wondered why they should be, when all around was blue water and a sparkling
sky. It was the first reminder of New York as, in a minor way, a war casualty.
Before the war Manhattan was a sparkling island, both by day and by night
because the city had a law forbidding the burning of soft coal anywhere, for
more than ten minutes a day.

But in 1940, when neighbouring factories turned into war factories for 24 hours
a day, the law was suspended and it's never been put back. By now a whole fleet
of little freighters and tugs were piping out as we rode by and from time to
time the Queen Mary terrified the children by roaring back three thunderous
blasts. A specially chartered ferry boat, tagging along by our side, played
jazzed-up versions of Why Did I Kiss That Girl and Here Comes The Bride. The
captains of the tug boats would look sky-high and wave at the brides and soon
we saw great signs painted on piers and docks. Welcome Home and Well Done.

A soldier friend of mine told me of the lump that came in his throat when he
heard the bands and saw the signs. Full of pride and bounce he went down the
gangplank to meet New York and its grateful citizens. He was far from home and
he started to look for a hotel room. Nothing had been built during the war and
the hotels were crammed. Then he looked for just a room anywhere. He wound up
by begging a man who ran a Turkish bath for a sheet just for the night. It was
his due, of fame, for a job well done.

I soon noticed other flaws in everyday life that only a month before I'd taken
for granted, as the war had worn on. The taxi that took me home had one door
tied with string and that evening in another cab, the driver couldn't use his
first gear which had given up shortly before VE Day. He also couldn't go in
reverse so if he scuttled past your destination, he had to drive round the
block again to land just right. This is useful money-making device, I offer
without fee or patent.

Next morning, outside my office was a long queue, about oh, 80 yards long,
mostly of women, a sprinkling of men shifting a little guiltily from foot to
foot. It was a queue for nylon stockings. Well by now there are, in theory,
enough nylons to provide most women with a single pair, a promise that signals
what might be called, Operation Greed. People get afraid they'll miss their
assigned pair of stockings, so a woman queues up for one pair and her husband,
nonchalantly disguised, for another. Need I say there are also in these queues,
smooth-looking gents and crummy-looking youths with fake ration certificates,
who have no personal use for nylons and no wife or girlfriend to be a hero for.
They're just doing the rounds of the queues, by way of running their own modest
black market.

Nylons are not a unique case, since I got back here. I've only once had butter
offered to me in a restaurant. But here again and I mean over here, a
wholesaler who serves any big city, hears there's going to be say, a shortage
of butter, maybe only for a few days, but the black market, if it's to keep its
custom, can't depend on a long shortage, so it corners the market and jacks up
the price. The big hotels and the restaurants are reluctant participants in
this game, they can't afford to go two days without butter, so they're thinking
of the prosperous peacetime patronage to come. They lay in extra supplies, pay
more for them and in the end everybody is the loser.

And now the city fathers tell us that worse is to come. Soon we'll be eating
brown bread. The fact that brown bread, which preserves the wheat kernel, the
whole grain, is far more nutritious than the white bread that has been bleached
of it, is not over-publicised. In both countries, it seems, white bread has for
a very long time been thought townier. So now what? Good housewives rush around
buying up stacks of white flour, which in turn produces a flour shortage.

This panic is basically a fear in a land of plenty, that you may go short and
become - help! - like Europe. The fear was very lively during the war. The
consequence was that Americans consumed more meat than ever before in their
history and eventually these contrived shortages affect the farmer, what they
call his mule feed, the residue from milling which farmers feed their cows and
chickens. And this means in another month or so, we're told, fewer chickens and
unnecessary egg shortage and a beer shortage, something American hasn't seen
since prohibition.

So whenever you're inclined to grumble at your lot, at the controls you live
under, think, as the prophet says, on these things and consider how hectic it
can be to be housewife in this country, where the government is not buying the
food in the first place, where controls start mainly with the bewildered
retailer. I hope the next letter will be more cheerful than this one, but I
thought you'd like to know how it feels to have left austere, shivery old
England and got back to the land of the free and the home of the brave.

Well that was the first of, I'm alarmed to see, 2,458 letters. Down the years
I've heard often enough not to be coy about it, that some of my personal
pleasure has passed over to listeners and very many of them have written to say
so, from it seems, every land on earth.

I thank them here and can only say, I've been wishing for 49 years, I could
reply to more than a fraction of them among the far-flung audience that radio
makes miraculously possible. Just recently a British journalist, who seemed to
have a gift for making mischief where he couldn't find it, asked me if anybody
in the BBC had ever asked me to retire and was I going to do so anyway? I said
the answer was no and no.

I've noticed if you retire, you keel over. The day of retirement from this
assignment, which was given to me 50 years ago by the BBC official who bore the
grand title of Director of the Spoken Word, the day of retirement is up to the
Lord of us all, the great time-keeper in the sky, the true director of the
spoken word.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (Â©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts Â©BBC. Letter from America
scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP