Hurricane Elena and the legal drinking age - 6 September 1985

Although about four-fifths of this country is still blazing away in the 90s the
calendar says that Labor Day, the first Monday in September, is the end of
summer and time to close the summer cottages, desert the mountains and the
lakes and the seashore and get back to work, to school, to writing the cheque
for the third quarter of your income tax and seeing that it’s in the grasp of
the internal revenue service by the end of next week.

So the last weekend in August is a happy, sad festival time for most Americans.
It is, however, for the inhabitants of Florida and the people who live along
the adjoining coast on the Gulf of Mexico, always an anxious time, for the end
of August tends to coincide with the first of the big hurricanes that are born
in the Caribbean.

With any luck – for North Americans, that is – they assault Haiti or crash into
Cuba but as often as not the Caribbean is the spawning ground. They grow up
down there and expand into the shape of a huge doughnut, the whole in the
middle being the eye, or dead centre, of the storm. They whirl around that
centre and then set course for the north and it’s a toss up then, with any
given hurricane, whether it’s headed for the Florida peninsula which drops like
the barrel of a pistol into the sea or turns north-west towards the cities of
the Gulf coast – Tallahassee at the trigger of the pistol or west along the
handle to Mobile and New Orleans and even farther west still to Houston.

Well this year, as you probably heard for the Floridians and the Alabamians and
the Mississippians, the theoretical summer ended with a mighty bang in the
eventual landfall of the hurricane Elena. Now it seems to me possible that seen
from abroad some people will think that an almighty fuss was made about the
imminent approach of this monster, actually the fifth of the season, but much
the biggest.

So what was the casualty list? How many thousands were drowned? Well, the
answer appears to be three. A man was killed by a falling tree and two others
died of heart attacks. So what is all this pother about winds of 125 miles an
hour and towering tides? The fact is that the tracking and observation of Elena
was an unprecedented triumph.

Thirty years ago there could well have been thousands of dead and missing. In
those days there were no weather satellites. Of course there were weather
forecasts and the air arm of the weather service flew down and into the storms
to measure their intensity and discover their general direction and the people
who were told they lay in the path, probable path, would gather up their
blankets and beds and children and old folk and beat it inland into schools and
gymnasiums and motels and such.

You never knew for sure which bit of land was going to be hit until it happened
but Elena was different in a maddening way. It came whirling up from the
Caribbean and seemed on a steady course for the west coast of Florida which
consequently warned its citizens and prepared to evacuate them, but then Elena
became worse news than usual. It paused. It crawled. It tried this direction
and that.

It stayed for three days at sea, hovering over the Gulf and not making up its
mind where to strike. The longer a hurricane stays over water, the more
moisture it absorbs and the moisture is like fuel to a jet engine and increases
the rotary speed. Days before Elena struck it was called a moderately severe
hurricane, a number one, on a scale of one to five. Two days later the circling
winds were in excess of 125 miles an hour and Elena was counted as a number
three in severity. Then, on Labor Day, Monday the 2nd, it stormed ashore along
the coast of Mississippi.

So once again, nobody knew for sure whither it was bound until it bounded, but
what the weather satellite picture – those beautiful bird’s-eye or God’s-eye
view of the whole country – what those pictures did was to show what no other
device could have shown, that the hurricane had a huge diameter and was poised
and tacking and hovering over hundreds of miles of curving coastline and could
just as well strike Sarasota, Florida as New Orleans.

So the hurricane centre, the national institution, warned the governors of four
states – Florida in the East and Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana – that their
coastal residents were in peril and the mayors and police of many cities were
told to begin the evacuation of everyone within reach of seaborne floods and
you know how long that threatened coastline stretches, just over 700 miles,
roughly about from Brighton to the Orkneys.

Everybody out – men, women, children, hospital patients, residents of towns,
villages, trailers, hotels, motels, everybody. In all, just over one and a half
million people were uprooted and driven way inland to every conceivable sort of
shelter. It was a colossal undertaking and it was done.

Was this journey really necessary? Yes, the damage to piers first and then to
whole towns, to buildings of all sorts, to forests, to power lines, was
enormous right along that 700-mile stretch. New Orleans was at the western edge
of the storm and most people there stayed put, positively grateful that all
they were getting was a 70 mile an hour fringe wind. Trees down, roofs off,
sure, but in New Orleans it was called “the storm that missed us”. Usually they
assessed the damage at so many millions of dollars. This time nobody has dared
to come up with a figure.

The president will declare those beaten stretches disaster areas and there will
be federal funds available which no one will deny even though the government
deficit will inch yet a little higher. Still, Elena deserves to go into the
history books as honourably as those wars that United Nations prevented and
which therefore nobody ever hears about. When John Glenn said, during a bitter
wrangling early stage of the space programme, that all it would contribute to
mankind was the non-sticking frying pan he could not have guessed that those
nightly satellite weather pictures could save thousands of lives.

Back to school then. The phrase in America applies not only to children, but to
everybody in college or a university. I still get a suppressed giggle from
strangers who ask did you go to school at Cambridge. Well this year there are
teachers’ strikes in about 20 cities and thousands of children are still at
large and will be till the teachers in this city get more pay, in that city the
same rate of pay for newcomers as for veterans, in another place inevitably no
school until women get the same pay for what is called comparable work.

Chicago is the worst off with 35,000 teachers out and over half a million
youngsters out on the town or the lake shore or otherwise rollicking in the
school of life. On the campuses in the colleges across the country there is one
quite radical change.

Twenty-one states have already passed law that raises the permissible drinking
age from 18 or 19 to 21 and in the coming year, new laws will do the same for
another 15 states. That leaves 14 states, all but two in the mid-west or the
far west, that don’t propose to raise their drinking age.

Governor Cuomo of New York, after a tough parliamentary tussle, saw the
21-year-old bill passed and said it was the best thing that had happened to the
state this year. The stated reason for this national movement is to stop or
lessen drunken driving, and to soften the blow to young one-fisted drinkers,
the colleges are bringing in a variety of reforms in the campus pubs,
substituting fruit juice, “mocktails” they’re being called, banning townspeople
who are not students from campus parties, setting aside corners of rooms for –
I was going to say alcoholics only – for the students over 21 who want to
drink.

The most severe new rule is the banning of alcohol from all college concerts
and athletic events. In this state, New York, the law now allows
administrators, teachers, dormitory supervisors and the like to have a set of
keys in order to make surprise raids on the rooms of under-age students.

Well it all sounds very sensible and progressive but to many students it also
sounds like a mini-repeat performance of the so-called noble experiment of
prohibition, which in the 1920s was meant to make America pure but did, in
fact, start people drinking who’d never touched the stuff and so generated a
whole new tribe of criminals, the bootlegging gangsters.

It’s not hard to imagine the waves of protests that are rippling across the
campuses. “We can join the armed forces,” said one student in Arizona, “we are
consenting adults, we can go to prison, why can’t we drink?”

It will not be long, I’m fairly sure, before a legal test case and the
trotting-out even before the Supreme Court of the good old First Amendment to
the Constitution, which has been invoked before now to justify campus riots,
mimic sex acts on stage, the "right" to go and make it in public. Of course the
First Amendment is always brought up to defend freedom of speech which it
guarantees but it contains also the phrase “the right of the people peaceably
to assemble”.

Now if that sounds far-fetched you should have heard some of the debates in the
state legislatures that defeated bills to compel the wearing of seatbelts in
motor cars. You’d have thought that Tom Paine and Patrick Henry had been reborn
in the speeches of passionate men who maintained – and in their own state
successfully maintained – that the founding fathers were the first champions of
the principle that every citizen of this country has a constitutional right,
the liberty to assemble with another citizen and sit in the front seat of an
automobile without having to assemble a seat belt across his chest.

How long this preposterous interpretation of the First Amendment is likely to
last is anybody’s guess. New York State put the seatbelt law into effect at the
beginning of the year and the results have been dramatic – fewer accidents in
proportion to cars on the road than at any time since the 1920s, and these
impressive figures have been published and publicised far and wide.

One southern politician who quoted Patrick Henry’s famous line “Give me liberty
or give me death” may soon hear himself being quoted as saying “Give me liberty
and give me death”.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP