Thanksgiving in California - 29 November 1996

San Francisco airport is as you might guess, one of the largest and most
spacious in the country. But we flew in here the other day to see a very odd
headline on the front page of the evening paper. "Parking," it said, "SRO, at
SFO." Standing room only for airport parking. This was not a report of what had
happened but a warning of what was going to happen three days later on the eve
of Thanksgiving which is always the fourth Thursday in November.

By mid morning of Wednesday the paper said, any space in the parking lots is
pretty sure to disappear. A graph accompanying this piece showed that November
is the worst month for airport parking, since the airport handles more
passengers then, three million and 40,000. More than in any other month of the
year and the worst day of the month was last Wednesday.

What is it, a stranger might ask, that makes Thanksgiving so special? Well so
far as travel is concerned, it is the family festival. A time when more
Americans travel and they're not going away, they're going back home, than on
the eve of any other holiday. To incredulous Englishmen who say: "Surely not as
many as Christmas?" I have to remind them that the United States, in spite of
the fulminations of the true believers known as the Christian right, the United
States is not a Christian country. "Congress shall make no law respecting an
establishment of religion," is the first clause of the first sentence of the
first of the ten amendments to the Constitution that became known as the Bill
of Rights.

That simple phrase begins to carry a peculiar poignancy as the Pacific coast
receives more and more Asian refugees, and the mainland, more and more Muslims.
In the wake of several, frightful terrorist explosions, riots and public
threats that you've heard about, there are desperate newcomers who need to be
told that it is not a Muslim country either. This influx from a country with a
particular religious bent is an old recurring chapter in the story of American
immigration. The one quarter, was it, of the Irish population that fled from
the potato famine in the late 1840s, ran into one trouble they'd not
anticipated which was prejudice against their Catholicism.

In the beginning this prejudice flared up among the people of Massachusetts,
the descendants of the Puritans who were determined to purify the Church of
England they'd left behind. The corrupt church as they thought. And for several
generations, reaching into my own time, the 1930s, there were signs, stickers
on the windows of shops and offices advertising for help: "No Irish need
apply." Down in the states of the Deep South, the filtering-in of the Irish was
instantly viewed by the Baptists and the more evangelical sects as the
forerunners of a Roman invasion.

This panic emotion gave rise to the Ku Klux Klan. As late as 1928 the Democrats
nominated for the presidency the Irish Governor of New York, a waggish, wily,
honest politician. And a Catholic. He was defeated mainly by the Southern vote
which saw Al Smith as the chosen emissary of the Pope. And even so late as 1960
when John Kennedy, grandson of one of those same impoverished Irishmen escaping
from famine, when Kennedy started his primary campaign in the South, he knew he
would have to confront the rising fear of the great population of Southern
Protestants that his first loyalty would be to Rome. In a speech in Texas he
put it on the line. That he was running for president as an American, a
Democrat, a man from Massachusetts whose first and only political loyalty was
to the Constitution of the United States. It was a sharp and eloquent speech
and memorable enough to stifle any lingering fears about Rome and popery. But
just think. It took 112 years after the first great tidal wave of Irish
immigration before a Catholic could become President of the United States.

Of course the Catholics in many more cities than Boston, New York, Chicago,
have long ago been assimilated. Though they're always a factor considered as a
voting block in elections. But now only one of several. And the point of my
bringing this up is that the recent presidential election made something
glaringly clear that we, we wasps especially, took seriously for the first
time. Which is that there are newer immigrants who are beginning to constitute
a political force, what I call, more crudely, a voting block.

Hispanics – what we must now call Latinos – have to be not only considered but
wooed and welcomed. It has come out that what carried Florida for Clinton was
not only the great population of old, retired people who were scared by the
story, untrue, that the Republicans would cut Medicare, the free medicine for
the aged, but also by the preponderance of the Latino vote, young and
middle-aged, particularly, that see themselves embraced by Clinton and the
Democrats, but greeted with a slightly apprehensive look by the Republicans.

Consider. Of the 60-odd counties in California the most dependably stalwart
rock-ribbed Republican county, down the last four, five decades in Southern
California, has been Orange County. Some of you may possibly recall a talk I
did from there during the Gulf War, when, surprisingly, fewer Americans were
flying than ever in modern times. There was a weird irrational fear of Iraqi
air raids. Los Angeles, I recall, ran out of its stacked inventory of gas
masks.

Well I flew with about ten other people into the airport of Orange County. Who
do you think it's named after? It's called the John Wayne International
Airport. And at its entrance stands a statue of him that would shame the statue
of Helios, the Colossus of Rhodes. And when you drive out you find yourself
very quickly on a boulevard or motor highway named after General Douglas
MacArthur, the colossus of Manila. I remember saying at the time that Orange
County, California, was where you would least be likely to see a statue of
Franklin Roosevelt or Adlai Stevenson or any other Democrat.

Well, this time around, there was a contest between a seat in Congress between
a fine old purple-angry Republican male and a young Latino woman, a Democrat.
Twenty years ago this would have been a no contest exercise in the ridiculous.
The young Latino won. I believe she did. She was leading by several hundred
votes and she took off for Washington and her basic training while her
Clinton-bashing opponent was swelling his veins with fury and howling for a
recount.

There are similar stories from around the country. Results that only eight
years ago would have been passing aberrations. So far we've not noticed the
rise of an influential Muslim voting block and here on the West coast, the
incoming or first generation Asians – that we used to call Orientals – they
seem to work first, very hard, to match and surpass long established locals, in
the sciences and trades, and think about a political presence later. But it
will come.

So what I've been implying is, among American institutions that are not subject
to change, there remains the blessed un-politicised institution of
Thanksgiving. Whether the newcomer knows the original story or not, it's the
same for everybody. At the end of the first successful harvest in the founding
colony of Massachusetts, after a brutal winter of sickness and actual
starvation, the founders gave thanks with a feast. And they cooked a beast
they'd never seen in Europe, a turkey. And cooked him with the new, the local
vegetables, maize, forever after called here corn, and made a sauce of the
cranberries they found in the coastal bogs. And for pudding, which later here
came to be called dessert, they made many dishes, but, at Thanksgiving, a pie.
A pumpkin pie.

So far in the matter of Thanksgiving dinner, ingredients, ethnic ingredients,
I've noticed on the part of the airlines no concession to new Americans, apart
from, what has been true for a long time, the provision at the touch of a
telephone, of kosher meals, especially in planes out of or into New York, which
after all contains one third of all the six million Jews in the United States.

But so far no breast of lemon tea turkey with mango fig cornmeal sauce and red
pepper crusted pumpkin mousse. Just the old originals. The one variation I've
noticed was voiced in a newspaper piece, a health column. A desperate piece,
attempting to see that you followed the traditional meal without breaking your
own diet rules, since, the writer says, a Thanksgiving dinner is a coronary
blow-out. Better baste the turkey not with butter, but with fruit juice. Mash
the potatoes, not as usual with cream and butter, but, he dares to say it, and
I'm afraid it may still be right in the English fashion, with - urgh - skimmed
milk. And then better skip the pumpkin pie and substitute persimmon slush. I
mean, enough!

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP