The Haitian refugees enter America - 25 June 1993

There can hardly be an American, born in this country anyway, who cannot recite
the five thundering lines inscribed on the Statue of Liberty. The hectoring
command: "Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to
breathe free, The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. Send these, the
homeless, tempest-tost to me, I lift my lamp beside the golden door."

Generous words, almost arrogant in their bravery. Whether they constitute fine
poetry or foul, they touched the hearts and minds of millions of Europeans,
always the poor, often the persecuted, in many lands. They were spurred by
those words to pack a few belongings, often no more than a blanket, a cooking
pot, a prayer book, a corset, climb aboard boxcars deep inside Russia or
Hungary or Lithuania or Germany, be carried to the great ports –
Constantinople, Piraeus, Antwerp, Bremen – and there in enclosures outside the
embarkation city, they were bathed, de-loused, fed, their baggage and clothes
fumigated and then they were put aboard. That procedure is important in view of
what happened to 125 political refugees at an American naval base last weekend.

Well, we're talking about the routine procedures employed on the fourteen and a
half million immigrants who arrived here, here being mainly New York or Boston,
in the first two decades of this century. If they'd memorised the lines of Emma
Lazarus, that scholarly lady who begged the tired and poor to come and be
clutched to the bosom of that colossal lady peering out towards Europe, they
would very soon find out that the physical routine of getting into the United
States was not quite what a poor foundling might expect of a new, compassionate
mother.

First, coming across the Atlantic they were not so much allotted space as
stowed aboard, as many as 900 in steerage. Sailing slowly up the Lower Bay of
New York City, they would spot their first Americans, climbing aboard from a
coastguard cutter. Two mean and a woman, immigration inspectors. And the first
thing these inspectors did was to look over the ship's manifest and see if the
captain had recorded cases of contagious disease. Considering the frequency and
unpredictability at the time of ravaging epidemics across the continent of
Europe, they looked out for signs of cholera, typhoid, tuberculosis certainly.
Any sign of these fearsome diseases, you were at once taken off to quarantine
on an island in the bay and got ready for early deportation.

Once the mass of newcomers had been herded into a large reception hall, they
would be tagged with numbers and grouped according to their native tongue,
which for the vast majority was the only one they spoke. They moved, shadowed
by bawling interpreters, in lines past a doctor in a blue uniform, a man with a
piece of chalk in his hand, an instant diagnostician. He was certainly a fast
one and he had the confidence that comes from not knowing anything about CAT
scans or MRIs or PSAs. He saw an ageing man with purple lips and he chalked on
the man's back "H", possible heart disease, separate this man. Children in arms
stood down to see if they betrayed the limp of rickets. "T" on the back was the
expulsion sign of tuberculosis. Two other doctors dipped into a bowl of
disinfectant and folded a suspect eyelid back with a buttonhook. Trachoma, very
prevalent in southern and eastern Europe and a sure passport to blindness. You
too were on your way back home.

We won't follow the release of most of the healthy rest to railroad agents, con
men, honest employers and sweatshop owners looking for, and getting, in
luscious numbers, an army of cheap labourers, but for most it was better than
life in the homeland. The expectation among the mass of the settled population
was that these strangers would settle in too. But with every wave of new
immigrants, there was always a booming counter-wave of protest from the people
who'd been here a long time, two, three, more generations, from what we now
call the Anglos and their collateral Nordics – Swedes, Norwegians, Germans.
They had run the country, its government, its institutions, for a hundred years
or more, so every breaking wave of new immigrants made a rude sound to the
residents and they protested, then they discriminated. Often Washington
legislated, as it did in the 1920s and again in the 1950s, against what were
called undesirable types, meaning southern, eastern Europeans.

To show you how this worked, let me say that by the time I first came here in
the early '30s, there still lingered, pasted on old shop windows and employment
agencies, stickers left over from early in our century – No Irish need apply.
But now, new to me, in the late '30s, looking for an apartment, you'd see just
outside the entrance to an apartment building, a block of flats, a sign, a
wooden post surmounted by a rectangle, a sort of mahogany plaque, very
handsome, a very meticulously printed sign, usually of gold lettering on a
black surface, It said, apartments to let, three to six rooms, restricted.

That last word was not put in as an afterthought, it was not sneakily chalked
in, it was printed in the same fine style as the rest of the announcement.
Restricted, I discovered, was shorthand for no Jews need apply. That was
standard practice here in New York, in Manhattan particularly. The other four
boroughs getting most of their business and work from the legions of incoming
Jews, could not afford to be so particular. That rather callous sign vanished,
constituted in fact a criminal act by the late 1940s, when a Republican
governor of New York, Thomas E Dewey – who had two failing shots at the
presidency against Roosevelt – Dewey got though the state legislature, the
first in this country, Fair Employment and Fair Housing Act. Of course the
practice of exclusion was not totally abandoned. It continued unofficially,
discreetly, on tiptoe, in the English manner.

Today there are no signs, except scurrilous ones painted by hooligans, but in
the teeming boroughs, in Queens, Staten Island, the Bronx, Brooklyn, blacks
glare at the successful Korean fruiterers, the pious religious Jewish sects
watch their step. People who once went to Chinatown for entertainment and
exquisite cheap sandals now stay away after hearing of boatloads of smuggled
Chinese brought in here to swell the active army of gangsters. It's news to
most of us that there have been for some time, ruthless and very active Chinese
gangs working profitably, what else, drugs.

But just now the victim, the scapegoat, everybody's feared interloper, is the
Haitian. I think I mentioned a few months ago the drastically changed ethnic
composition of New York taxi drivers. Where once, in what to me I fear is the
familiar long ago, taxi drivers were first or second generation Irishmen,
Italians, Germans, now they are Puerto Ricans, Haitians, Russians, Israelis.
Why should the arrivals from Haiti be so feared? Well, since the Haitian
military overthrew President Aristide, almost two years ago, about 40,000
Haitians have fled from what is quite plainly a particularly brutal tyranny.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP