Military intervention in Bosnia - 25 February 1994

Two weeks ago, I believe I talked about the spell that every American president
since Lyndon Johnson has fallen under, when there's an act of aggression
somewhere in the world, that America might be expected to respond too.

I use the rather academic phrase "act if aggression" deliberately instead of a
massacre, an invasion, a bloody war because it's the phrase in the United
Nations Charter, which in fact is used as the reason why the UN exists, a
voluntary association, a league of nations that swears to respond to acts of
aggression that threaten any one member. A Utopian idea as we've seen from the
fate of all the other leagues of nations that have been formed and abandoned
since the 16th century.

The United Nations has lasted as long as any of them because to be fair and not
cynical, it's accepted a lot of failures and still gone on and it's only been
able twice to get the Security Council to vote unanimously for action. The
first time was Korea when the Soviets were staying away from New York in a huff
and didn't get there in time to veto the vote.

Desert Storm was something else, by then the Soviet Union was a dismembered
giant and in no shape to veto or stop a UN force, mainly American, charging
into Kuwait and Iraq with 100,000 men and all those frightening smart weapons.

President Reagan may seem to have contradicted my theory, no president loved
the military so conspicuously, none spent more time saluting, not one warned
everybody so often that America was going to click its heels and stand tall on,
as we say, his watch. The strange fact that more than any Western leaders since
the Second War, Reagan was responsible for winding down the Cold War and the
threat of mutual nuclear destruction. Here's another story altogether, but as
for sending American troops anywhere into action, President Reagan for all his
parade ground flourishes didn't do it unless he had an almost ludicrously
crushing superiority in numbers. What was it in Grenada, 10,000 brave Americans
putting down 600 Cubans, what caused this trance or trauma was no secret as I
said last time, it was the fear of a second Vietnam, which dogged Americans for
two decades and still dogs them that once you send men into battle, there's no
saying when it will end and how many thousands of casualties you'll have to
suffer.

This fear was very strong in the summer when Saddam Hussein walked into Kuwait
and even on that January night two years ago when the action began, an immense
fearful calm fell on the people of this country. But I don't believe any
president in recent memory has been so hobbled by the Vietnam trauma as Mr
Clinton for, of course, the main personal reason that he had been a young man
who, if he did not evade, avoided the Vietnam War, which made his relations
with the military sticky in his first few months, especially since he committed
the enormous tactical blunder of making the question of homosexuals in the
forces his first big political issue.

But I think behind all this first with Somalia and then with Bosnia, there must
have been always at the back of his mind ready to leap to the front of it the
dread fear that he'd find himself commander-in-chief in a long and ruinous war
and then what a howl would have deafened and immobilised his administration.

You'll remember that when he did decide to go into Somalia, he paid tribute to
the old trauma by announcing a date for the withdrawal of American troops that
must have been a giggly day for the guerrillas to be the beneficiaries of the
first promise that the enemy would fight for only so long and then go home, so
what's going to happen after that March deadline? Let's not think about it.

But now Bosnia, what suddenly stiffened the Clinton policy on Bosnia, what made
him decide to lead the punishing air strikes if the Serbs didn't withdraw their
heavy guns? What made him talk in his explanatory press conference as if the
siege of Sarajevo was something that had been started a week ago; it's been
going on for 18 months and that, what is it, 1,200,000 civilian casualties
don't bear thinking about.

I believe the answer is simple, not terribly inspiring if you're looking for a
new impulse, a new decisiveness in American policy, the answer is the
television pictures of that Sunday mortar explosion in the square and the
sights of so many grisly variations of human corpses among the 64 who were
killed. Am I saying that a new turn in American foreign policy was triggered by
the television pictures? Yes. Somehow, the 18 months of arguing and fighting
and suffering and temporising and threatening and dithering, all were banished
by the vivid image of those scattered dead. The UN commander himself more or
less admitted it in the wake of the American agreement to deliver an ultimatum
to the Serbs.

The present atmosphere, these things can change overnight like a weather system
and I'm talking before the weekend, the present atmosphere in Washington is one
of shall we say guilty relief, I was going to say a modest sense of triumph and
there'll always be a senator and a congressman to wrap himself in the flag at
the drop of the first enemy casualty, but in the nick of time to spoil any
American feeling of a triumph as the Serbs started moving their heavy guns, a
bogey man appeared in the shape of a bear. The Russian foreign office in the
person of Mr Vitaly Churkin and a very personable person he is. He – on and I
suppose the orders of Mr Yeltsin who interestingly enough could not be reached
by Mr Clinton's hotline for two whole days – just as we were about to proclaim
that the evil Serbs had caved in before our NATO-UN-US threat, Mr Churkin
repeated on the telly the very alarming warning of the Russian foreign minister
before the UN 10 days before, a speech not picked up in many places.

I think I mentioned his warning the Security Council of all instant warmongers
that not only would air strikes cast a very dark shadow on American-Russian
relations, but in a speech which I have no doubt will be recorded for all time
in the Russian, the new Russian history books, he first suggested that he took
the Serbian view of that Sunday mortar outrage, namely that it had been done
secretly by the Bosnians – Hitler's tactic before the invasion of Poland. Then
he went on, once before in Sarajevo, in 1914, a similar provocation led a
global tragedy. I thought this was a most extraordinary line to take, we've
known for ever of course that the Russians are the Serb's allies but not in any
blood-brother sense and they weren't going to interfere in anyway with the air
strikes or the UN were they? Well, we discovered they were and in a twinkling
they performed a little master stroke of diplomacy, which left the new braced
Clinton backbone looking wobbly indeed.

What the handsome Mr Churkin said just before the deadline approached was that
the strikes, the bombing would mean all-out war, continuing the same rhetorical
flourish as his boss at the UN, but then came the moment of wonderful
deception. In effect, he was saying, "Mother Russia couldn't bear the thought
of the Third War, which confidentially the UN-American initiative was about to
provoke, so we have gone to the Serbs and offered to send in from Croatia our
very own troops, paratroopers 400 of them in United Nations uniform. To do
what? To keep the peace.

This must feel like a very backhanded compliment to General Rose who has been
there for months in the thick of it running the large peacekeeping force under
awful conditions and with no sure protection as we saw only the other day in
Tuzia where the general's forces were refused air cover and saw five Swedish
soldiers wounded, so to keep the peace, which really I think means to the
Russians and the Serbs to protect the Serbian forces from the murderous
possibility of infantry contact with Bosnians, who would be more than their
equals without the looming of the Serbian's heavy weapons. To keep the peace
also, I'm afraid, means keeping or freezing the Serbians' territorial gains in
cruder words to say, "Well men, I see the war's over, so let's not be so
tasteless as to say the Serbians won it, but the new borders surely must be the
ones they fought for and reached". The coming bout of peacekeeping could be
quite as long as it was in Korea.

At the least we should notice the Russians have come out from behind their
recent role of playing Oliver Twist, they're back in the diplomatic game as an
independent superpower. The arrest of that American counterspy the other day
showed also that the KGB has not turned into a detachment of unemployed
Keystone Cops, it is just as wiley and widespread a secret service as ever it
was.

And talking of Korea, another glaring example came up of seeing is believing or
the effect of television on foreign policy: an American colonel there said that
the South Koreans were not so much afraid of a nuclear attack from the North as
of the 700,000 North Korean conventional forces assembled shall we say not
quite mobilised within 60 miles of the demilitarised zone, why so? A former
American ambassador to South Korea said it in seven words, "they saw the Gulf
War on television".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP