US taxation in 1995 - 21 April 1995

Our Constitution is in actual operation. Everything appears to promise that it
will last. But in this world, nothing is certain except death and taxes.

Who wrote that sad maxim that every English speaking person has heard since
babyhood? Benjamin Franklin, writing to a French friend only two years after
the American Constitution and the form of government it set up had been
ratified. Is there anybody alive who does not believe in the inevitability of
death and taxes? Well yes. I know one American woman, belongs to a California
cult that won't allow death, and there's a whole nation that after more than
200 years of dickering around with various forms of taxation, still feels that
one of its signal failures is not finding a way to govern, to get along without
taxes.

It was well said this week, that ever since the Boston Tea Party and the cry of
no taxation without representation, our pragmatic nation has tended to reduce
all philosophical issues about the scope of government to one word: taxes. It's
true that at all times, at the beginning of every election campaign, whether
for congress, the presidency, city mayor, treasurer, the first outcry, the
first slogan to hit the placards and the television ads, is to do something new
about taxes, preferably to reduce them.

Now of course nobody can reduce taxes drastically. The party quarrel is usually
about where to cut spending and whom to tax. Only once in recent history did a
saviour, a Moses, I mean a presidential candidate, come along and say, not only
was he going to cut income taxes, he was going to take a cleaver. Fifty percent
of all your earnings going to the government? Ridiculous, he said, let's make
the highest rate for personal income tax, say 24 per cent and the government
will bring in more revenue than it did before. Who was this medicine man, this
snake oil salesman? His name was Ronald Reagan and he was so ingratiating – he
wasn't fiery or bloodshot, like most reformers – he said, I'm just your
ordinary Joe, most happy fella and this is my idea. People were so bedazzled by
this promise that they voted for him in large numbers and he went, in 1981
sailing, into the White House.

Moreover he got through a bill and the Congress passed it, and the high rate
for personal income tax dropped from 50 to 24 per cent. And once this Reagan
reform came into effect – which is always about 18 months after a new President
comes in – the government receipts from income tax, both personal and
corporate, were dramatically higher than they'd been before. How so? A wider
tax base, many more people paying smaller taxes. The Democrats said that Mr
Reagan and his cockamamie ideas would ruin the country. He pointed out that one
result of them was that during most of his presidency, the United States
sprouted more millions of jobs than all the West European countries combined.
Mr Reagan went thundering in, the second time, by a bigger majority than the
first and at the end of his presidency he retired in glory to Beverley Hills,
having left behind, the Democrats hissed, a trillion dollar debt and an
unprecedented deficit. Remember however, it was only his initiative, the
enabling bills were passed by Congress, Democratically controlled Congress.

The Republicans said then and they keep on saying, the deficit and the trillion
dollar debt have nothing to do with Reagan's devastating tax cut and this
puzzle will be argued to the end of time and there's no point in picking out an
expert. If you go to John Kenneth Galbraith, a liberal economist, he will
deplore the Reagan years and the legacy of his debt. But go to out to Chicago,
to a conservative economist, Dr Milton Friedman and he will tell you that the
relation of the deficit to the American G.D.P. gross domestic product, is
healthier than that of the European countries. Forget the deficit, he says, and
go on cutting spending and cutting taxes. He got his Nobel Prize, by the way,
for advocating the nutty Reagan ideas, four years before President Reagan began
to apply them.

In any year – election, non-election year – taxes as a personal problem always
come home in mid-April because that's when our federal income taxes are due and
last Monday was the deadline. In New York City, if you're a resident, it's
particularly awful because you have to file federal income tax, New York State
income tax, New York City income tax. But this year, for the first time that I
can remember, there's a popular outcry which is not partisan at all. It is to
scrap the whole federal tax system and begin again. However, whatever new
method is devised, the hot argument will go on and on between the Republicans
who are now in power in Congress and the Democrats on the defensive. The
Republican insistence that cutting taxes, personal and corporate, again and
again will provide more money for investment. This has always been their dogma,
that if you cut the high rate of taxation imposed on the rich, they will have
more money to build factories, create products, generate jobs, as if by magic.

Well, the new House under the leadership, you might say the dictate, of the
Speaker – the Republicans' little Napoleon, Mr Newt Gingrich – passed a tax cut
bill more spectacularly huge than anything I think even he had imagined: 189
billion dollar tax cut. On the last of the 100 days which he dedicated to
what's been called the Gingrich Revolution, the Bill was passed and the House
Republicans gathered in a festive hall and put on a show not matched since V.J.
Day. To a tidal wave of cheers, Mr Gingrich said it takes the money from the
bureaucrats and gives it back to the people.

I've not talked about the whole train of laws that the speaker managed to get
passed in the House in his 100 days, because they are not law yet and are not
going to be until they've gone through the pressure chamber of the Senate. In
the flush of the Gingrich victory, a reporter went up to Senator Dole, the
leader of the Republicans in the Senate, and said: "Is it true sir, Senator
Dole, that you are going to sponsor the House Tax Bill?" "I hadn't heard," he
said. "I was going to do anything of the sort." A Republican aide added,
"What's Newt been smoking?" But last Monday the debate was not political but
about the tax system, the horrible complexity of it, the appalling waste of
time and money and paper that is spent with and by accountants and other
humans. There's been a national poll on what the reforms should be. Only 27 per
cent of Americans would like to stay with the present system which is an
astonishing figure because three quarters of all taxpayers use a basic form,
fairly simple.

They take a standard personal deduction: so much for each adult, so much for
each child, they don't itemise allowable deductions, so they reduce their tax
returns to two or three pages. And even people in jobs that allow expense
deductions, the homework is much less than it used to be. Nowadays employers
send statements of wages and salaries, taxes withheld, banks send interest and
dividend statements, credit card companies send every month beautiful
print-outs of where you dined and when and the bill. For the great majority of
taxpayers it's simpler than it used to be. But if you put down your own
deductions item by item, the forms can turn into a fat paperback. Of course
everybody has some new wrinkle, legal wrinkle, capital gains, childcare credit,
home mortgage interest exemption and on and on.

Anyway, in spite of the improving simplicity of making out your tax return, as
I say, only 27 per cent want to keep the current system. Now here's the new
note, a note that was first struck in these colonies 350 years ago. A flat tax.
Four years ago, a Governor of California, one Jerry Brown, based his
presidential campaign on this idea. He was dismissed as a lunatic. Now in both
parties there are fervent advocates of it. Of the two proposed forms, over 30
per cent of Americans say they'd go for a flat tax of 20 per cent for
everybody, with deductions allowed for home mortgages and for charitable
contributions only. The other form, which 29 per cent would like, is a flat tax
of only 17 per cent on income earned or unearned but no dedications of any
kind, no credits, no exemptions, no charitable contributions. A friend of mine
who has his own business and was, until Monday morning, entwined and gasping in
octopus tentacles of forms, notes, calculations, computer print outs, bills,
sighed, imagine what it must have been like 100 years or so ago. It was 1894
when the Supreme Court ruled that an income tax was unconstitutional. They
changed their mind, you may have heard, since then.

If there is to be a flat tax it will not come soon. The chairmen of both the
House and the Senate Finance Committees think it's a trap. Yet many Americans
must have gone to bed on Monday night, dreaming the impossible American dream
of the beautiful object promised by the flat tax people. A postcard with four
lines. Name, income, minus 17 per cent, total to be paid. Bliss. There's
another view of taxes that is not, I should guess, very widespread. The late
immortal Mr Justice Holmes, the most towering intellect to appear this century
on any English-speaking judiciary, was not a rich man. He could have been very
rich indeed but he was an austere Yankee who embraced the law as he might have
embraced a priesthood. When he died, at 94, he left his entire estate to the
United States Treasury with the comment: "Taxes are the price we pay for
civilisation." It's a sentiment that has no echo in the current debate.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP