Ross Perot runs for American presidency - 29 May 1992

Whenever I'm tempted, which is often, to start talking about American politics,
especially in a presidential election year, I always recall a postcard I had
years ago from a little old lady in Devon. I don't know why I condescend and
say "a little old lady", I never saw her, she might have been a very large
young lady, but I retain an old prejudice that morsels or what we'd now call
"sound bites of wisdom" tend to come more often from little old ladies than
from, say, strapping young athletes.

Anyway, I must have been talking that time about the men who were running for
the presidency and I'd evidently been musing and speculating about the likely
winner without quite committing myself. I got this postcard, which said simply,
"Dear Mr Cook, Instead of telling us who might be president, why don't you wait
till November and tell us who is?" A fine point, well taken and a caution not
to go on too much to people abroad about the tedious process of sorting out the
candidates, choosing them and then electing them.

But not only is this year's election not normal, the prospect for the November
election is a repetition of something that has happened only twice in American
history, the second time in 1824. Its the situation of an election in which no
candidate gets a majority of the electoral vote and the solution prescribed by
the Constitution is to send the problem to the House of Representatives, which
then votes one vote for each state.

If this sounds alarming so it should, it's a situation that three, four months
ago was a whimsical one tossed around lightly by academics, professors of
political science and such. I took it up as a bizarre possibility simply with
an old pro who chuckled. He was being kind and indulgent. Whenever, he said,
there's a third party candidate, people begin to credit him with at least a
third of the total electoral vote and the drama of going to the house. Not a
prayer my friend. What we are talking about is one man, that small wiry
61-year-old, slightly whiney-voiced man with jug ears and a nose like a carrot,
a presidential candidate about as far removed from the mind of a Hollywood
casting director as it's possible to imagine. A Texas businessman whose main
qualification to be president so far is the way he fits the old sentimental
picture of the boy who proceeds from log cabin to White House. H for Henry but
never spoken, H Ross Perot, P-e-r-o-t, an approximate French pronunciation for
the good and proper reason that his ancestors were French settlers who went to
Texas.

A year ago, less, few of us had ever heard of him. The earlier accounts of his
life and career, mine was no different, started with the prescribed: a poor boy
who borrowed a $1,000 30 years ago to found an electronic data system, which
miraculously turned into a goldmine because the government found it was the
first system that could easily and quickly process the accounts the whole
paperwork of the government's health system. Medicare for everyone over 65 and
Medicaid for the very poor. To those of us who are not given to appreciating
the finer points of business expertise, this ability of a machine to process
several million bills doesn't sound as exciting, shall we say, as Edison's
looking for a filament that would burn in a vacuum and finally after testing
6,000 fibres coming on a shred of Japanese bamboo that lasted a 1,000 hours and
so guaranteed that the world would be lit by electricity.

Then the invention of the safety pin and the zipper sounds modest, nevertheless
they procured fortunes for their inventors and Ross Perot with the government
as his main client did well enough on that borrowed $1,000 in eight years to
sell the firm for, wait for it. $2,500 billion.

As we've come to look more closely into Ross Perot's origins and career, we
find that the regulation poor boy did not exist. His father was a cotton broker
and successful and the young Perot instead of doing the humble chores required
of a traditional potential president like helping mum with the laundry, running
a one-boy newspaper delivery system, teaching Sunday school – Nixon did all of
them – Ross Perot managed to be accepted by the United States Naval Academy and
subsequently spent four years in the navy, then he got out and joined IBM as a
computer salesman. Five years later, he had the gall and the loan to breakaway
and found the firm that built the system that helped the government process the
bills that handed Mr Perot his $2,500 billion.

This whole story would never have been printed up and down the land if it had
not been for a second thought, a second remark that Ross Perot made on a
television talk show, oh, I think end of February. Apparently, he'd been
sounding off before air time to the host about the miserable failure of both
the traditional parties to lead the country, in particular to arrest or cure
the deficit and to have the money to pay the appalling mounting costs of
medicine for the old folks, namely Medicare.

So, when the show opened, the host to his famous four, simplifying every issue
in a no-nonsense gutsy way asked his guests, "so do you plan to run for
president?" Just as crisply, little Mr Perot said "no". Three-quarters of an
hour later, he changed his mind on the air, yes he decided he would run for
president if he could get enough people around the country to put his name on
the petitions required to have his name printed on the November ballot. He'd
want it to happen in all 50 states he said and that day or very shortly
afterwards, he dropped a second bombshell and one that startled but delighted
uncounted millions of citizens. The second bombshell sounded more like a swift
wonderful firework display: Mr Perot would employ no managers, press agents,
image polishers, he would solicit no funds because he was ready to cough up all
the costs of his buttons and bows and literature and television exposure to the
tune of $100 million of his own money.

Nothing like this plot has happened since the late Frank Capra directed Gary
Cooper as Mr Deeds in an enormously popular movie in its day, but this was in
life. Americans have always loved audacious mavericks, witness the existence of
the word itself. In the middle of the last century, there was a man – a Texas
Ranger – name Sam Maverick. He disapproved of the immemorial custom of branding
calves, cruel he thought it was, but how was he to recognise his cattle from
everyone else's? He'd take his chances he said, he'd take and call his own all
the unbranded cattle on the range. There were an awful lot of them; he grew
very rich to the indignation of his neighbours who called him a hypocrite.

Anyway, thereafter, all unbranded calves were called mavericks after Sam. All
that old people remember about Sam, which took his surname into the language is
that he was an eccentric whose eccentricity paid off, so inevitably Ross Perot
shot on to the national scene as dramatically as melodramatically as a man out
of a canon at a state fair. Every professional politician and pundit three
months ago saw him as a raw entertaining novelty of a sort familiar in state
politics, especially in the South and the Southwest.

Since he wasn't on the ballot in the primaries, nobody expected him even to
begin to count as a factor in the presidential race, but then in some of the
spring primaries the astonishing fact appeared that he was getting 20 and more
per cent by a write-in vote in both the Democratic and the Republican
primaries. Plainly, we all said, "a protest vote against Bush", but also
against Clinton as representing the Democratic Party. Nothing serious, just a
warning to the two main contenders and the two regular parties to mend their
ways come up with more radical changes on the home front especially.

Then it was discovered that literally millions of Americans were ready and
willing in every state to work for Perot. About a month ago, national polls
were taken if the election were held today, who would you vote for? Over
several polls it came out Bush 32%, Clinton 28%, Perot 24%. In Texas and mighty
California, Perot was the outright winner over the other two.

Now, if that first division of the poll happened in November, even if the Bush
and Clinton figures were reversed, it would not be enough to make either
president, you must have a majority of the electoral vote not the popular vote.
Several presidents, Wilson, Truman, have been what's called minority
presidents, which means the total count of the popular vote of their opponents
exceeded their popular vote. What counts is the total of the electoral votes
assigned to each state in proportion to its population, so if Perot denied
either Bush or Clinton the majority, then the election would go to the House of
Representatives, which with its enormous majority of Democrats one vote one
state would almost certainly throw the presidency to Mr Clinton, so the
Democrats are not quite so agitated by the rise and clatter of Ross Perot as
the president and his men.

I hear people say, "but what does Mr Perot stand for?" Ah, he's taking two
months off to figure out the issues. At the moment, he stands against both
parties. He says he'd cut the deficit and make old folks with money pay for
their medicine, otherwise he says, he'd lead the country. It seems to be enough
for one voter in three such is the extent of the despair with the two ancient
parties that plagues the whole country.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP