Decline in US personal savings - 25 December 1998

Well, there's good news and good bad news. Let's begin and stay only briefly
with the bad news – the prospect of the second impeachment trial of a president
in history.

A simpleton, a very nice European, asked me "What do Americans think?" To which
the only answer is, every possible reaction that comes to mind. The two totally
superficial ones, that are not worth going on about, I think, are one, that
it's the consequence entirely of the Republicans who hate the president and the
second adolescent reaction is, it's his private life and none of the public's
business.

I've spent the past few days collecting remarks from around the country of
characteristic views that are distinct from each other, So far I've found 17
and there'll be time next month to recount them. They're all fascinating and
thoughtful and they're sad.

As for what's going to happen when the new Congress assembles on 6 January, or
what will happen before then, the best comment I can make is that of a short
headline over a think piece in the New York Times the other morning. "What next
– don't guess".

The second bit of news is both good and bad and might be more threatening to
the stability of the republic than either the public stance of the Republicans
or the private character of Mr Clinton. It came last Tuesday on to the front
page, the main news page, of the New York Times, whereas it's a topic that
forever and always has been at best on the front page of the business section.

This is it, "Saving rate below zero". And the lead sentence goes this way,
American consumers have recently been spending all their income and then some,
sending the personal saving rate below zero for the first time since the Great
Depression.

Some economists offer the explanation that the better people feel about their
situation these days, the less likely they are to set aside extra for the
future. Other economists predict a dire future for a nation living on a credit
card.

So, pick your economist. The one who has a big placard out – The End is Nigh,
Save. And others who, like a Harvard economics professor says, almost in low
dudgeon, this is no time to tell people to stop spending. If he means Christmas
time, a million shopkeepers chant Amen.

Yet another school of on-looking economists, who never profess to predict but
just to remark on the passing scene, say that fears about the drop in personal
savings are groundless. The main reason, they say, why the official savings
rate is down is because interest income, which goes mainly to the rich, has
shrunk and so dragged down all the other reported increases in income.

So, how to interpret which view to take is almost as hard as picking the wise
view of the impeachment process. Somebody quoted a failing banker in Tom
Wolfe's latest masterpiece as a perfect symbol of an economy, not on the
cutting edge, but as we're learning to say, on the bleeding edge. This dreadful
man, Ray Peepgass has 18 credit cards and is not sure he's going to stay afloat
unless a 19th comes in the mail on Monday morning.

On the other hand, pray silence for another very eminent economist who says
prosperity is based on the denial of thrift. This is a fact of life that
continues to bewilder me. It takes me back to the only economics lecture I ever
attended, it was at Cambridge, in, I believe, 1931, at a time anyway when most
of the Cambridge colleges were floundering in the pit of the Depression.

There was one glaring exception, King's College, which was enjoying a lonely
and bizarre prosperity, thanks to the investing wizardry of its bursar, a
professor by the name of John Maynard Keynes. I went to one of his lectures,
not as an economics student, but as the staff cartoonist of the university
magazine. I was there as an intruder, to draw him. But in between my furtive
sketching, I couldn't help hearing what he said, though he had a high, nasal
drone, which was difficult to follow, even if English was your native tongue.

I should explain that I was alarmed by what I heard because I had a father
who'd taught me one or two things, including the advice to put the first cheque
you ever earned in a bank and at the same time, take out a life insurance
policy.

I obeyed on 10 October 1934, five days after my first BBC broadcast, the
colossal sum of 15 guineas. I closed down the life insurance policy a year or
two ago. I mean, what the heck.

There were two words my father taught me to beware of. One was debt, the other,
even though he was an insurance agent, was mortgage. So now flash-forward to Mr
Maynard Keynes. In explaining the difference between the economics of public
and private life, he said, "If you owe the Bank of England £100 and skip the
country, they will track you down and put you in prison. If you owe them
£1,000,000, they'll put you on the board of directors."

At the time, an economics moron, I thought this funny and incomprehensible, but
it was a philosophy that inspired Roosevelt's New Deal and American government
policy for 50 years, and it became so widely accepted as a proper way to behave
that, only a year or two ago I recall, an American who won a million and a half
dollars in a lottery, went to American Express to sign up for a credit card.

They checked downtown on his credit rating and they found he had none. No? He'd
always bought what he could afford and paid for it in cash. A suspicious
character. They turned him down.

I've drifted into this talk, not so much about the economy as the people's
pocketbooks because I now realise most of the writing about Christmas in our
papers, apart from the advertisements for Christmas movies and concerts, is
almost exclusively about Christmas shopping.

The most striking item I've picked up on this front is that this is the first
Christmas in which, it's been discovered, one American in five shops on the
internet, a statistic that really sets the grey cells agitating among everybody
from double-dome economists to the corner grocer, where he exists, everybody
that is who's interested in the traditional American ideal of life, liberty and
the pursuit of money.

But some things stay the same, to remind us this is a great formerly Christian
festival. Only a skip and a jump or a good 3-iron shot from my doorway, we're
at Park Avenue and can look down the long and a half mile stretch with a centre
divide planted with small firs and now, at sunset, from 96th Street down to the
crucifix atop the canopy of Grand Central Station at 42nd Street, each fir is
lit with hundreds of tiny oyster-white bulbs.

By order of the Park Avenue Association, a tenants' group, that's what the
lighting has to be. It's one blessing about New York lighting. No trees lit
with orange, green, purple, red, white bulbs but down the long canyon of Park
Avenue, those platoons of firs carrying fountains of white light. The only
colour is the timed interruption of red and green, as the traffic lights change
along 50 cross-town streets.

But, I must say, this year there seems much less public expression of Christian
symbols. This is always the time when non-religionists, pretending to be
freedom of religion maniacs, mobilise like a militia and pounce on any church,
Roman Catholic especially, that has the audacity to plant a crèche, a Nativity
scene, outside say the church entrance, instead of well inside the church
property.

And when they find one there's a hue and cry and a legal suit, charging the
church with violating the First Amendment to the Constitution – Congress shall
make no law respecting an establishment of religion.

In this city, of course, the most populous Jewish city on earth, the closeness
of Hanukkah to Christmas results in people exchanging a card bearing a cross
with a card bearing the star of David and it's fairly clear this year that soon
the emblems of Islam will not be far behind. What these First Amendment
watchdogs have managed to do, without meaning it, is to discourage the faiths
from making as conspicuous displays of their symbols as they used to.

So how, in this very multicultural, multi-religion city, how do they greet each
other? They skirt Christmas, just as we Anglos are careful to skirt at all
times the crass phrase "Christian name" – first or given name, please. We say
Happy Holidays.

I was going to salute you with the oldest greeting between practising or lapsed
Christians, the greeting which is still the normal one in America, Merry
Christmas, but in answer to an old enquiry, I've been told that about 30, 40
years ago in England, when breathalyser tests came in, the word merry had taken
on a connotation of drunkenness and a man who ought to know told me that there
came a Christmas Day when the Queen's annual speech ended with Happy Christmas.
From thenceforth, that's been the word in Britain, England anyway.

Now I have, with the permission of the powers that be, to end on a personal
note. I feel it would be callous to let the year go by without saying a word of
gratitude to the hundreds of people from Libya to Liverpool, Sydney to
Stockholm, who sent me notes or cards at the end of November and, another
high-tech note, the thousand-odd who saluted me on the internet.

People who, as one man wrote, don't have to listen to radio any more, we
download you whenever we feel like it, at any hour of the night or day. Well,
all I can say is that I am, for once, unable to express how touched I was to be
on the receiving end of this blizzard of goodwill. One man in Bangkok urged me
to begin to live a long and productive life. I'm working on it.

And to you all, I won't wish you a merry anything, for fear you think I'm
urging you to soak in the poteen, but a happy Christmas and a contented life
throughout the new year.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP