Legal guns vs murder rates - 4 January 1991

I wonder how long it's been going on, this custom, this feeling of obligation
on the part of public men, mostly men, of politicians, journalists, parsons
certainly, to look back over the past year, to review the good and the bad and
draw a moral from it.

I don't remember it as an 18th-century habit at all. I suspect it came in with
Nonconformity and popular preaching, with anyway the 19th-century love of
sermonising, of drawing morals from everything that was happening and of
believing, as no society before or since, that it knew at once and at all
times, the difference between right and wrong. I look back to a few other
firsts of January and noticed another habit that always went along with the
retrospective survey, which was the wind-up prophecy, not so much a prophecy as
an educated guess at the way things were likely to go, which trends in politics
and international affairs especially were likely to continue.

Well, the good news about this New Year's surveys is that 1990 was such an
explosion of unpredictable forces, such a turnaround of trends and truisms
we've been parroting for years and years, that I'm delighted to see even the
gravest, the wordiest windbags, and I'm thinking now of academic historians and
double-domed university prophets, even they hesitate to predict with any
confidence what's going to happen to the town council, let alone to the
Lithuanian republic or the future of Israel. The common note that was struck a
year ago exactly was, and how sweet it sounds, peace is breaking out all over.
It's a phrase that hasn't been heard since 2 August, and when it came this week
to tapping the pundits for an educated guess about what's going to happen on 15
January, nobody cared to say. Every Middle Eastern expert, defence expert,
political science expert, Arabian or Arab expert, every one of them was ready
to say what ought to happen, what would be the best thing to happen, what ought
not to happen. But nobody was prepared to say he or she could look into the
mind of Saddam Hussein.

The Hitler analogy may be false in all sorts of ways but I can't think of
another international character who's had the whole world so dithering on
tiptoe since Hitler, in the early summer of 1940, when everybody knew or
pretended to know, when he would invade Britain. It was going to happen in
September, a month from now, a year from now, two weeks, next Monday.

What most of our pundits and politicians have done for a change is simply,
helplessly, to list our woes, most of which, it seems to me, are common to the
Western world, although perhaps we suffer more acutely from some. Street crime,
drugs, the deficit, the pollution of the environment, the sorry state of public
education, America's risky dependence on oil and lack of an alternative energy
policy, what to do with the 30-odd millions who have no sickness insurance, the
developing recession. Having listed these chronic ailments, most politicians
and editorial writers urge us to cure them but very few of them specify a cure
and nobody across the political spectrum, from the bluest conservative to the
goriest radical … As a matter of fact we don't have very radical leftists in
America, we have screwballs of all sorts and colours, a few black anarchists,
but since the death of Michael Harrington, I can't think of a single serious,
distinguished socialist.

Well, I was saying that while few people can spell out with any conviction of
political practical cure for our ills, absolutely nobody will say where the
money is coming from to repair the bridges, to rebuild the slums, to pay for
more day-care, to build the jails to incarcerate the drug pushers, to back ever
more job-training programmes for the ever more and more unemployed and the
school dropouts. The mayors of a hundred cities are looking at the books for
1990 and finding them dredged with red ink and warning the townspeople of hard
times ahead.

There are some indisputable facts, the most glaring one and the most
publicised, it comes from the FBI, is that in 1990 more people were murdered in
the United States than at any time, any peace time in the nation's history.
Why? The experts, the criminologists, the police chiefs, are not fudging their
replies. Probably the frankest and fairest reply came from a judge in the state
of Wisconsin, who was once the district attorney of Milwaukee and he said the
other day, "There is rage out there, you have the drug epidemic, the
proliferation of guns, gangs of course, and the whole sector of the community
that lives in utter poverty and hopelessness."

Everything right on down the line is more violent; 19 big cities set murder
records. The only point in taking up these statistics, having once deplored
them, is to find out who gets killed, who does the killing, why and how. The
FBI's annual report has some answers. More than half of all the killed knew
their killer and 54% either were related to or acquainted with the murderer.
Why do people get killed?

Arguments were responsible for one in three, felonies for one in five, brawls,
sparked by drugs or alcohol, one in five. It's noticeable that of all the
homicides, only 19% were done to strangers, a slight increase, but they are the
ones that grab the publicity – the on-looking children caught in the crossfire,
the Central Park jogger, the foreign tourist or student here only a day or a
week. How are the killings done? 6% with the legendary blunt instrument, 8% by
poison, 18% with knives, 60% with firearms.

One ray of light in this dark catalogue, with the increase in population since
the 1980 census, it turns out that the per capita murder rate is down from a
high in 1980 of 10.2 per 100,000 to 9.3. And, this is not new, this is a
constant fact, there are some states that are very little acquainted with
murder. North and South Dakota together, which are not quite twice the area of
the United Kingdom, had 13 murders, Vermont,11, Wyoming, 21; 21 – that's a
hundred times fewer murders than in New York City alone. No wonder my son, who
lives in Wyoming and was back here for Christmas, thinks of New York as a
jungle. Much changed from the, as he thought then, exciting and romantic town
in which he grew up and went to school. You'll notice apropos of the Dakotas,
Vermont, Wyoming, that we're talking about mountain states, that are sparsely
populated. Wyoming and Vermont each have only representative in Congress, a
congressman at large, so-called. A young woman from the Wyoming Criminal
Investigation Department commented, you don't have the population base that you
have elsewhere and it's spread and there's no rush hour, no stress, and it's
hard to have gangs in Wyoming.

Now, the one figure that everybody will have noticed is the preponderance of
murders committed with firearms, over 60%. In spite of the National Rifle
Association's contention that guns don't kill people, people kill people – one
of the more logically nonsensical maxims of the times – I don't suppose there's
another social issue in America over which there is more ferocious and
ill-tempered argument, than there is over gun control.

Both Presidents Reagan and Bush were, are, firm against it, saying that the
incidence of murder has almost nothing to do with the availability of guns.
They and several governors and state legislatures, say their own experience
proves that a criminal, however strict the law, will always find place to buy a
gun. Mr Reagan used to argue that a drastic national gun control law would
spawn a huge black market and have much the same effect of the banning of the
manufacture and sale of alcohol, the famous Prohibition experiment in this
country, which was legally maintained and flouted throughout the 1920s, one of
the most drunken decades in American history. However that may be, Mr Reagan's
own state, California, began to enforce on 1 January.

A new law, the most severe gun control law in the country. California now
prohibits the sale of 56 types of semi-automatic weapons and puts into effect a
two-week waiting period for the purchase of rifles and shotguns. Approved types
of semi-automatic weapons had to be registered before midnight, New Year's Eve.
About 20,000 owners obeyed, leaving another 280,000 yet to be heard from.

Two other facts ticked off the end of the old year. One, the United States is
in a recession. The accepted definition is two or more quarters of consecutive
decline in the gross national product; 1990 closed out the third quarter and
the third decline. Even a research outfit agrees, whose main task is that of a
weather man watching out for oncoming recessions. The National Bureau of
Economic Research has just discovered and declared to a waiting world that,
yes, there is a recession, it began in the summer of 1990.

The second fact is one that will bring relief and delight to males of the
species who've been waiting for about 25 years for women to come back. Well,
the New York Times says it has happened, is a fact. They define a woman as one
who has freed herself from the anorexic, pencil-thin, anaemic, diet-obsessed
X-ray figure, dictated by the fashion tyrants since the early '60s. It is now
decreed, and the new fashions exemplify it amply, that a desirable woman is one
with breasts, thighs and curves. So, finally, farewell Twiggy, hi there Dolly
Parton.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP