The OJ Simpson verdict - 6 October 1995

The Congress suspended business for 15 minutes, airlines delayed flights, bank
tellers stopped counting bills, empty streets were remarked on in the big
cities across the whole country, as just before 10 in the morning in California
and one p.m. in New York, the television commentator started what one called
"the countdown", which was this time not as 33 years ago, a word clocking the
launching of John Glenn's capsule, but the calling off of the minutes as they
ticked away towards the verdict in the case of the people of California versus
OJ Simpson.

Not so long ago, a folk hero sometime actor, the greatest running back in the
history of American football, but from the moment of his arrest almost 16
months ago, the Los Angeles district attorney's office, the prosecutor, chose
rather to cast him as an American Othello, a man whipped by jealousy to the
point of murdering the woman he loved not wisely but too well.

In the beginning, in June 1994, seven months before the trial began, everything
we heard that might be evidence in the trial ran against OJ Simpson. Quite
simply here is an outline of the undisputed plot. After midnight of Sunday June
the 12th 1994, Mrs Simpson was found savagely slaughtered with many stab
wounds, outside her house in a posh section of Los Angeles, by her side was a
young man a waiter who'd come to return some eye glasses Mrs Simpson's mother
had left the evening before at his restaurant.

About an hour before, a chauffeur had picked up Mr Simpson at his house Ð the
Simpsons were separated Ð and driven him to the airport to keep a long planned
business date in Chicago. Of course, he flew back shortly after he arrived at
the Chicago Hotel and after the funeral, police charged him with the double
murder. He agreed to turn himself in. Instead he disappeared, leaving behind a
sad rambling letter protesting his innocence, conceding he had a good life and
was saying goodbye.

The police eventually tracked him in a white car speeding at a great rate along
one of the Los Angeles highways, and a friend who was driving him, reported
over a cellular phone that Simpson was holding a gun to his head and
threatening suicide. The car followed a roundabout course and at last went back
to Mr Simpson's house, where he stayed slumped in the car for an hour before
the police managed to coax him out. He was taken into custody and two days
later pleaded not guilty and was held without bail. The trial was set on the
docket for late in the year, but it took forever to choose a jury and various
other niceties of the Californian criminal code had to be observed Ð remember
this was not a federal trial Ð a code that is in some ways more stringent than
most, and stuffed with precedents, which the counsel were quick to cite on very
fragile pretexts.

Finally, in the middle of January this year it started and ended nine months
later, by which time the court had lost 10 jurors in all through sickness,
minor misbehaviour of some sort, admitted prejudice, one or two I feel fairly
certain hadn't thought too deeply about the meaning of sequestration and under
whatever pretext were silently crying, "let me out of here." Sequestration...

In California, a judge may, and in this case did, order the juries exile from
normal life to a degree that a dictator held on a house arrest would very
likely protest before the International Court of Justice. The jury, after
interminable challenges, queries, manufactured indignation from both sides,
consisted of nine blacks, two whites and one Latino. They along with the
originals had been told the trial might last a few months, they must brace
themselves to obey the rules, they would be sequestered in a hotel separated
from the other guests, would be led to their meals, were not allowed to read
newspapers, magazines, listen to radio, watch television. Movies were chosen
for them, which they saw together. The married were allowed, from time to time,
conjugal visits.

When at last the jury began their deliberations at nine o' clock last Monday
morning, the commentators, mostly lawyers, legal scholars, prosecutors and so
on, settled down to speculate and guess at the verdict. And the overwhelming
consensus was that the jury would take a week or two to declare itself a hung
jury. Suddenly in the middle of the day, the word went to the judge, "We have
reached a verdict." That was a stunner for everybody, but the judge said the
secret would remain sealed overnight and this gave us all time to guess now,
which evidence had been decisive. The DNA analysis of the bloodstains perhaps?
It took four days to explain to the jury. My own sense was that in general,
juries distrust medical expertise especially when the doctors disagree and that
this jury might well have believed the defence, that the Los Angeles Police
Department had been sloppy in analysing the blood and storing it and might have
contaminated some of it.

Now the prosecutions case was that Mr Simpson was the only villain, a known
wife beater, who once he knew for certain that he'd lost her and she was living
her own life, couldn't bear the loss of his control over her, so one June night
he went berserk. He left his house, drove off to her house, murdered her and Mr
Goldman, drove home, changed, buried or hid the clothes and the weapon, took a
shower, dressed and packed for Chicago.

The defence said, by the way, that by the prosecution's estimate of time, he
would have had to do all that in five minutes, but the chauffeur had to wait 41
minutes for him and when he appeared he said he'd overslept and he had to take
a shower. The prosecution maintained that nobody saw Simpson for over an hour
during which he had ample time to commit the two murders. Since there were no
witnesses, both sides had to stress the physical evidence, of which there were
two items, all agreed were crucial. One was a bloody glove, the other a bloody
sock, both found by the police in Simpson's home. It was not disputed that the
rescued droplets belonged to nobody in the world, but Mr Simpson and that, for
the prosecution, was conclusive proof of his guilt. But the defence lawyers
touched the nerve of all doubt when they asked, who found the glove and when?
The answer was one Mark Furhman, the detective who, without a warrant, climbed
over the fence to Simpson's home and later produced the glove, the blood still
moist seven hours after Mr Simpson dropped it Ð if he did! A chemical
impossibility, two doctors testified and why did it take two months for the
bloody sock to appear, after two months of exhaustive searching of houses and
gates and grass, driveways, cars, furniture, everything? The defence's
contention, which seemed very melodramatic when it was first launched, was that
this same Fuhrman, was a racist, who chose with one other detective to frame Mr
Simpson and actually planted the glove and smeared the sock.

Mr Furhman was challenged on the stand about his reputation as a racist. He
denied any hint of it. In 10 years he'd never used the word "nigger." I must
say he sounded plausible at the time, and the prosecution ridiculed the whole
macabre nonsense of a conspiracy contrived by two or more of the police of the
Los Angeles Police Department, which we should not forget and the jury didn't,
has had an unsavoury reputation over many years for its powerful minority of
race-hating cops.

Alas, for the prosecution's ridicule in a turn that marked the collapse of
their case, a screen writer was found who had over three years recorded many
hours of taped interviews with Detective Furhman in which he used "nigger" 43
times, in which he told of police initiatives in framing blacks at one point he
wished all the blacks in America could be piled up and burnt.

It seems to me very naive to say that these disclosures from a foul bigot would
not deeply affect a jury with nine black members however high-minded their
final discussion. Off in retirement in the mountains of Idaho, former Detective
Furhman was quoted as saying: "If I go down, the case goes down." and so it
was.

All our analysing and judgements made in retrospect, were swept aside by the
one item of evidence out of 45,000 pages of it, that the jury had asked to be
read over. It was the testimony of the chauffeur who picked up Mr Simpson and
drove him to the airport. It came out that in the first two minutes of their
deliberations, the jury voted ten to two for acquittal, but they decided to
take Miss Clark, the chief prosecutor at her word, that the root of the
evidence was the time line. The jury's decision, whether or not Simpson had
time to drive to Mrs Simpson's home, perform the double murder, get home, clean
up, hide the clothes, the weapon, shower, dressed and be ready for the waiting
chauffeur. The jury trooped back, they heard the chauffeur's testimony: he got
the time of arrival at Simpson's house wrong by an hour but corrected himself.
He didn't see OJ's car because, the prosecution held, Simpson had not yet
driven it back. The jury cut off the rest of the chauffeur's testimony, they'd
heard enough. They went back and reached a not guilty verdict within the hour.

There is a point that worried some of us from the start, who were heavily
inclined to believe in Simpson's guilt. It's the ferocity of the murder,
calculated by both sides to have taken at least 10 minutes, 32 stab wounds in
Mr Goldman Ð did he put up a fight?ÊÐ Mrs Simpson practically decapitated, yet
Simpson revealed, after his arrest, not a bruise or a blemish on his body and
no blood on anything he subsequently wore. Altogether, the incriminating blood
evidence was very sparse, the jury thought, sparse enough to have been planted.

When the verdict was announced and travelled in seconds the length and breadth
of the country, there was great and thunderous rejoicing among blacks
everywhere from the most famous black university to the seediest inner city
slum. There's one consolation for the people who think justice was denied Ð
there were no riots anywhere.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP