Tompkins Square Park Riot (1988) - 31 May 1991

There is a park in New York City. There are many parks but I'm talking about
one that's called Tompkins Square Park way down on the Lower East Side, 16
acres of walks, greenery, playgrounds, which for about 100 years have meant to
provide relief from what even so long ago was a seedy dreary district of
tenements. By the turn of the century, this part of town known as the East
Village housed for the most part Russian and Polish immigrants and for as far
back as anyone living can remember, a regulation sight in Tompkins Square Park
was the facing couples of old men playing chess. By this time the racial
mixture is of the new and the old, still the children, grandchildren of
Russians, Poles, Ukrainians mingling now with blacks and Puerto Ricans.

In the past year or two, the park has come to be called a "tinder box". For a
while here and there old men still play chess and children of all sorts and
colours bounce around the jungle gyms or strut up and down blazing the air with
their booming radio tape players. The new element since three-four years ago is
the homeless. There are about 100 of them, not vagrants, a new permanent
population hemmed in at nightfall by makeshift pallets, blankets, department
store trolleys and other nondescript possessions that greatly reduce the area
for strolling, meditating and otherwise peacefully enjoying the greenery.

Nobody seems to be able to agree on the actual social group that causes
trouble, they have been respectable working-class families settled in and
around the park for a long time and now some young professional people who
gentrified one section, they're the ones who accuse a small army of young
ragtag radicals who are known even to themselves as "the anarchists".

Three years ago, there was a night-and-day riot that left 50 people injured and
31 arrested. The riot left also a lot of physical damage to the amenities of
the park. There's been more sporadic violence throughout the past three summers
and last Monday there was another outburst of rage and fighting, which injured
18 police officers. Whoever started this riot, most parties are agreed that the
problem is the homeless, they are never the instigators, they are the least
violent characters around, young and old, single, families, white, brown,
black, they constitute a big visible nuisance the ever present obstacle to
having the park used and enjoyed as it was meant to be.

Of course, Tompkins Square Park is not unique; I've picked it as typical of a
situation that exists in parks, squares, railroad and bus stations in hundreds
of cities across the nation and no doubt in many other cities too. Sooner or
later a committee is formed and the city council comes into it and the mayor.
That has all happened in Tompkins Square and whatever local grievances are in
dispute, one conflict is common to all the cities that try to face the problem.

On the one side, tenants or neighbourhood associations that want the park
closed. On the other and amalgam of young families who want the parks left open
for their children, but ask for more patrolling police, which the city can't
afford. In between are other people, politicians, neighbourhood shopkeepers,
young mothers who want a curfew that would amount to an eviction order for the
homeless. A minority, but a strong and vocal minority, believes it is right
that the homeless should find refuge in the parks, they are content – they'e
the only people who are content with the status quo.

The local assemblymen, the politician who represents this district says bluntly
to keep the status quo for the summer of 1991 is, to quote, "absolute
disaster". A young friend just moving out of his teens said to me, "I don't
remember all these homeless everywhere, was it always like this?" The answer I
think is double barrelled, "no you didn't see them when you were a toddler and
yes it was always like this only more so".

If that sounds cryptic, let me enlarge. For some reason I can't figure, the
homeless have in the past 10 or more years grown bolder, maybe it has something
to do with the decline of respectability as a working-class ideal. The homeless
used to congregate exclusively in the slummier parts of town – they now litter
the great concourse of Grand Central Station – but the main reason why
everybody is aware of something you used to have to trek down to the slums to
see is again television. And I'm sure that New Yorkers who'd never heard of
Tompkins Square Park have now seen it as a tinder box of social strife. As for
"was it always like this?", the middle-aged people who are outraged by the
homeless are either people whose normal daily itinerary between work, home and
pleasure never took them into the slummier parts of their town or they never
read any history or both.

Recently, I came on this passage in Charles Booth's Life and Labour of the Poor
in London. He's writing about the 1890s and he says "90% of the population of
London dependent for its pleasures, its glimpses of pleasure, its bean feasts,
its pints at the pubs on windfalls. And working men got the price of a pint of
beer for hailing a cab on a wet night. A char woman got an old dress given her
and sold it in a rag and bone shop for the price of a quartun of gin. Old women
with puffety pockets slank up and down area railings, their pockets would
contain pounds of dripping, mutton fat and with the price of them, the cook
would get some tobacco for her father in the workhouse." You lived in slums in
Seven Dials, Whitechapel, Notting Dale. You burned the stair rails and the
banisters and the window frames for fuel, the rest of the world was no better.

In Paris, half the population was insufficiently fed. In Berlin, the greater
part of the population never thought of tasting meat. In St Petersburg, the
condition of the poor would not bear thinking about.

I have to say that I never really thought about the scale of homelessness in
London in the mid-19th century, except to recall that Dickens had a large heart
and generous sympathies towards it, until I came on the story of Susan Rye and
the so-called "home children". In 1869, she began something I don't believe had
occurred to anybody else, an attempt to deal with one frightful consequence of
the industrial revolution in the country that started it. The throwing out of
work of thousands of hand labourers, their retreat to the cities to swell the
population of the unemployed and to swell the population of children who
couldn't be cared for – who, if they were the lucky ones, went into the
workhouses, if not were abandoned to the streets.

In the 1860s, the streets of London and Manchester most notably teemed with
listless armies of homeless urchins. The government did next to nothing for
them, so this Englishwoman Susan Rye had the idea of literally taking small
children off the streets, fumigating them, clothing them, herding them and
accompanying them on ships to Canada to place them with farming families. Like
the United States, Canada found once it had a transcontinental railroad that it
needed people, farmers most of all, to populate the now reachable west. Miss
Rye started with 68 aboard one ship in 1869. During the next 45 years, until
the outbreak of the Great War, she brought over to Canada over 100,000 English
homeless children; they became known as the "home children".

It's a stirring tale and like the American story of the huddled masses pouring
into New York in the first decade of this century, it has passed over into
legend, but unlike our legend, this one has not been so generally sanitised and
sentimentalised. The published letters of the home children reveal that every
sort of good and dire fortune happened to them.

You may have spotted the phrase in that recital "the government did little or
nothing for them". For most of us, what we didn't see didn't exist and it was
up to high-minded religious people, usually Methodists, to start small
orphanages and similar missions. Now this brings us up against the perennial
the everlasting argument: how much ought government, town, counties, state,
national government to do for these people the problem? When did the conscience
on the middle classes, the majority of voters first come out into the open and
propound the quite new idea that government, not private charities had a prior
obligation to take care of the homeless, the poor, the sick, the disabled? I
suppose historically, we can put it down in the beginning to Bismarck from whom
Lloyd George and his fellow battling liberal Winston Churchill picked up the
idea of the welfare state, which frankly Roosevelt a quarter century later
adopted as his own.

Thereafter, we recall the names of Beveridge and Bevan and now across the
so-called civilised Western world it's generally assumed that government should
not do something but everything, but we are now at the point where even the
richest governments cannot afford to do anymore. Even Ronald Reagan, who was
elected on the Jeffersonian promise to have as little government as possible,
found that he was stuck with a budget into the foreseeable future, which
earmarked at least 44% for social security and welfare untouchable.

And as succeeding generations have come to take for granted the government's
obligation to feed, clothe, heal them and compensate them for being out of
work, so there has been a drastic decline in the voluntary aid given to the
poor or the homeless, the immigrants by fraternal societies, the churches, the
masons, the fraternal insurance societies, the Community Chest. I now know if
anybody's done a study of the proportion of income different classes give to
charity in this country, it's a striking fact that the middle class and
especially the lower middle class gives more proportionately than the rich. The
heroes, if any, in this social consciousness competition seem to be the solid
citizens who were suspicious of Franklin Roosevelt and the entire New Deal,
were always scared of socialism, who organised the Community Chest, took the
hat round for the hospital and the wounded servicemen. The Babbits, I'm afraid
to the extent that they're still at it, they justify their obstinate prejudice
against big government.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP