Internet pornography - 21 March 1997

Last Wednesday morning, two small armies of chanting or bawling protestors were
marching up and down outside a building in Washington that is not often used as
a stamping ground for demonstrations.

It has been variously called the largest marble building in the world, a
classical building aiming at grandeur and verging on grandiosity, and it always
looks to me like the most monumental Greek wedding cake ever baked.

We are looking at the truly awesome building of the Supreme Court of the United
States, the one American institution that more than any other decides (you
could say) the public behaviour of the American people.

You can imagine how bizarre it seemed on Wednesday, from early in the morning
these little disputing armies gathered, waving banners, one side screaming,
“Let the law protect us” and “Porn poisons kids”. The other side, with
noticeably more professionally-printed placards, the largest of which
proclaimed, “The First Amendment includes the internet”.

Heavens! Did the founding fathers who wrote the Constitution have something to
say about pornography on the internet? Obviously not. But it’s the job of the
nine justices of the court to say what they could have said, how they would
probably have ruled if the internet of the day, the newspapers, had printed
pornographic drawings or invitations that might be seen by children.

As a matter of record, I can tell you now that there were in colonial days and
throughout the long history of the Republic, until the 1930s, very strict laws
punishing anything – eventually spelled out in a law, incidentally a British
law of 1857 – which said, "obscene matter, whether it be in writing or by
picture, effigy or otherwise". And neither the colonials, nor the Victorians in
either country wasted time sharpening fine points about what constituted
obscenity. They knew it and they punished it promptly.

But during the past 60 years or so, the justices have never agreed unanimously
about obscenity. There are statutes, of course, but they’re always being
challenged, and the standard agreed on by the courts has staggered from one
definition to another, identifying obscenity as "that which has the intention
of corrupting morals". Through most of the 19th Century then, making it mean
anything tending to the corruption of minors. That lasted till the 1930s when
in this country it came down to the definition through which James Joyce’s
Ulysses was able to wriggle through into the light of day.

That definition over which Ulysses triumphed was "anything that would offend or
corrupt the average sensual man". Just to make things clear to us laymen, the
conquering judge remarked that the average sensual man is the moral equivalent
of the reasonable man in the law of torts. Is that so?

After that, there was a vague agreement on both sides of the Atlantic that
everything depended (if you wanted to get your erotic stuff through the courts
and the mail) depended on its literary quality. Not very helpful, since
literary critics squabble over what’s literature more than politicians fight
over what’s good for you and me.

And then the definition was adjusted to allow only what was "socially
redeeming", which proved hopeless to apply.

But once Europe, the Swedes in particular, blew all definitions apart and
started filming at first timidly explicit sexual scenes, the Supreme Court
threw in the towel and all but admitted there could be no national, no federal,
definition of obscenity. They passed the buck to the states, which the
Constitution allows them to do when there’s no statement of federal law.

They said each state had the right to forbid something that the community
thought was obscene. That’s when the whole legal effort to define and confine
obscenity broke down. What is the community? A county, a city, a village, Park
Avenue, Belgrave Square, Greenwich Village, Tottenham Court Road, Little
Piddletrenthide, residents in their 20s or 60s?

The last well-remembered definition of obscenity by a Supreme Court Justice,
coined by a man now retired, said, “I can’t define it, but I know it when I see
it”, which was not much help.

Today anything, however gross, goes, in print, on the radio, most startlingly
and uncensored, on television. So why do people still bring suits and take them
doggedly all the way up to the Supreme Court?

On Wednesday, the court met to hear arguments for and against a suit brought by
a coalition of several groups – civil liberties buffs, advertisers, chambers of
commerce, computer manufacturers – to have the court declare unconstitutional
an Act of Congress sponsored by the administration, passed only last year,
called the Communications Decency Act of 1996.

The clause of this bill that got it taken all the way up to the Supreme Court
made it a crime to display on the internet indecent material in a manner
available to a person under 18 years of age.

The bill came about when in the past year or so television mostly made it
common knowledge that the internet, this new worldwide source of knowledge,
offered among its enormous variety of aids to learning, a worldwide service to
accommodate the private pleasures of, for instance, middle-aged men who like to
hire small boys.

Dare I, in this progressive age, call such men perverts? A great majority of
the Congress thought so, and Mr Clinton has been criticised for not helping to
get this law on the books sooner.

Well apart from the universal availability through the internet of small
children for sexual exploitation, the bill would also make it a federal offence
to show sexually explicit pictures, films, magazines, to air sexual
conversations that might be seen and heard by adolescents.

The whole point of this case is what it might do to a child with access to a
computer. The law obviously includes all such stuff that can be seen by adults,
and we’ve come so far in reverence for free speech that even obscenity has been
declared by the Supreme Court to be protected by the First Amendment when it’s
going on between adults.

What fired up a lot of members of Congress and their constituents was the
demonstrable and well-demonstrated fact that a child can now get access to
Penthouse and Hustler and worse at the click of a mouse.

The exchanges between the rival lawyers and the justices were lively and
understandably sceptical. This, I believe, is the first time the Supreme Court
has had to adjudicate what should be done about a thriving worldwide market in
anything to which a child has access at the flick of a thumb.

One or two of the justices frankly seemed to concede that it couldn’t be done.
One said, “If I spent my time monitoring my 16-year-old’s use of the internet,
I’d know even less about this case than I know today.” Another with a young
daughter wondered if this law wouldn’t make criminals out of parents with
computers on which the Internet is available. And one judge was well aware,
probably from his own children, that a very popular feature available
everywhere on the internet is the conversation of teenagers exchanging sexual
experiences, real or imagined.

Of course the justices wanted to know what technology is available now that can
instantly block out offensive material or display a sudden warning of what’s
coming up.

At the moment, though nobody on either side quite said it, the only certain way
to keep an inquisitive child from seeing it would be to sit with him or her or
stay in the same room 24 hours a day.

In fact this law got to the Supreme Court of the United States because the
lower courts it had gone through agreed that there does not exist any technical
way of preventing even well-intentioned, cooperative exhibitors on the Internet
from finding themselves criminally liable.

Well whichever way it goes, it will come down in the forum of public argument
to the old question: does watching violence and rough sex repel the young or
tempt them to do likewise? We’ve been arguing this since the 1920s when a very
raunchy period in Hollywood movies caused the movie industry itself to set up
what it called the Legion of Decency with an elaborate system of rules of
propriety I won’t go into. They would certainly be ruled unconstitutional
today.

There’s no way of guessing for sure how the court will rule in this case.
Normally it takes them about three months to make up their minds. Of course
during that time, they’re making up their minds on a bunch of other cases. I
had the feeling that more than one or two of them already knew how they’d rule
– a suspicion that reminded me of the early experience of the great Mr Justice
Holmes. He went on the court when he was in his 60s and kept to the habit that
had served him well for 20 years on the Supreme Judicial Court of
Massachusetts.

He listened to the arguments and if he’d been picked to write up the ruling, he
went home and did it at once. His legal thinking was just as deep as it was
quick, and pondering for weeks on the one hand, on the other hand, was not in
his nature. So he’d have his judgment ready at an early meeting of the Supreme
Court. He produced it and everybody agreed it was brilliant. Brilliant, but he
soon gathered that he was acquiring in Washington a reputation for being
superficial, a touch glib.

So ever afterwards when he was doing the writing, he listened as patiently as
ever, he went home and wrote up his opinion at once. Then he put it in the
bottom drawer of his desk. Two, three months later, he was ready to read it to
the court. His opinions were always applauded as being tremendously thoughtful
and very wise.

The only difference in the reception of his rulings, he told a friend, was that
his later opinions were “aged in the wood”.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP