President George W H Bush’s re-election - 2 August 1991

Anyone who has listened to these talks for many years would expect by now to
have at least one, if not several talks of a particular seasonal type. Which
I've not given. On the other hand, you may not have noticed this gap because
it's hard to be struck by what isn't there.

Well, it's now midsummer of the year before a presidential election year. As I
speak, it's only 15 months to the next election. And we've never mentioned a
candidate, a primary, the words Iowa and New Hampshire have never crossed my
lips. And I can almost hear a cry of gratitude from many listeners. I share
their unexpressed feelings for if there's one American tradition that requires
a fanatic to enjoy it's the preliminary heats tradition of presidential
elections. The sudden emergence of unknown egos, or egos, the thumping and
whizzing round the land of at least half a dozen men getting more dogged and
more exhausted every week from the brutal travel and the mechanical
grinding-out of so much manufactured indignation.

All these men, and so far thank God only men, no woman has been witless enough
to try it, all these men flying and preaching far and wide, pretending to be
either John the Baptist, or the man himself, who with your help, your votes,
could become the saviour of the republic. Well this time, fairly obviously,
there aren't going to be any more Republican candidates to clutter up the
stage. If there's one thing certain about the American political future, and
there never is, it is that George Herbert Walker Bush will be the next
Republican presidential candidate for re-election, in November 1992.

Of course the certainty of his running again has a lot to do with the
extraordinary sluggishness, the almost non-existence of a presidential campaign
so close to the day of the election. Maybe I ought to throw in a gross
explanation for any startled listeners who don't remember what happened in the
summer of 1987 and '83 and '79 and so on back into the womb of time.

Quite simply then, normally, an American presidential campaign starts about two
years before the November of the actual election. Candidates from each party
declare themselves and begin to pitch headquarters, recruit disciples and an
advertising agency, run around corporations and prominent citizens and unions
and every sort of civic body for money. They undertake frequent safaris into
Iowa and New Hampshire and California which, for reason or another, are thought
of as political barometers.

Now there's talk that California may hold its primary in late winter, to be
first of all. And if that happens, that could practically neutralise the
influence of later primaries. Because California is now well ahead of any other
state in population, in representation in Congress and therefore in the numbers
of delegates to the party conventions. In a nation of 50 states, it's got to
the point where one vote in five of a successful nominee would have to come
from California. It does suggest anyway that to lose the California delegation
could almost certainly deny you the nomination. To lose the California vote
would go a long way towards losing you the election. Still, we're talking about
mechanics. Well, given that George Bush is certain to be crowned by acclamation
as the next Republican convention next summer.

So where are the Democrats? Where is their Galahad? Where is their Moses? I
certainly cannot remember a year in which 15 months before the election there
weren't half a dozen men of the opposition party who weren't bawling and
weeping from coast to coast, pounding around the highways and skyways,
showering bumper stickers as they went. There were two declared candidates.
There's no point in naming them. Since they smote their breasts, announced they
would campaign to save the people, tried to collect some money, some support
and, on second thoughts, decided to serve the people some other way. They
withdrew.

There is now one declared Democratic candidate: a former senator, Senator
Tsongas from Massachusetts who speechifies here and there but doesn't get
reported. Months and months ago, there were one or two of the distinguished
Democrats in Congress who after the smashing triumph in the Desert War decided
that George Bush is unbeatable. They, the more plausible possibilities are
young enough to forget 1992 and think, instead, of running in 1996. "I'll tell
you what," said an old wag of a Democratic advisor. "Let's cancel the 1992
election, leave Bush four more years to ignore the home front! Let him flounder
in the bog of domestic chaos, then in 1996, we'll come roaring in all around
the country!"

The Democrats do have a theme, or rather a complaint, as a party, as a body of
complainers, even individually on television, all croon the same lamentation
about George Bush: that he loves handling foreign affairs, is enviably good at
it, but is totally indifferent to the developing chaos of America at home. The
symptoms of that chaos are well-known and endlessly recited: ever rising crime,
never enough prisons, choked law courts, the pestilence of drugs which escapes
no class, no sex, no generation, no part of the country, and dooms one black
baby in four to addiction. By now, one American baby in four, just like one
British baby in four, is illegitimate. Among blacks the percentage is 64.
There's a crisis of healthcare in a system which spends more than any other
developed nation, which offers the best in modern medicine for the rich and the
very poor, but which can pretty nearly bankrupt the pocketbook of a
middle-class family if struck by what we now define as a catastrophic illness.

There is no doubt about it, an appalling decline in the quality of public
education that threatens to keep on disgorging from the schools an alarming
percentage of the barely literate and the functionally illiterate. All across
the country and just about at the same time, large cities built at the end of
last century or the beginning of this, find that their structures, the water
pipes, the electrical systems, the sewage systems, the bridges across rivers –
and this is a land of several thousand rivers – are rotting, or not very far
from collapse. The environment goes on being despoiled, in spite of the brave
enforcement of new laws. The banking system of the United States is wobbly. And
many people in it believe only firm, visible involvement of the president can
restore confidence in it.

I know that many, if not all of these problems are familiar to you,
particularly to you in the older European countries. But in America which
boasted for so long at having things bigger and better, the crime rate, the
drug addiction, the semi-literacy, the government's deficit, are unhappily
bigger and worse.

I think if you no more than scan the headlines in Britain, France, Germany,
certainly in Eastern Europe, you'd find that the political leaders spend at
least half their time in front of their legislative bodies arguing, pleading,
debating about these domestic ills. Not in America. Some say that Mr Bush has
never been much interested in domestic affairs. Whether that's true or not, it
can be convincingly proved that his whole political life has been a training in
foreign policy.

Now, of course, the president is not a member of the legislature. He lives and
he has his political being as a man, an institution apart. But the Congress
debates almost nothing else since the voters dumped the rotted fruit of these
issues on the doorstep of Congress. The popular wailings and the anger are
heard first by the mayors of the towns and cities, then by the governors of the
states, but always, all the time, by the people's representatives in Congress.

Now the Congress is run and has been run for more than 50 years by a majority
of Democrats. Somehow the people feel that as distinct from voting in a
Republican president or a Democratic president, when it comes to Congress, when
it comes to the home ground, the bread and butter and mortgage payments in your
own neck of the woods, a great majority trusts the Democrats and keeps sending
them back, more than 90 per cent of incumbents, back to Washington.

Mr Bush could say that there's not much he can do to pursue his own domestic
policies against such a heavy majority. But he has restraining powers, powers
of defiance. He can keep on vetoing domestic bills he doesn't like, and he's
been doing it. But when the country is in crisis, either of foreign or domestic
origin, it is the president and no one else who can rouse and lead the nation.
To put it mildly, in domestic affairs, Mr Bush has not been doing this.

He could rightly claim that since he came into the White House in January of
1989, the whole post-war world has undergone a revolutionary upheaval that none
of us dreamed possible, even in the last days of Ronald Reagan. And that since
America is now the only super power, no nation has a more urgent duty to help
the breakaway republics, to assist the pacifying, the survival of famished
Africans, to try and pave the way towards at least the prospect of peace in the
Middle East.

But now the Democrats are saying – or saying that they are echoing the majority
of the people – that millions of Americans need desperate help here at home,
and that George Bush is doing nothing about them.

The Democrats problem is that since the rise and triumph of Franklin
Roosevelt's new deal, for 50 years they prospered with the Roosevelt formula:
soak the rich, tax and spend, tax and spend! Ronald Reagan made taxes a dirty
word. At best, no word on which to run a presidential campaign. The Democrats
are scared to use it, and taxing to pay for public needs and social services is
the only cause they know. So they have no leader. Because they have no cause.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP