1989 Soviet-Chinese summit - 17 February 1989

Does anybody remember 4 January 1980, a date that is already impressed on the
history books and can be checked for its stunning effect on Washington by any
researcher who cares to study the flaring newspaper headlines of 5 January
1980.

The President of the United States proclaimed an extremely serious threat to
peace and at once announced a series of punishing measures against the
aggressor – first an embargo upon the sale of American grain and high
technology, on oil and gas to the Soviet Union.

The following April, at the president’s request, the United States Olympic
Committee voted to boycott the 1980 summer Olympics in Moscow and no Americans
took part. All this was done by President Carter in angry response to the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.

The high moral indignation of Americans was pretty soon exhausted – in the
farming states of the Midwest and the Great Plains anyway when people found
they were raising wheat and maize to rot in silos or to be sold at alarmingly
low prices – but it took nearly three years for the next president, Mr Reagan
to lift the embargo on oil and gas.

So last Wednesday, 15 February 1989, the last Soviet soldiers went home from
Afghanistan after a nine-year experience that Mr Gorbachev himself called “a
bleeding wound”. There were elegies on the tube and in the papers and many of
them, remembering America’s bleeding wound in Vietnam, were even a touch
sympathetic.

But what was most notable – there was no gloating in Washington, no
"I-told-you-sos" and, since Mr Reagan is no longer in the White House, no
applauding mention of "freedom fighters", a phrase that during the past eight
years had come to be applied to any army, band of mercenaries, rabble of
guerrillas, that fought a government the United States opposed.

On the contrary, most despatches from Moscow and Kabul and the following
editorials were busy bracing their readers for the dreaded intensifying of the
Afghan civil war, but in the administration, in the Pentagon, in the State
Department and no doubt in Mr Bush’s new National Security Council, the
Soviet-Afghan war was being earnestly for lessons, the main lesson being one
that Americans very reluctantly came to learn over the years in Vietnam. It was
a lesson the British discovered too late in the American War of Independence
and Napoleon in Haiti – that a crack professional army, if it does not win
quickly, is no match for hit-and-run guerrillas fired by nationalism on their
own ground.

Edward Gibbon put it brutally and pungently about the last Roman expeditions
against the northern barbarians. “All things became adverse to the Romans,
their armour heavy, the waters deep, nor could they wield in that uneasy
situation their weighty javelins. The barbarians, on the contrary, were inured
to encounters in the bogs.”

In the latest adventure of a high-technology army fighting the barbarians,
there was only one challenge to the moral drawn by an American military
commentator. The moral is “Conventional armies lose unconventional wars.” The
challenge is the Stinger,the American-made anti-aircraft missile fired from the
shoulder. It was introduced just over two years ago and, for now anyway, the
consensus is that the witheringly effective Stingers marked the turning point
of the war.

But there’s another element much more difficult to pin down in the American
restraint in commenting on the Soviet failure. It’s the stature in the United
States, and among the Western allies, of Mr Gorbachev.

As one old soldier put it, it would be senseless at this point to bate or crow
over the first Soviet peacemaker. Let’s get it over with and back to Geneva. I
believe it would have been a very different story and a very different
emotional response in Washington if the humiliated leader had been Brezhnev or
Khrushchev.

As it is I’m quite sure that both Mr Bush and his Secretary of State Mr Baker
would come down hard on a member of the administration who dared to mutter
anything about the evil empire. Mr Baker, by the way, has just been
discovering, in a whizzing tour of America’s allies, how widespread is the
European respect for Mr Gorbachev and how keen the hopes for his survival.

Mr Baker is of course no newcomer to foreign affairs. Probably no American of
either party has had a more thorough briefing in the state of Soviet-American
relations over the past eight years as Reagan’s chief of staff and secretary of
the treasury, and also as the oldest friend of Mr Bush during his years as head
of the CIA and as vice president, but I gather that Mr Baker’s recent trip to
Europe banished any prejudice he might have had that this serious and
sympathetic view of Mr Gorbachev was the monopoly of a single political party,
or of parties edging towards the left.

I’ve been looking over a survey of foreign editors around the world on what
they, in their necks of the woods, considered the biggest news stories of 1988.
It took a month or more to collect the responses and they go from two
international news services, American-owned, both of which put the American
presidential election at the top of the list, but then on through London,
Luxemburg, through Europe, out to Nigeria, Hong Kong and China.

The most striking thing, once you get away from the polls of American editors,
is how low in the rating of importance is the American election. Americans, of
course, are not alone as a great power in assuming that the rest of the world
thinks first of the effect of some local upheaval on American opinion.

I’ve been mumbling tactfully for years to some American friends the truism that
people think first about themselves and their own lives and that in many places
on earth people don’t give a first thought, let alone a second, to America or
what it thinks of them. But even I was surprised at the answers that came in
from these overseas editors.

Here, from a news service based in London, the most important story of the
year: Gorbachev’s speech at the United Nations. Second, the PLO’s recognition
of Israel, three, end of the Iran-Iraqi war, four, toxic waste dumping, five,
the agreement between Namibia and Angola, six, the Soviet withdrawal from
Afghanistan, seven, the earthquake in Armenia, eight, Bush’s election.

The editors of the leading Hong Kong weekly put as the top six stories: Mr
Gorbachev’s unilateral arms cuts, his withdrawal from Afghanistan, his
rapprochement with China, the beginning of his talks with the Japanese, his
pressure on Vietnam to withdraw from Cambodia and on Cuba to get out of Angola.
Nine more points down, at the bottom of the list, Bush elected President of the
United States.

In Costa Rica, what would you guess was the top story of the year? A stalemate
in Nicaragua, the disputed Mexican elections? Not at all. Number one, the
proclamation of a Palestinian state, followed by the bombing of the
Pan-American jet in Scotland, then the Bush election. In China you’d... I’d
certainly think that the decision to hold a Chinese-Soviet summit would be the
first, second and third biggest story. It’s number eight. At the top is the
Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan and then the American-Soviet agreement to
destroy intermediate-range missiles.

The Associated Press, which serves more newspapers worldwide than any other
agency took a separate survey of all its overseas subscribers and the top of
the stories for 1988 were these four in order: the United States-Soviet summit
in Moscow, the end of the Iran-Iraqi war, the Gorbachev party shake-up and his
continuing reforms, the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan. The Bush triumph
came fifth.

Of course every region is bound to feature political crises or natural
disasters or whatever in its own corner of the world. Still, the constant of
this survey through Europe and Asia is the overriding fascination with Mr
Gorbachev and his actions at home and abroad, and along with the fascination,
the feeling which swamps party lines that the success of his revolution is
devoutly to be wished.

Everyone knows by now that the watchword of Mr Reagan’s policy towards his
new-found friend Mr Gorbachev was “Trust but verify” and it’s certainly the
watchword of President Bush, as of his lieutenant Mr Jim Baker, the agile,
patient Texan who is not given to spurts of wishful thinking.

But it would be a mistake for Europeans to think that the new administration
will not be responsive to new Soviet initiatives or be laggard in offering its
own. If, as one foreign editor suggested, 1988 was the most hopeful year for
world peace since 1945 that hope is sustained in part by the strong hope of the
Bush administration that Mr Gorbachev will survive to succeed.

There’s one point about that worldwide survey of editors which amazed me – the
almost casual attention given to the announcement of a Chinese-Soviet summit.
Seventeen years ago, at the end of his life, the late Walter Lippman, the seer
of American political commentators, was asked what was the worst catastrophe
that could happen to the world.

He said “China on the loose”, and I quoted that bleak line at the end of a
talk, but then added my own coda, thus, "I can think of something worse – the
possibility that China and the Soviet Union, deciding in a year or two that
they have more to lose by being at odds than being together, might conclude a
pact as unthinkable as the Hitler-Stalin pact of August 1939 which guaranteed
the Second World War, as the second get-together would herald the end, or at
the best, the last stand of the west."

Well I hope there are more substantial reasons than a trust in Mr Gorbachev for
believing that a Soviet-Chinese rapprochement will be anything but the
nightmare I feared.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP