Bill Gates and the Senate Judiciary Committee - 6 March 1998

Last Tuesday morning, into a Senate committee hearing room, there walked a
young man, younger looking than his 42 years, on account of his baby-fat round
face, rather squeaky college-boy voice and general air of an applicant for a
Rhodes scholarship, say, who'd never had to submit to an interview before a
committee of full-grown men.

This young man was, for the first time in his life, and quite likely he hopes
it'll be the last, was facing one of the Senate's most powerful committees, the
Senate judiciary committee. It has to approve all the president's nominations
of Supreme Court justices, all federal judges, all American ambassadors and it
has the final say on whether any articles of impeachment, voted by the House
against such, even a president of the United States, shall be passed on to the
whole Senate to decide whether or not he shall stand trial.

The hearing room was packed, not expecting fireworks or any dramatic outcome
from this first hearing on this subject, which on the face of it sounds
deceptively boring – monopoly. The hearing room was packed, the members of the
public who got seated first had been the lucky ones who led the long, curling
snake line of people who'd waited in the outer halls since before dawn. Several
celebrities of various kinds were turned away.

One man, who had no official business there, and you'd have guessed had better
things to do, was Senator Trent Lott, leader of the opposition, the leading
Republican in the Senate. All these gaping, craning people were there, it was
plain, not because of a burning interest in the odd topic of business monopoly,
they were there to be able to tell their children and grandchildren that, yes,
on Tuesday 3 March 1998, they had sat in a room in Washington, the nation's
capital, and seen with their own eyes the richest man in the world.

Would that be, piped up a six-year-old schoolboy, a millionaire? Millionaires,
multi-millionaires, why son, such people creep under this man's huge legs to
find themselves dishonourable graves. This man is a mega-billionaire. As one
reporter put it, as Mr Gates sat there, his net worth kept ticking up from 46
billions with every passing minute.

William H Gates, known to us all as Bill Gates, whose unassuming way of life
polishes up the simple magic of his being. He travels coach class on airplanes,
he doesn't go to nightclubs, he goes to bed early. He wears, most of the time,
a sports shirt and sweater with a crew neck.

He did put on a suit for his Washington appearance, greyish, loose-fitting, not
because that's the style, the cutting edge, fashion-forward, as they say, but
because he'd be wearing a hangdog loose suit if the fashion was skin-tight
trousers and belted jacket.

He's an easygoing, hang-loose fella, they say, the very opposite of what most
people used to call a tycoon, a no-nonsense go-getter, and is now called an
in-your-face, take-no-prisoners type.

Not young Bill Gates. I must say no rich, let alone fabulously rich, man I ever
saw puts on a more natural act as an unassuming bank clerk or the modest
15-handicap guy whose name you keep forgetting. And yet, at this Senate
committee hearing, he heard himself described as the most dangerous and
powerful industrialist of our age.

Who said that? The chairman of a California software company which maintains
that Mr Gates's monopoly of the software business is so overwhelming that he
virtually strangles all competition. Those two words, monopoly and competition,
is what this extraordinary Senate hearing was about.

It's been so long since a congressional committee held an open public hearing
on monopoly in business that one newsman excitedly reported on Wednesday the
spectacle of the nation's most powerful businessman deferentially answering the
senators' questions was a moment unique in history. "No legendary business
leader has ever defended himself before Congress".

To respond simply – rubbish. We may charitably assume that this was a very
young reporter. Now I don't expect anybody alive ever saw the mighty John D
Rockefeller or the cunning railroad tycoons, Harriman and Hill or the mighty
Morgan cringe before committees investigating, under the whip of President
Teddy Roosevelt's indignation, the locktight monopoly at one time these men
held over the oil of America, the steel of America, the railroads of America
and several other trusts.

I myself go back most vividly a little later to the son of the lordly Pierpont
Morgan, who tried to defy Teddy Roosevelt and lost, to the son, JP with the
unforgettable bulbous red nose. I remember his being bluntly quizzed by a
Senate investigation into the armaments business and being made out to be a
heartless weapons manufacturer, making unholy huge profits to send young men to
their death.

The large and florid Mr Morgan was sharply questioned by the legal counsel to
the commission and when this young man decided to grill old JP, JP's red nose
went to purple and the young interrogator, name of Alger Hiss, later went to
gaol on quite other grounds.

Way back in the 1930s, I thought covering some of those Senate hearings into
all sorts of things – banking, customs, farm subsidies, the condition of coal
miners, racketeering – that the institution of the open public congressional
hearing was a very healthy institution, a vigorous expression of democracy.

I can think of a whole raft of tycoons in the automobile industry, mining, the
head of US steel, banking, tobacco, whose friends and family would dearly wish
it were true that Mr Gates's appearance was a novelty.

Grilling big shots is part of the business of Senate committees, not only in
business but in any public service. Nominees for the Supreme Court – I've seen
at least four of a president's choices turned down by that same judiciary
committee.

And how about the grilling, frying and sautéing of the president's top advisers
and aides, remember Ehrlichman, Haldeman, John Dean, remember Richard Nixon?

This extraordinary meeting had as its purpose, as all congressional hearings
do, the need, if need be, to seek new laws, in this case, new anti-trust laws.
You could say that the real genesis of the hearing is the fact that last
October, the Department of Justice filed an anti-trust suit against Microsoft,
Mr Gates's company, for violating a 1995 agreement with the government "in that
Microsoft forced makers of personal computers to load Microsoft's own Explorer
programme for browsing the internet's world wide web as a condition of
licensing its (Microsoft's) operating system".

There were two of Mr Gates's rivals alongside him, who claimed that their
companies couldn't sell their software because time and again the intending
buyer would say that their contract for their personal computer stipulated they
must install Microsoft's software.

At one point the angry head of a rival company swivelled round and faced the
audience, a very rare trick. How many of you use personal computers? About
three-quarters of all present raised their hands. How many of you have a
computer that is not fitted with Microsoft's Explorer? Not a hand was raised.
That, said the aggrieved rival, is a monopoly..

If there was one simple question that ached to be answered throughout a
hurricane of computer jargon, it was, "Mr Gates, do you run a monopoly?" The
question was put in many forms by the committee chairman, Senator Hatch.

It was put in many forms because Mr Gates evaded it in many forms. Senator
Hatch is an old hand on this committee and he knows how to take his time with a
recalcitrant witness but his determination to get something like a straight
answer was possibly sharpened by the fact that in Senator Hatch's state of
Utah, there is a software company that is a conspicuous complainer about Mr
Gates's giantism.

In the end, after three hours of playing the artful dodger, Mr Gates conceded
that yes, his company did, er, restrict the ability of its internet partners to
deal with its rivals. Senator Hatch let his head droop in relief over his
three-inch collar. Well, he said, you've been somewhat hard to nail down.

Mr Gates smiled and was soon free to go home. He is, by the way, notorious for
a hot temper but he was smiley cool at this hearing and that's because, an old
employee of his said, because he knows what trouble he's in.

Enough, Senator Hatch believes, that there's no present need for new laws.
Simply rouse from the grave the 1890 splendid, but comatose, Sherman Anti-Trust
Law, which after a brisk, punishing short life under Teddy Roosevelt, was
forgotten about and during the Second War President Roosevelt practically told
the great oil and steel and rubber corporations to forget the anti-trust laws.

"Combine all your resources for America and the free world", was the unsung cry
and since then, whatever happened to the Sherman Law? It has become almost a
joke among two generations of budding monopolists. However, it seems Congress
has been aroused. The cry from the grave of the Sherman Law is when we dead
awaken, watch out.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP