History of chocolate - 18 February 1994

A headline in the New York Times gave us an idea, it said, "Keeping Elderly At
Home And Care Affordable", you'll gather that care affordable is one of those
new compound noun adjectives, like user friendly, that you get used to before
you can translate them into English and so you go on using them for the rest of
your life.

What this headline keeping the elderly at home meant to us was more of a
challenge than anything else, why should we be kept at home and gazing out like
a marooned sailor on a raft at an ocean of snow and ice cracking trees and
happy golliwog children in the park and unhappy adults stumbling and climbing
and slipping everywhere else in 5 or 10 degrees in a whistling north-west wind
and lots of them winding up in the hospital. Enough is enough, so off to
Kennedy Airport.

I must say it's a sign of the superb job done by 1,700 men and 1,000 thundering
ploughs through the nights and the days that Kennedy Airport was closed during
the past hideous five weeks for only one day. The 1,700 men are known here as
sanitation workers, which may be funny to you but not as funny as calling them
"dustmen" would be to Americans, they were all over this great city and it's
five boroughs from the first snowflake and by last weekend all the avenues and
the main highways in and out of town were squeaky clean with the snow now
turning between grey and black in huge orderly ramparts at the edge of the
sidewalks or the fringe of the roadways.

So on Monday morning when the plane took off and we looked down on the endless
stretching landscape of blinding snow and the curves and ribbons of black
highways snaked between these endless ramparts, it was like I imagine it would
be like a great battlefield of trench warfare at the South Pole. It was a
privileged feeling to be able to rise above it and be gone and it was all
provoked by that headline "Keeping Elderly At Home And Care Affordable". How
about sending elderly away to California for instance if they can afford their
care?

Well, to be frank after working in front of a microphone for just on 60 years
and if from the time you were a toddler you were schooled in such boring
clichés as saving for a rainy day not buying things you couldn't afford. The
trouble is when you learn such reactionary doctrines early on, you can't shake
them. So yes, we don't mean to be smug, but we simply state a fact when we say
we were in ourselves care affordable.

Driving from the San Francisco Airport into town between green surrounding
hills, we saw the sign on one of the main highways out of the city still up
"Route 280 closed", it was going to be repaired and strengthened within a year
of the '89 earthquake. It's now been four and a half years; it makes you wonder
if that main freeway in southern California which collapsed in a second or two
will ever be rebuilt.

So what is the scoop from California? Well the first news as it came out; the
great news came actually from Dallas, Texas and a medical symposium being held
at the university there. The subject of the symposium was, wait for it
"Chocolate in Perspective", the story came from a reputable medical
correspondent and appeared either by luck or more likely by cunning design last
Monday, which was you may recall Valentine's Day. The connection the happy or
contrived coincidence will be immediately clear when I say that what the
perspective of the symposium showed just in time was that although chocolate is
rich in the villainous saturated fatty acids, the ones that are accused of
raising cholesterol levels and clogging coronary arteries, yet the new, the
amazing yet the highly saturated cocoa butter, which makes chocolate taste
like, well, chocolate I quote "almost miraculously spares blood vessels". This
is not only news, it is sensational news and especially for chocoholics.

The organiser of the symposium one Dr Margo Denke, a nutritionist described
along with two other colleagues, the peculiar magic of cocoa butter.
Incidentally, the fact that these three pioneer researchers are all women has I
believe no scientific significance whatsoever.

Anyway this is the story, which turns on what is so special about cocoa butter
from a medical point of view? It's essential element is a saturated fatty acid
unlike any other, which occurs more plentifully in chocolate than in any other
food, it's called stearic acid – an 'S' before tear, stearic acid – and it has
no effect on serum cholesterol or rather before it could like, say, meat and
dairy products do its mischief, it's converted in the liver to another acid,
oleic acid. This is a mono unsaturated fat present also in olive oil and has no
effect on cholesterol. Before the assembled doctors could tear of and go on a
stearic acid binge, Dr Denka and her colleagues warned choco- maniacs not to
just grab and wolf the first chocolate to hand, read the label carefully she
said, she might have added in countries where it's compulsory to print the
chemical ingredients of all food products she noted that some chocolate
candies, sweets, biscuits products contain palm oil and coconut oil, which do
raise cholesterol. And by the way she says, prefer the right stuff dark
chocolate to the anaemic, that's my word, milk chocolate since it obviously
contains butter fat.

A metabolic expert at Pennsylvania State University contributed a study, which
fed a group of healthy men students three separate diets cocoa butter, olive
oil and dairy butter. After a month the only men who showed no increase in
their serum cholesterol were the ones you guessed it on cocoa butter. This
doctor from Pennsylvania went so far as to suggest not to chocolate
manufacturers who by this time must be in ecstasy, but to food companies in
general that they would do well to start thinking of using cocoa butter in
products that normally contain butter and margarine.

There have been several other confirming clinical trials and one doctor made a
point of remarking that in all the studies done so far, females convert stearic
acid into oleic acid in exactly the same way as males. So for the moment
anyway, there doesn't seem to be any issue for rampant feminists to jump on all
stearic acid consumers are created equal. Since this symposium was being held
in Texas, since the subjects of the trials were Americans and since most of the
medical audience was American, its not surprising that one reporter should have
introduced the now rather proud reminder that Europeans never knew the joys of
chocolate until at least a century and most of them two centuries after its
cultivation by the Aztecs and the Mayans.

Columbus took some of the beans back to Ferdinand and Isabella, but evidently
they paid no attention or they thought it odd and bitter. Anyway, about 100
years later, not till the very end of the 16th century, did later Spanish
explorers return from the America's with a liquid, a chocolate drink. At that
point, the records are murky for some non-apparent reason the drink was kept a
secret due one reporter thinks to some bright characters adding a dollop of
sugar to the confection and spreading, but only inside the court, the
superstition that chocolate was an aphrodisiac not to be taken up by the serfs
and pheasants. This I suspect is all very shaky reportage, but just how long it
took for chocolate to become acceptable as a pleasant drink in Europe, it took
another century for the lump form to develop, I really don't know, but the
first great man who spotted occupational diseases the Italian Doctor Bernardo
Ramazzini wrote about chocolate as a new thing in the first decade of the 18th
century, I think, I'm away from the books but I think his great work De Morbis
Artificum, The Diseases of Workers, came out about 1710.

Anyway, a couple of centuries after Columbus took the beans home, you have
Ramazzini writing there's a great new soporific and delicious too and he
recommends it specially to scholars he says "it soothes the fevered mind, it
helps humped-backed scholars to straighten up and fly right, it calms the mind,
it helps dreamless sleep a magical new potion called chocolate". Some of you
may have been wondering about other hazardous properties lying deep inside the
cocoa bean, the Madame's or Mrs what's the plural of Miss, say forget it, it's
a myth that chocolate produces pimples. As for caffeine, an ounce of chocolate
contains 10 milligrams at most. Your freshly brewed morning cup of coffee
between 100 and 150 milligrams, help. By the way no hard evidence that
chocolate is an aphrodisiac. The old ones will have to do – youth and boredom.

I promised that next week we'll get back to sterner stuff nuclear inspection in
North Korea, the Navy's sexual harassment scandal, what suddenly stiffened the
Clinton Bosnian policy, but for the moment I felt I had to stay with this
earth-shaking story, the discovery of the DNA molecule was I grant important
source of human life, but think what the discovery of stearic acid will do for
the human race a vast reduction of nagging of children, of husbands, by wives,
no question. Dr Denke, Dr Grundy and Dr Kris-Eftherton must be immediately
nominated for the Nobel Prize; I think the Peace Prize would be most
appropriate.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP