School prayers - 22 December 1995

Towards the end of the First World War after the first American troops had
arrived in France, an American doctor was assigned to General Pershing's Paris
headquarters to take charge of the health of the American Expeditionary Force,
and very soon he had an S.O.S. call from the southern sector of the front.
Several different American army camps had reported an outbreak of a disease,
which the army doctors couldn't diagnose. It didn't seem to be contagious
though in most places two or three friends got it, violent symptoms, stomach
pains, nausea, thirst, delirium. The attending doctors were stumped and
alarmed, for there'd been a death or two.

The colonel doctor in Paris looked at the message and telegraphed for a list of
names of the men afflicted. It came back they had one thing in common: all the
names were Italian. The colonel doctor in Paris who was to become a famous
epidemiologist had an idea. He telegraphed back: "Are there mushrooms in the
vicinity of the victims?" There were, so he sent another message: "Procure
charcoal immediately, other measures to follow." The colonel was a New Yorker
but well acquainted with the neighbouring states of New England and he
remembered having early in his career, taken care of a young American a boy, a
child from Connecticut, first generation American born of Italian immigrants.

The parents had been in the habit in their native land of mooching through the
countryside looking for one particular, and as far as they were concerned, a
succulent mushroom. And some years later soon as they were settled in
Connecticut, their little boy had run around the countryside and spotted what
looked like very much the same mushroom. In Connecticut it was safe and
succulent, in France it looked the same but it was poisonous.

The thought that much trouble and a life or two could have been saved in France
if the doctor's had spotted where the men came from by their names was what
made me wonder about those withering pictures of the first American troops in
Bosnia huddled against the snow-blind wind, where they came from and did
anybody at the Pentagon think of carefully picking the men who could ride out
that winter? Well plainly armies can't afford the luxury of breaking up a
division according to place of birth. But the other night on the telly we had
an unwittingly comical reflection of this very theme, a brief exchange between
an American television reporter and a soldier. The reporter, judging from his
question came I should guess from the Florida peninsular or southern California
as some similar semi-tropical spot. "Well soldier," he said. "How do you like
the weather here?" And the soldier all wrapped up in his camouflage patchwork
quilt – not much camouflage against a dead white landscape – looked to the
reporter as the song says, square down in the eye, he said: "Have you ever been
in Buffalo this time of the year?" That was the interview. Buffalo in Upstate
New York gets normally well over 100 inches of snow each winter and lies in the
full force of the Canadian wind. Already this December it's had over 40 inches.

The first reports from Bosnia on the reception of the Nato troops were good
enough for the Nato commander and American admiral to say: "I'm tickled pink to
see how things have gone and I hope they'll stay that way." We hope so too,
even as I talk, for the possibilities of mischief, ill-feeling,
misunderstanding, eruptions of ethnic hate could happen and be exploited
overnight. And one moving aside here, as Christmas approached, was of many
church congregations of many faiths holding special twilight services for the
safety of the Nato mission.

Incidentally, talking of many faiths, there's a new and I think regrettable
story, to add to my thoughts the other week on the never ending ever wrangling
debate, in and out of Congress, on whether prayers in the public schools, in
the American sense, violate the Constitution's ban on setting up a state
religion. I recited some pretty ludicrous cases for example: a suit brought by
a man, of atheists, against a whole state, Colorado, for permitting a stone
monument in a public park to have chiselled on it the Ten Commandments. The
point is this: if you're going to celebrate the Christian religion you ought to
do it in a Christian church on demonstrably Christian property and not out
there shamelessly in public where it could lead innocent citizens to think that
the United States had suddenly adopted Christianity as its official religion.
Horrors!

But now the latest outrage. There is/has always been a splendid Christmas tree
in Grand Central Station in New York, there was one this year until a week ago,
but maybe because the festival of Hanukkah was upon us, somebody put up a
menorah, and lit all the candles. Why not? However this time, a sudden
commotion one morning in the station, a hullabaloo from Muslims protesting the
flaunting of the symbols of two religions. This has never happened before maybe
because only recently have we become more aware of the American Muslim
population.

Well the board that runs Grand Central and supervised its restoration back to
the splendour of the old concourse simply took down both the Christmas tree and
the minora. Where all this will end, knows only God. Time was, more often than
not, come Christmas and the concourse was winding up its session breathing
goodwill all around and echoing the president's proclamation – he often did put
one out – of the right of Americans to enjoy this great festival. Franklin
Roosevelt once actually I recall, uttered the name of Jesus Christ, which would
cause an uproar today for reasons just elaborated.

This year, the scene in both the Senate and the House was lamentably different,
unprecedented I believe. I don't recall such a continuous demonstration of ill
will amplified by demagoguery. It all had to do with the issue, the balancing
of the budget by 2002 that has practically obliterated every other pressing
concern of American life: welfare, abortions, school prayer, poverty, crime,
drugs, all the things that our fine and famous ex-governor of New Jersey gave
as the reason why he would not seek a seat in the Senate, that the state
Republicans had rushed to offer him, because he said, the Senate has become a
mean place and does not stay with the things it ought to be talking about and
working on all the time.

I won't bore you by detailing the tricks and gestures of demagoguery, and this
debate, the shameless rhetoric worthy of Charles Dickens at his worst, writing
about say the death of Little Nell, but each party has oversimplified and
dramatised the other party's plan for a balanced budget and so talked it into
deadlock. Let me explain, a balanced budget in 7 years, that's what it's all
about and after months of squabbling, the president and the Republicans agreed
on that. By the way, there hasn't been a balanced budget since the 1960s.

And also by the way, what makes this whole debate more gruesome is the
coincidence of the time of year. It's the time when the Congress normally signs
a bill authorising the money that has to be spent on keeping the wheels of
government turning. But now it's withheld the money for the administrative
offices, of all the bureaus: agriculture, the Treasury, Veterans' Bureau – no
cheques – immigration office – no passports – so on. And all the non-partisan
government agencies: the national museums, the National Parks, the National
Forests, monuments, tourist attractions.

This year, the Congress, the House, in the main refused to sign a bill or even
a continuing resolution, which is a temporary expense account, to keep the
wheels turning while Congress gets more time to argue on what it's worked up
about. Well as I say, it's very worked up indeed about agreeing on a bill to
balance the budget. It put through a resolution three weeks ago to send those
three quarters of a million federal employees back to work, but this time it
refused. Who is it? A question never answered, a villain, not so far as I know
defined. I dare to define it. The number of freshman congressman in this
Congress is about 140, a record in the body of always 435 members. They are
mostly of course Republicans, that's where the seizure, pardon me, the new
acquisition of power, came from in the last election.

I think when this budget debate is eventually settled, and it could be
tomorrow, it might be next June, it will be seen that what arrested the
so-called Gingrich revolution, what stopped it in its tracks was the
ideological fervour of Mr Gingrich's most ardent revolutionaries namely the
freshman Republicans. On both domestic and foreign policy, they have been
disturbingly, how shall I say downright, on foreign policy, they are newborn
isolationists. American troops must go into action only against an army
physically invading the United States. They have shown they know little
history, especially the history of the 1920s, and therefore may be doomed to
repeat it. On domestic policy, they have never heard of the great maxims of
James Madison, the true architect of the Constitution and so the real founding
father of this republic. They want the whole cake of their pet projects, if it
means shutting the government down indefinitely. They voted for instance, to
abolish the federal administration of Medicaid, the only system for the past 30
odd years that guarantees medical care for the very poor. They would turn
welfare 60 years old upside down by denying money for aid to dependent
children. They passed the bills and the president exercises his final right and
vetoes them.

The freshman Republicans, I say, seem unacquainted with that passage, that day
in the original debates in the 1780s over making the Constitution. One day
James Madison said that good government must be based on ambition counteracting
ambition, since in any human society there would always be disagreement and so
compromise was an essential element of government. A mocking delegate got up
and asked: "Is Mr Madison saying that the frailties of human nature are the
proper elements of good government?" Madison replied, "I know no other".

May I wish you the old English greeting and still the American greeting, a
merry Christmas and a happy New Year!

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP