Assassination attempt on Ford - 12 September 1975

Before the world was inundated with such marvels as tape recorders,
televisions, the jet engine and the aerosol spray, it used to be said that
radio – what for so long in Britain was known as the wireless, and then for
some inexplicable reason as sound radio, though nobody ever told me of any
other kind – it used to be said that radio was a marvel. Because you, the
listener, felt you were there along with the man who was really there, talking
from the spot, and however dead his material, he was live.

This might have its special excitement for the listener, but for the
broadcaster, it carried its own highly uncomfortable form of tension. I will
remember the morning after the 1948 presidential election when the papers
appeared with headlines blaring that Thomas E Dewey had beaten Harry S Truman.
But we’re still waiting for the results from a couple of states, and while
Republicans could go around slapping each other’s backs and exchanging cigars,
the broadcaster has to be extremely pernickety, if he goes on the air, with
what everybody on earth takes to be a statement of fact and then two minutes
later the "fact" is shown to be false. The broadcaster pretty quickly hears
from his mail that he is a blunderer, a sluggard, asleep at the switch, a
careless and reprehensible journalist.

On that nervous morning I had to give at noon – 5pm, British time – an
absolutely definitive thoughtful commentary, on how and why the winner had won.
But an hour before the circuit time we didn’t know who he was. This is very
embarrassing to a seasoned commentator, who one minute before an election
result is known is assumed to be as fallible as everybody else, but one minute
after the result is out, he is expected to trace the hidden and subtle shifts
of public opinion that made the result inevitable.

Incidentally, my favourite newspaper is a shrewd lady who makes predictions
only in the foggiest terms. But the morning after the election or the
assassination or whatever, she recounts to her friends and patients the most
lurid and extraordinary dreams in which she foresaw with uncanny accuracy what
in fact had happened.

I am happy, by the way, to see that a veritable congregation of distinguished
scientists including a stack of Nobel Prize winners, many of them astronomers,
has come out with a total denunciation of the astrology mania as a lamentable
sign that human gullibility is no less now than it was when superstitious Roman
emperors, who knew very little about the movement of the planets, assumed that
those mysterious twinkling stars controlled our behaviour. And if the stars
didn’t work, and you lost the battle the royal astrologer told you to fight,
next time you took the entrails of a dead cat and studied them by the light of
a new moon – a clinical exercise which bore as much resemblance to diagnostics
as the signs of the zodiac bear to any predictable human behaviour.

Well on that terrible November morning in 1948, the men who step up the
circuits across the Atlantic were already testing things out, and talking their
squawky mumbo-jumbo, "Erm, do you read me NL, a little feedback at your end
I’ll check with post office" and so on, and there was I, with no script, no
thoughtful commentary written, and about 40 minutes to go before the cue came
from London, "And you’re on the air, live". Live and feeling foolish.

And then the results came in from Ohio. And it suddenly turned out not that
Dewey had clobbered Truman, but that Truman had clobbered Dewey. We learned
this just in time for me to ad lib my way through thirteen minutes of deep
thought – saying, in effect, that that was the way it was bound to be.

Today, it's surely no mystery the system of relaying these talks has changed.
Since the days when we broadcast live, and if we felt a froggy cough coming on,
we had to bury ourselves under the table and choke the frog. Since then, there
have appeared the jet aeroplane and the tape recorder. Of course, there is
nothing against looking at transatlantic circuit direct if you’d prefer me to
sound like a kidnapped Donald Duck putting in an underwater call to the RSPCA.

Since the miracles of the jet engine and the tape recorder we have assumed that
a talk should sound not like a lecture or an essay, or Hitler haranguing
through a megaphone, but a talk between two people in a room. So at this moment
I am being taped and tonight the tape will be jetted over to London, dispatched
to the BBC, and played over to you, first on Friday evening, then on Sunday
morning, and early next week to Europe and Asia and lord knows where.

This makes for quite a gap between the considered opinion, and the possibility
of a weekend disaster, something for which people, critics especially,
naturally don’t allow. How was I to know when I taped a talk about the growing
of artichokes in California, or the history of the hamburger, or some other
such absorbing bit of Americana, that the Russians were going to send their
first astronaut into orbit about 24 hours after my tape had arrived in Britain?
A critic wrote, "Cooke evidently doesn’t read the papers, he will go waffling
on when the last bomb has dropped".

Well, of course we try to keep up and last summer, the summer of 1974 that is,
I used to do my talk, drive a hundred miles down Long Island, hear that Mr
Nixon had just discovered some further high-principled explanation of why he’d
lied – or as he used to put it, made a mistake of judgement – and I’d go into
reverse and drive a hundred miles back, tell them to scrap the tape already in
London and talk on the circuit about fifteen minutes before the clock – your
clock – struck 6.15 on Friday night. In that terrible time Mr Nixon would
sometimes perform another trick on Saturday and, again, we’d scrap the latest
thoughtful commentary and think again.

Well things have been relatively calm, though no more predictable since then,
but last week I had my say, and on the Friday night I turned on the television
and was chilled by an emblem or logo which showed the picture of a pistol above
the word Sacramento. It was, of course about the outrage precipitated by that
ex-disciple of Charles Manson, on the president of the United States.

I was glad, for once, that I had been caught out – in the immediate shock there
was nothing new to say. And now I think there is. Time was when President
Truman, who kept his old farmer's hours, used to leave the white house at 6.45
sharp in the morning and go for a brisk walk along the streets of Washington,
pausing to hail a stalled bus driver, or a shoe-shine boy, duck into a grocer's
shop, talk cheerily to a little band of early birds who tagged along behind
him.

Well, there is no way of bringing those times back. For three weeks after the
assassination of President Kennedy, Lyndon Johnson stayed at his ranch in Texas
and thought things over. The White House press corps was housed in a hotel in
Austin, the capital city of Texas, about 30 miles away from the ranch. The last
thing we expected was ever to see a president again, at large, on the highways,
let alone the streets.

We had, I recall, a couple of press conferences at the ranch – more like
barbecues, they were chiefly get-acquainted sessions with the new men. But one
day, I went out of the hotel and up to a main street and was petrified to see,
padding along the sidewalk, and followed by a dozen gaping stragglers young,
old, people just out walking, the pied piper himself, the huge, loping
elephantine figure of President Johnson.

Austin was home-town country to him and he stopped at a jewellers and a
barber's shop, I remember. The owners had been at school with him and he was
full of nods and pecks and wreathed smiles. I presume there were a couple of
secret service men along but I couldn't spot them, though usually they are the
most conspicuous of incognitos – they have their right hands in their coat
pockets and they jerk their heads around unceasingly, like jungle inventory men
on the lookout for snipers. One of them in Sacramento last week was just a
split-second ahead of the girl with the gun.

Well President Johnson was not simply slap-happy. He told us, when he came into
a newspapermens' party on New Year’s Eve, that he had thought the whole thing
over and decided what President Ford must have decided a year ago, that if you
are going to be president you must get out and meet the people and, as Mrs Ford
said, live with it.

This is brave talk. I mean it, but we have to begin to ask ourselves if, in the
television age, the president needs to live with it. Even in the days many
decades before radio, presidents didn’t always mingle with the crowd, and for
the same precautionary reasons. In the last century, since 1865 to be exact,
four presidents have been assassinated and four – Theodore Roosevelt, Franklin
Roosevelt, Truman and now Mr Ford – have had very close calls. That works out
at about one assassination attempt every 13 years. Only by God’s grace and the
nudging elbow of a lady standing beside a maniac in Miami in 1933 did the
bullet meant for president-elect Franklin Roosevelt kill the man standing next
to him.

The theory that if the president isn’t seen and pressed in the flesh, people
won’t know him wasn’t even accepted in the days when a photograph or a line
drawing was all people ever saw of their president's likeness. One president
decided not to campaign at all – he sat out the summer on his back porch and
won.

But today, you can learn all you ever want to know about a man, and more, by
watching and hearing him on television. So it’s been said that we should have
an end of mingling with the people. Mr Ford doesn’t agree. So now there is take
of more rigid gun control. There was much talk after Kennedy and nothing much
happened for nine years. The sporting gun lobby is very powerful and appeals to
30 million Americans who use guns for the so-called sporting purpose of
shooting ducks, geese, pheasants, turkeys, deer and other innocent
non-politicians.

What the Sacramento incident has done, as a political episode, has been to give
pause to those Democrats who are relying their fellows to storm their next
convention and nominate Senator Edward Kennedy. There is nothing in the stars
to say that when two brothers are killed the third is bound to be the next
target. But there are demented people at large who like to think so.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP