American sport - 24 June 1994

I never fail to marvel not at what gets into the papers and on to the box but
what doesn't. A ceremony took place last Saturday and if anyone had told me 49
years ago that when in the fullness of time this ceremony would surely take
place and it would not blanket the headlines of the world I should never have
believed it possible.

I spotted the story as a snippet reprinted on Monday in a paper that I pick up
occasionally, a short piece with the sombre, incredible heading allies bid
farewell to Berlin. Canons boomed it says here in salute, parachutists fell
from the sky, helicopters flew by in formation and 75,000 spectators watched
the soldiers step martially through the streets.

The most startling and I imagine for many of those older spectators the most
moving participant in the parade was a single aeroplane, a DC-3, the flying
workhorse of the Second War, which as a transport C-47 carried men and material
across two oceans, but here in Berlin it was the lone symbol of Berlin's most
desperate hour, it represented the hundreds of British and American flights
that in 1948-9 night and day dropped food and medicines for the besieged people
by way of defying and eventually breaking the Russian blockade of the city.
Russian blockade of Berlin, cried an incredulous college student to whose
generation I gather the Russians are a greatly misunderstood shaggy bear of the
people trying very hard without much of our help to be a going democracy.

Well, if you don't remember that grievous winter or haven't read about it, it's
too long, too grim a story to go into, suffice it to say that since the
Russians had captured Berlin in 1945 all on their own they wanted to have it
and hold it, but they'd agreed before the war ended with Britain and free
France and the United States that Berlin should be occupied jointly so they
divided it into separate zones with free access from Western Germany to the
virtual island of Berlin, it worked restlessly at best. The contrast grew
sharper every year between prospering West Germany and the poor dour Eastern
sector of Berlin.

And in 1961, the East German Police sealed off 68 of 80 crossing points and
overnight built a barrier of barbed wire and concrete, it became known as the
Berlin Wall and stayed intact for 28 years. So since 1945, British, American
and French troops have been in Berlin to protect West Germany and the West from
the communist countries beyond the Iron Curtain.

It's been 31 years since the young American President John Kennedy roused half
a million Germans with his defiant cry "Ich bin ein Berliner". I ought to say
that that thunderstorm of applause was amplified by bellowings of laughter for
what nobody told the president at the time was that in German a Berliner is a
cake. It was as if in another city he'd cried, "Wherever your liberty is
threatened, I give you this solemn promise I am a hamburger". Still, that
unforgettable scene flooded the television screens of the world; it was the
supreme guarantee that Berlin was the American frontier. The allies, said one
speaker the other day, came as saviours and stayed as protectors; they
liberated us from one dictatorship and saved us from falling under another.

So last Saturday almost 50 years after they came, they began to leave. I don't
wonder if you never saw any of Saturday's solemn and emotional scene because
this has been a week of you might say universal sport. I don't remember such a
week of what the sports writers called "climatic events" in so many sports last
Wednesday was the final, the Cup Final if you like of America's favourite
sport, favourite sport to play certainly, basketball, the Knicks and the
Rockets. And we've had the famous Stanley Cup, the ultimate trophy of Canada's
contribution to sport – and what would be that?

Well of course, one of the two games they originated, the first being lacrosse,
this one is from coast to coast known as hockey, which everywhere on this
continent means ice hockey. The other hockey known as field hockey is to hockey
as rounders is to baseball. Hockey has been supreme in Canada and the
north-eastern United States for a long time. The rules were standardised at
McGill University in the 1870s, the first hockey league set up in the 1880s and
the Stanley Cup was first awarded, just think, in 1912. That's as far as I'm
going with ice hockey, the history of Berlin should be enough for one week.

I can hear almost the intake of breathe; the incredulous gasp from some people
it might not mentioning the festival that Americans call "Wimbleton". An
American who'd been in England for the Wimbledon fortnight last year said to me
on his return "the British are sure crazy about tennis on TV aren't they". No,
I said rudely, they're crazy about Wimbledon and unless things have changed
drastically in the past year or two, you'd better stay in the United States if
you want to see on the tube everyday the play in the Australian Open, the
Italian Open, the French Open and in the blistering weeks of summer the United
States Open.

Well, Wimbledon is only halfway towards its climax, but it has provided at
least one reeling sensation in the first round, disposal of Steffi Graf. How
about golf? I hesitate there, I talk about golf once a year in April from
Georgia, yet I have a friend in England, a lady who says, "I rarely listen to
him he talks all the time about golf". Well, we'd just emerged from the
cauldron of western Pennsylvania with the youngest and the oldest great golfers
in the world wilting under a sun temperature of 125 in pursuit of the United
States Open Championship and it was won by a tall, languid, perpetually smiley
gum-chewing South African Ernie Els in a play off with a Scot and an American.

In April, a Spaniard won the Masters Tournament. This is the first time that
the first two of the four major tournaments have been won by foreigners; the
papers are black with further melancholy statistics, six of the last eight
major championships have been won by foreigners, what's worse by six different
men. In the world rankings, put out of course by Sony, there are only two
Americans in the top 10. I will say no more about golf except to quote a
lugubrious headline in the New York Times, Where Are America's Golfers?

So hockey has had its finest hour, basketball, baseball is now in full stride,
golf has its second of the four grand slam tournaments and awaits the third in
Scotland three weeks from now, Wimbledon is well on the way, but we haven't
mentioned the world's favourite sport, certainly the biggest spectator sport in
any country you care to mention except the United States of America. And yet,
as a 100 million people do not need to be told the climatic event of soccer is
taking place nowhere but the United States, a situation so improbable to all
but the fanatics that the most typical American response to this great honour
of being the shop window for the universal favourite game, the truest American
response was shown in a comic strip this week. A middle-aged man on the left, a
visitor enquiring of two middle-aged Americans a man and his wife, the dialogue
goes like this.

"I've come to your country to watch football."

"Really. I'm a Chicago Bears fan myself."

"No, no. Soccer." "Soccer but she's my wife."

"No, no it's a game 11 men playing with their feet."

"Sounds kind of kinky."

It ends with the visitor going off saying "crazy American" and the American
saying "crazy foreigner".

For filling the stadiums they're going to have to depend pretty much on what we
used to call "the immigrant group" and now call "the ethnic minority" even when
they're in the majority, but so far they've racked up surprising figures. The
Dutch v. Saudi Arabia drew 50,000 in Washington. Brazil beat Russia in Palo
Alto California before 80,000. In New Jersey, in 101º in any discoverable shade
60,000 showed up to cheer or groan as Ireland beat Italy.

The truth, which would surprise many an American couple like the one in the
cartoon strip, the truth is that soccer is running neck and neck with two other
sports as a game the young most like to play in schools. The favourite of
course is basketball beyond any other sport and then volleyball. By the way,
volleyball on the beach with nubile semi-naked girls is getting to be very
popular on television, I can't think why. And then softball, then soccer,
baseball is listed next most popular though baseball is an exclusively summer
game, which must confuse the comparative statistics. Those statistics come
suspiciously from the soccer industry council of America.

Still, you can say that soccer has taken on in a big way in the schools as a
professional game a league was formed with enthusiasm in 1968 and died from
public neglect in 1984. Whether the playing of the world cup in the United
States will prime the pump of national interest in soccer or whether once the
cups gone and forgotten, soccer will remain in popular esteem somewhere between
lacrosse and bowling that is the question. It's not a question I think that
will noticeably trouble the rest of the world, which long ago crowned soccer as
king.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP