Halloween 1994 - 4 November 1994

For a day and a night at least, the resounding political lament "been there too
long" was pierced by the small insistent voices of little children on the
evening of Monday 31 October, millions of doors were knocked on and opened in
response to the cry "trick or treat".

If there's one Irish Institution other than the practice of charm or blarney
that came into the United States and conquered, it is the secular festival of
Halloween. I stress secular because so far as I can discover few secular or if
you like pagan festivals passed so solidly into Christian practice. It was
originally a Celtic festival called Samhain and Celtic scholars or crossword
buffs perhaps will no doubt be eager to translate it for me, Samhain was the
Celtic harvest festival, but also thought of as the time when the spirits of
the dead came back to their old haunts, I suppose is the proper word.

Until the 9th century, it seems people were content to accept these visitations
as the return from the underworld of demons and goblins and other monsters. How
and why the Roman Catholic church managed in 800 something AD to introduce this
weird festival and its usages into the Christian liturgy is to me a remarkable
mystery and must remain one pending an explanatory fax from Rome.

Anyway, as we like to say when we've told you something irrelevant to the story
and ought to move on. Anyway, the original pagan festival became All Saints'
Day. Now it was saints not demons that came back and 31 October became All
Hallows' Eve. I believe there is no record of daubing faces with sort of red
dye, mask-wearing, tricking and treating in this country until the middle of
the last century and the arrival in lively multitudes of the Irish.

The interesting switch here is that apparently right from the start, except
among the extremely devout, they cast off the religious elements and turned it
into a children's holiday as somebody said of trick or treating and general
mischief making. If so, the mischief making was pretty innocent and wherever
they settled, the Irish for a generation or two were always the poorest people
in town. No wonder they sent children off very often their own to knock on the
doors of the comfortable and say "trick or treat" in the full expectation that
nobody wants to have a scary trick practised on them and would willingly cough
up the cake, a pie, a candy bar or some such.

So last Monday inside the lift in our building, there was posted a sheet of
paper with two parallel lists written on it. On the left a list of tenants
willing to subject themselves come twilight to the knockings and gigglings of
children in the building and to provide them with a treat. On the right side
was a list of children willing to offer themselves up for the reception of
these goodies.

You'll have notice the phrase "children in the building", it's the first
sinister chance in the once general custom of kissing your tots goodbye and
good luck and sending them out into the night to roam and knock and go on a
cornucopia of treats. Kids used to love to do this the way we, when a little
older and in another country, set out into the darkness of Christmas Eve with
four or five other songsters and jogged around the town till all hours
carolling outside houses that were well lit and seemed prosperous and might,
did have you in for a mince pie or better a first swig of the demon wine of
Scotland, but to send your children out on the town without a protective adult
these nights would be taken in some quarters as a form of child neglect
punishable in the courts.

For more years now than I care to count – 10, 20 – the last thing on any
parent's mind is to send small children or for that matter young teenagers out
into the night for any purpose secular or holy. And as you no doubt know in
some cities there are curfews for people under 18, I don't need to tell you
that the painful restriction of Halloween, just one apartment building in
cities or one street block under adult patrol in the countryside, is yet
another response to the growing and seemingly incurable affliction of public
random crime.

Now most crime, as you've no doubt heard, is committed between members of the
same family, most homicides at any rate or between close friends or members of
one family feuding with another. And always swelling the homicides in Los
Angeles, Miami, Detroit and half a dozen cities you'd never guess at are the
ritual murders of teenage gangs who have replaced life, liberty and the pursuit
of happiness with the triple pledge respect, reputation, retaliation. Which
means pitifully once you're initiated into a gang, you earn respect by a
serious mugging or attempted shooting, reputation by clocking up a record of
shootings and retaliation by avenging the wounds or the murders of your own
gangsters by another murder on the old principle of an eye for an eye.

But, in spite of this remarkable closed circuit of crime, which eats away at
the decent community life of this country, there's a great deal of random
street crime and what could be more appetising, likely to be safer than a swift
assault on a gaggle of small children. There's been enough of it in the recent
past to have some cities post warnings in the week before Halloween urging
parents to forego Halloween altogether, a cruel blow surely to the pleasures of
the young, they are the usually fundamentalist Christians who dislike very much
the clause in the Bill of Rights in the First Amendment that dictates the
separation of church and state.

The extremist wing of them longs to make this nation a Christian nation against
the lively presence of so many other religions here and against the unwavering
rulings of the United States Supreme Court, they take every opportunity of
introducing Christian custom symbols into public places and, just as resolutely
and just as tiresomely, the civil liberties maniacs not just civil rights
upholders just as grimly fight and oppose the militant Christians and they
usually win. As for instance whenever a church mounts a little creche in say a
village square up jumps the American Civil Liberties Union, goes to court and
is conceded yet another victory by pointing out that the creche is on display
on public property maintained and paid for with the taxes of Muslims, Jews,
Agnostics and heathens.

But now Halloween, the latest bait to the religious right. In at least five
states, they have this year begged or urged or tried to order families to
abandon Halloween or change its rituals drastically and celebrated as a sacred
Christian festival, because they've just discovered perhaps that all these
years, for a century and a half, America has been practising without shame a
purely pagan festival and perpetuating in the innocent young a belief in the
most wicked and primitive superstitions black cats, witches, ghosts, scary
monsters, deaths heads made out of pumpkins that healthy Puritan fruit if ever
there was one.

So in Maryland, New York, Ohio, Georgia, California – only of course in certain
places abounding with Christian fundamentalists, the public elementary schools
fearing the prospect of litigation have reluctantly told children to come to
school in their normal dress and forgo the innumerable comic or ghastly masks
available.

Of course, the first protests have come from the manufacturers and especially
the retailers in hot Republican territory of masks, lifelike but in this
context sinister, of Bill Clinton. I myself was about to appear as Madonna if
we'd stayed in New York, but we were flying off to family. Still, I was cheered
to arrive at the airport and duck under a great sweeping sheet of something
swaying slightly like a giant cobweb, it was a giant cobweb reaching without
explanation from one shining pillar to another squeaky clean counter, candlelit
pumpkins everywhere, one or two small passengers who plainly from their scarred
or deformed faces had just arrived from or were on their way to the underworld,
it was very rousing.

In some cities the brethren announced that Halloween night would be replaced by
Hallelujah night and prizes would be given to tots mind you for the best
biblical costume. Not much public sympathy I'm afraid for the prim little one
who chose to come as David instead of Dracula. The way around this in some
wicked place was to appear as a ferocious Goliath or defying the parents too
now as one or other of the more disreputable inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah.

The television stations, I'm happy to say, paid no attention whatsoever to the
reformers. Of our 72 operating channels, I guess that at least 40 were drenched
with blood on Monday night, every horror film ever made. An actual revival of
such old Saturday night series as Chiller Theatre and the more vivid films of
Hammer Productions and of the Japanese company that gave us the incomparable
Godzilla. Also, a public station notable for it's nightly one-hour profile
biographies of the famous – from Julius Caesar to Humphrey Bogart, Charles
Darwin to Charles Lawton – came out with a piece that drained the previous
horrors away with a documentary life proving, and it was quite true by the way,
the essential love-ability of Vincent Price. It was a kind of final perch of
pity and terror worthy of the Greeks.

Halloween, however celebrated, gave us too a blessed surcease or pause what is
now called a hiatus from you'd guess the election, so aren't you happy to hear
that my time is up and I shall respond to the sensible suggestion of an old
lady who wrote to me long ago just before an election saying "instead of
telling us who might get in, would it not be wiser to wait till the next time
and tell us who did?" So it would.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP