The atomic bomb - 11 August 1995

For at least 30 years, there's been a chronic worldwide controversy about the
circumstances under which the decision was taken to drop the Hiroshima bomb.
And in this country this past week in places as far apart as the United Nations
New York Headquarters and the desert town in New Mexico where the bomb was
first tested, there were marches and protest demonstrations, all of them that
I've seen more melancholy than militant.

We also had here two television documentaries that while meaning to recount the
facts and draw from them a true conclusion, rather advanced a thesis, and then
with ruthless and selective energy, produced the pictures and the commentary to
prove the original thesis, which asked us to consider the ignorance and
hypocrisy of President Truman and his advisors their blind stupidity in not
listening to the pleas for peace of a desperate Japan on the ropes and their
brutal inhumanity in performing what the maker of one of the documentaries
calls: "The totally unnecessary decision to drop the bomb on Hiroshima".

Just 25 years ago, this weekly talk was on the same topic. What I had not read
then and have not since is a straight narrative story of how the bomb came to
be made here and what President Truman and his two most trusted advisors had in
mind before they agreed that the bomb had to be dropped. Let's try again. You
could start the American story in several different places and at various
times, let us choose a day in the spring of 1938 when a Viennese woman, a
physicist, working for years with a famous German physicist Otto Hahn in Berlin
suddenly discovered that she was a non Aryan. When Hitler took over Austrian in
that spring of '38, she had to go, to the fury of Otto Hahn who interceded with
Hitler to no effect, so Lisa Mitna slipped out of Germany and became a refugee
in Stockholm.

Thorough that year and on into the summer of 1939, she kept in touch with the
scattered international family of physicists who'd been startled out of their
fundamental principles, by Hahn's discovery of nuclear fission. But could the
discovery be exploited to produce what somebody called, "a massive explosive
force"? Einstein years before had thought it extremely unlikely and Lord
Rutherford called such talk moonshine. But there was Lisa Mitna in Sweden and
in the United States three Hungarian Jewish refugees from Hitler who thought it
possible and who moreover heard from friends in Germany that the Nazis were
starting themselves to consider a manufacture an actual atom bomb. These three
got reports of the mobilising of 50 German physicists, a conference here, a
conference there. Now today we know that the Nazi atomic effort was never a
threat to the allied project in the United States. Hitler was curiously
uninterested in scientific research unless it could produce a weapon he could
touch and see. And by the grandest irony of his career, the most eminent
physicists who were experts in the subject were mostly Jews who had been driven
into exile by him to work as it turned out on the American bomb.

In the summer of 1939 a month or more before the Nazis invaded Poland, Lisa
Mitna heard that the Germans had banned all exports of uranium ore from the
mines of Czechoslovakia, which of course Germany occupied. Now here was proof
that the Nazis were onto uranium as the essential element in nuclear fission,
probably meant they were well along with the early stages of the bomb's
production. As I say of course it was not so, but when Lisa Mitna sent this
information to the three Hungarian colleagues in Manhattan, they felt the time
had come to warn the American government how to do it. They were well known in
what you might call the expert secret society of the world's atomic physicists
but to everybody else, totally nonentities, their names were Leo Szilard,
Edward Teller and Eugene Wigner, nevertheless they decided to act.

How to reach Einstein then a refugee professor at Princeton. Wigner was a
working associate and friend, all he knew about Einstein that summer was that
he'd rented a cottage somewhere down at the end of Long Island and that the
place name began with a "P". I've already told, in I hope riveting detail, the
story of that horrendous automobile trip before they found Einstein. They'd
driven about 100 miles and were ready to give up when a little boy with a
fishing rod standing in a drug store where Szilard and Teller had gone for some
trifle said: "Dr. Einstein sure, he lives in Dr. Moore's cottage on Nassau
Point." The boy went with them to this two mile long little peninsula dropping
into the middle of Peconic Bay, found Einstein in his slippers and told him
what they knew.

In checking this safari and other details later, Leo Szilard told me that the
possibility of a chain reaction had never occurred to Dr. Einstein. Anyway,
they came back with a model letter to President Roosevelt, which Einstein
signed â€“ he later said he hadn't the remotest idea the letter might spur an
American effort to make a bomb, only to alert Americans to Hitler's progress.
In sum this is what it said: In the course of the last four months it's been
made probable through the work of Joliot in France as well as the Italian
refugee Fermi and Szilard in America that it maybe possible to set up a nuclear
chain reaction in a large mass of uranium, by which vast amounts of power and
large quantities of new radium-like elements would be generated, by which my
dear President it might be possible to unleash and immense destructive force,
Einstein Nassau Point, Long Island, August the 2nd 1939.

The President didn't get the letter for three months, eventually through a
friendly banker. Chain reaction in a large mass of uranium, what did it mean?
Nobody in the armed forces, if consulted would have had the slightest idea.
Roosevelt thought the letter interesting though mysterious. Not until two years
later the fall of 1941 was anything done about it. The president appointed a
committee, Vice President Truman, two well known scientists and the two key
people Secretary of War Henry L Stimson and General George Marshall, the
effective commander and chief of the war of supply in two oceans.

And I think I should say at once that Henry Stimson, an old austere upright
Yankee and General Marshall the Virginia soldier who refused to write his
memoirs for fear he might hurt living people, were men of honour and conscience
and 18 carat integrity to match the characters of all the revisionist
historians combined. Well President Roosevelt at first put aside a few hundred
dollars for this odd possibly crackpot project, which before the bomb went off
in New Mexico had been increased to the tune of over 2 billion dollars had
recruited six Nobel Prize winners and in three vast isolated factories, each
the size of a city, in three states had gathered over 50,000 workers most of
whom had no idea what they were working on.

Now however, we move to the early summer of 1945, the war in Europe is over,
the big three: Churchill, Roosevelt, Stalin are going to meet in Potsdam to
plan the course of the war in the Pacific. This is normally where the debate
begins about the necessity or brutality of dropping the bomb. The theme of the
debate is not complex, it turned on two unknowns: the future human cost of an
invasion and the present warlike posture of Japan.

I say unknown here, where the revision is taught cockily about Japan being
beaten an begging to surrender. The truth is that in the July, the Japanese
made a tentative offer through the Soviet Union of a peace treaty, which made
the preposterous condition that Japan should keep most of her Asian conquests.
The response came from Secretary Stimson. He consulted every authority in the
armed forces and the government and proposed to deliver to Japan an ultimatum,
which was done at Potsdam. It demanded total surrender or threaten Japan with
intensive air and sea blockade, massive strategic fire bombing. By the way, the
casualties at Potsdam and again in Tokyo from our fire bombing had been as bad
as Hiroshima and Nagasaki followed by an invasion over the outer islands and
eventually the home islands all to be done with the combined military power of
the United States, Britain and soon the Soviet Union. No mention was made of
the bomb.

To avoid this fate, Japan must give up her conquests, and that word should
remind us that Japan owned by then, most of the Far East territories, larger
and more scattered than Hitler's ownership of Europe. And that brings us to the
point. In calculating the point in most disputes, the likely losses on both
sides, we tend to think of a million or more fierce fighting Japanese hunkered
down in the home islands waiting for the arrival of the island hopping
Americans. Not so, the Japanese navy was more or less defeated. But there were
just under two million men in the home islands, more than two million men in
China, Korea,!!! INAUD and Formosa, half a million in the East Indies and the
Philippines, a quarter of a million in French Indochina, today's Vietnam,
Thailand and Burma and a 100,000 in many Pacific Islands not all of which could
be bypassed by the main invading forces. In other words, there was a Japanese
Army of 5 million controlling the vast new Japanese Empire.

The Potsdam ultimatum was turned down by the Japanese prime minister as a
document unworthy of consideration. The Stimson Marshal and hence Truman guess
at the allied casualties, five million American and allied men would be
mobilised was between one and two million. The Japanese, if their appalling
tenacity at Okinawa was anything to go on, ten Japanese casualties for every
American would likely be much more. These were the considerations that made
these honourable men with infinite reluctance and a strong knowledge of the
alternative, decide after the power of the bomb was know that perhaps 200,000
Japanese would have to die to spare the much more immense casualties of another
18 months or so of conventional war over the hugest battleground in history.

The surrender on the 15th of August was a surrender to the Potsdam terms with
the new enlightened promise that the Emperor would retain his sovereignty,
exercised under an allied commander. This was conceded because it occurred to
Truman, Stimson and Marshall perhaps a little late that no Japanese admiral or
general could successfully order a surrender, but the divine one, the Emperor
could and did.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (Â©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts Â©BBC

Letter from America scripts Â© Cooke Americas, RLLP