The first World AIDS Day - 3 December 1993

Last Wednesday in Washington a scene was enacted, no enacted is wrong, it was a
happening, entirely unrehearsed, totally unexpected, frightening for a moment
or two but unlike anything I can recall happening to a president of the United
States.

Mr Clinton arrived at the Georgetown medical centre in Washington, to talk to
an audience of doctors, students and researchers, particularly people doing
research on the plague of our time, Aids.

Wednesday 1 December had been proclaimed by the secretary-general of the United
Nations as World Aids Day. I don't know how it was observed in your town, I can
imagine a dozen or more towns that I know where, from fear, indifference,
distaste or actual opposition, there would be no observance at all. But in
Berlin, Christmas shoppers were handed out free condoms. In India, one
newspaper broke a practically sacred taboo and published explicit illustrations
of what we've come to call safe sex.

It was of course known that President Clinton was going to talk about Aids and
when he arrived at the centre, the audience rose to him. I should like to have
seen a camera pan, roam slowly across the rows of faces, to guess at the
various emotions with which this special audience was greeting him, the Aids
researchers especially.

I doubt any of them would have been flushed with great expectations, not
because of any prior dislike or distrust of Mr Clinton but if you've talked
ever to an Aids researcher, you'd have recognised a look on many faces of
resignation, sad, serious, stoic resignation. Many of them came to this
specialty a year or two ago, full of hope and bravery and determination to help
solve the riddle. They have certainly become privy to the literature of the
teams in many countries that have been slogging away for a few years or for
most of the 12 years only that separate the first alarm bell going off in San
Francisco from our present condition, in which only seven years from now that
40 million men, women and children around the world will have become infected.

There is today no answer, a little light. The researchers know it and the
politicians know it but the politicians drone on through thick clouds of
federal prose, promising this and that, especially money and there was no cause
to believe that President Clinton would sound any different.

But this speech was - I was going to say, unlike any he's given, but there was
one, only a week ago, in the church where Dr Martin Luther King preached the
day before he was assassinated - and Mr Clinton's was not only a moving speech,
it was about the crime that stalks the land. But also he made a frank admission
that the federal government with all the money and good intentions in the world
cannot solve the problem, that in the main, it is up to the cities, the towns,
the citizens and parents.

Now let's not forget that Mr Bush never mentioned Aids until he was two years
into his administration and that he and certainly his predecessor were more
embarrassed by Aids than alarmed by it. It's been really, until the past year
or two, a topic that politicians, compelled by now to say something, always
worked into a speech the passing tribute of a sigh, as you would in referring,
say, to the deaf and the blind. So the audience sat up and took notice when, in
his first sentences, President Clinton struck a quite new note.

Today, he began, I think just about every American who has ever been touched by
Aids will think of people they know who have died or who have suffered family
loss. That sentence alone could hardly have been spoken by either of the two
previous presidents. Not out of embarrassment on their part, but because they
probably never met or knew anyone with Aids. But anyone of Bill Clinton's
generation, who has a wide acquaintance, would have to be a hermit not to know
someone who is infected or dying or dead.

The president went on to say something else that you could not possibly have
heard from Mr Bush or Mr Reagan. I want to say a special word of appreciation
today for the people who are infected with HIV and the people who are living
with Aids. Some of them are here today and I think them for the power of their
example and for their commitment to life. He thought that maybe this whole
disease is bringing out the best and the worst in America. I can't incidentally
ever recall any president of my time using the phrase, the worst in America. I
mean, he went on, it's exposing some of our prejudice in ways that are
self-defeating, since every family and every child is now at risk and yet it's
also showing the courage, the self-determination, the incredible capacity of
people to give and to love.

Well, then, the scene. A young man exploded from his seat, dashed down the
aisle and stopped only a few yards from the president while the Secret Service
men jumped to form a protective ring. In a high treble voice, shrill with rage,
the young man said, and I can only say, not shriek, his words: "If you're so
concerned about Aids, where's the Manhattan project on Aids you promised during
your campaign? One year, lots of talk, no action." Well by then, any other
president I can think of would have flushed with anger or shuffled in a fluster
of discomfort or like Eisenhower once, I'll never forget, would have been out
in the aisle striding in on the man and rasping, say that again, say that just
once more. But, the most extraordinary response.

Mr Clinton leaned on the lectern and cradled his chin in the palm of one hand.
He looked gently, attentively at the young man, as he might to a younger
brother telling him his personal troubles. The tirade went hurling on, "30
recommendations on Aids go sitting on a shelf, gathering dust in your White
House, while me and my community are dying in ever-increasing numbers and all
you do is talk. Talk is cheap and we need action. Slick Willie, the Republicans
were right, we should never have trusted you."

Long before his final jabs, normally he would have been hustled out by the
Secret Service and/or the police. As it was, the president listened, almost
sweetly. The man had his screaming say and a police officer led him away. And
the president, in the same quiet, reasoning voice, he said, part of my job is
to be a lightning rod, to lift the hopes and aspirations of the American
people, never fully closing the gap between what you're reaching for and what
you're actually doing and knowing for sure there's no way I can keep everybody
alive who already has Aids. So the fact he's in here, expressing his
frustration to me means at least he expects me to do something. I'd rather that
man be in here screaming at me than giving up altogether.

Then he told of the directions to every federal employee with instructions and
education about Aids for three million families and, at a time when domestic
spending was absolutely flat, we have increased the research funding for Aids
by over 20% and funding for care by 66%. Of course, he added, that if the
Congress passed his healthcare plan, a practical impossibility before this time
next year, then people living with HIV and with Aids will not lose their
benefits when they lose their employment. As for what can be done now and all
the time, he ended on a note similar to his warning about crime. Each of us has
to take personal responsibility for our own conduct. If you want children to do
that, they have to be educated about the consequences of their personal
conduct, which means someone else, not government.

I don't think anyone who saw this scene will ever forget it. The steady gaze,
the soft answer may not have turned away wrath but it left the impression of a
rare emoting, a look of mingled frustration and genuine deep concern. If you
put yourself in his position, you'd think of other things, true things you
could have said to that young man, things that are not often blabbed aloud and
that together contribute to a widespread, but unspoken, public resentment of
Aids victims who mount protests and parades. First we must admit, there is
among many people an inborn or acquired distrust, if not actual dislike, of
homosexuals. There's the un-contradicted fact that Aids is very largely a
disease of homosexual men and of intravenous drug users and is picked up by
women who are even mildly promiscuous and by the children of such women. Every
day, in New York City, one more Aids-infected baby is born.

Indeed, the burden of treating Aids in this city and in San Francisco, the two
capitals of the infection, is heavy to the point of being soon impossible to
bear. It is true, incidentally, that the Bush administration increased the
federal funding of Aids by 10 times the amount it added to cancer research.

What stimulates a sort of angry boredom with the Aids public protesters is the
sight and sound of what seem like hysterics who appear to believe that more
money will mean more research and a quicker cure. What this naive attitude
shows is an ignorance of the nature of research and of the tireless work being
done in many countries and a blithe unawareness of the social fact that we do
not see indignant parades of sufferers from multiple sclerosis, from motor
neurone disease, from cancer even, stomping around, demanding more money, more
action. It occurred to me that if I'd been in the president's place, I would
have reminded that young man, they've been researching cancer for several
thousand years and billions of dollars and pounds and francs and rupees are
being spent on it at this moment, but there is no cure. But then, Mr Clinton is
president of the United States and I am not.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP