General Douglas MacArthur and the Japanese surrender - 16 August 1985

“Morning’s at seven,” the poet said. Only a bouncing, moral Victorian could
have said it.

Even on Long Island, morning’s at ten for me, a creepy, still time time
disturbed only by the bleat of the morning doves and the two-tone salute of the
bobwhite, our resident quail, and the prolonged parody performance of every
bird in sight by that preposterous show-off, the mocking bird.

Last spring my oldest friend in both senses came to stay with us on our high
bluff at the end of Long Island, a man devoted to country matters, revelling in
a spot where there is nothing but sky and a vast shining bay and wild cherry
and a pine or two etched against it and sand and not a house or a human in
sight.

We were sitting out on the terrace in perfect peace except, as I say, for the
pandemonium of the birds – it was after all spring and our peninsula is a bird
sanctuary – and my old friend said, “This is perfection. There’s only one thing
I miss here.” “And what is that?” I said. “Birdsong” he said. “Bird what?” I
shouted to override the symphony of the little beasts on the wing.

I knew then that his deafness which had been deepening for years was at that
tedious stage with confident old men when they accuse their bawling sons and
daughters of mumbling. His wife suggested to me in a very confidential moment
in a dark corner that perhaps I was the only friend who might hint to him that
the time had arrived for a hearing aid. He is a proud man and no man is so
proud as an old deaf man who believes the rest of the world has taken to
whispering and muttering.

I did write, in what I hope is the easy, familiar style I’d been writing to him
for years and got back the only peppery, insulted note he’d ever written – to
me that is. We said no more and his wife has borne up ever since under the
daily complaint that she’s a mumbler. Well my old friend has gone now, to the
end maintaining his beliefs that (a) his hearing was sound and (b) the only
thing we lacked in our island retreat was birdsong.

This pastoral theme comes up partly, I suppose, out of an earnest desire to
boast that for me today, which is the day I’m improvising or composing this
talk, morning did begin at seven because I had to tape the piece very early and
be off out of New York to Kennedy Airport and pick up two old friends flying in
from London. So I wish to go on record as having been up at six-thirty.

I am, I was, in the city and looking out on a sunny, dense heat haze over
Central Park which was a harmless sight since the only sound in my room was the
very gentle breathing of the air conditioning. Well I was chewing on my awful
bran – bulk, you know, or if you didn’t your doctor’s likely these days to tell
you that your survival depends upon it – when there was a firm thump outside
the kitchen door and whereas in other countries the morning newspaper may
arrive as a flutter or a sound like a soft-shoe dance, the New York Times
arrives with a thump.

It was only 96 pages today so that was a thumping day. On Sundays it arrives
with a thunderclap since it runs to three or four hundred pages. It was nice to
discover, for once, that I could be ahead of anybody with the morning news. I
am cantankerous enough to refuse to watch any television before the big news
programmes at 7pm unless, of course, some president of a big business firm is
being bawled out by a Senate committee.

We have one television channel which starts at ten in the morning and does
nothing but televise important Senate committee hearings and, when Congress is
in session, follows the entire debates in the House of Representatives. But
Congress is home now chewing away at the hot grass roots, so the New York Times
was as usual my introduction to the woes and wonders of the world, and what is
the first thing I see?

A photograph of a kindly, smiling, dark-eyed man bending over to embrace a
tiny, very frail, very white-haired, very old little lady. Behind them was some
sort of navy or air force brass. Brass is the wrong word, I guess, since he was
all in white and offering his hand to a plump, smiling, grizzled man. I don’t
know who the navy man was but I recognised in old grizzle Secretary of State
George Schultz.

I wasn’t sure about the kindly, smiling character but who was the bent, frail,
little old lady? That was the shocker. The caption read – and I had to believe
it – “Defence Secretary Casper W Weinberger greeting Jean MacArthur,
86-year-old widow of the general of the army Douglas MacArthur on the deck of
the aircraft carrier Enterprise yesterday in San Francisco. With them for a
ceremony marking the 40th anniversary of the end of World War Two was Secretary
of State George P Schultz.”

I appreciate that this will be no shock to the generations that never heard of
Jean MacArthur, that may have only the dimmest notion who General MacArthur
was, let alone having to look up in the books the dates of World War Two, but I
had the kind of shock that you young man, young lady, will have when some time
from now you see a photograph of some important public official bending over a
frail old lady and the caption reads “The President or the Secretary so and so
greeting the former Raquel Welch”. Do not mock the old, nor the young either.
Their time will come.

Well, when I saw that picture I at once saw another picture in my mind – a
newsreel picture which is the one that flashes to mind whenever anyone mentions
the end of the second war. The picture is the deck of a battleship. The
battleship is the USS Missouri. It is anchored in Tokyo Bay. In a neatly
cleared space in front of American sailors stacked up on every level of the
ship stand two rows of men, one of high-ranking American navy men – they are
standing in smart order behind a table.

In front of the table stand two or three small, quaint Japanese gentlemen in
morning coats. At the table sits the ultimate Roman general of our time with
the imperious profile and the baritone voice as impressive as that of Orson
Welles. The Roman is General of the Army Douglas MacArthur, the hero of the
Pacific war, which has finally come to an end. It came to an end on 14 August
1945 when Japan, still rumbling in the reverberation of the two atomic bombs,
the first dropped on Hiroshima and the second on Nagasaki, at last gave up.

The surrender ceremony, the signing of the Instrument, took place two weeks
later on 2 September and that was the scene being marked, as the paper said, on
its 40th anniversary. What brings the scene on the Missouri alive to me is the
accompanying sound, almost more than the sight. There was a huge silence
moderated only by the faintest breeze wafting the flags. The quaint men in
cutaways advanced. One was an admiral and he leaned over and put down his
signature to the paper. He bowed. He stepped back. He bowed again, and the
second war was officially over when the Roman general pronounced in his organ
tones four ever-memorable words, “These proceedings are closed”.

This, of course, has been a summer, a spring and summer, of anniversary. First
D-Day and the Allied leaders in France and the awful gaffe of the visit to the
German cemetery. I can’t tell you and I won’t bore you by marking off all the
domestic anniversaries that were noted in passing. It was odd and sad, I
thought, that the papers passed by without noting the 40th anniversary of that
stunned Thursday when the country seemed suddenly to have lost its father, the
day Roosevelt died down in Georgia.

Of course last week we had the longest, gravest recollections and editorial
pieces on Hiroshima and saw the eerie Japanese peace ceremonies and once again
the controversy was revived about whether or not the bombs need ever have been
dropped. Now finally, let us hope, the anniversary of the Japanese surrender.
Maybe we can now go back to living history instead of embalming it.

The two friends from England I was to meet at the airport had written querulous
little notes, fearful of New York’s reputation for summer heat and I’d been
assuring them for months that since May we’d had only a week or so of atrocious
heat and for most of the time wonderful stretches more like the fall, 80
degrees, brilliant days, clear as a bell, silvery, bone-dry thanks to the
blessed import of the Canadian north-west wind.

So, wouldn’t you know, they came out of their cool plane and the
air-conditioned Kennedy Airport and walked outside into a furnace, the hottest,
sweatiest, most rancid day of the year. Now that was in the east. Summer is the
craziest time over the whole continent – Galveston, Texas lashed by a hurricane
and then a lurch of cold air out of Canada on to the hot inland plains produced
in one place a three-foot deposit of hail, millions of golf balls, as they say,
which slaughtered pigs and cattle.

Here in New York the mayor, Mayor Koch, is in a frightful tizzy. We’ve had only
spasms of heavy rain infrequently for four months. The reservoirs are low, some
of them are cracking, so he’s slapping $200 fines on anybody who dares wash a
car and $500 on what he calls “the water rats”, people who have a sprinkler set
to go off sneakily at 4am to water their lawn.

I’ve just looked again at that incredible picture of the frail old widow of
General MacArthur and it brought back another picture of another very old
figure in a dressing gown, his once leathery frame reduced to a skeleton on
which hung limp flesh, his eyes large and startled. He was sitting in a
hospital chair and by his side a cheerful, trim man, the President of the
United States, one Lyndon B Johnson. The president had come to call on the
frail old man in the hospital.

The old shrunken man was General of the Army Douglas MacArthur. He’d requested
the meeting. He wanted to, and did, urge on Johnson never to commit American
forces to the Asian mainland. Alas nobody listened to him.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP