Atlanta and Augusta - 14 April 1989

Once a year – and always at this time – I go into retreat.

Not San Francisco. My regular trips to San Francisco are not of the same order.
I suppose that if I had to fill out a work sheet for an employer I should call
them working holidays, looking at America from the Pacific, instead of from the
Atlantic, coast as a necessary corrective to seeing everything from the
intensely parochial view of a New Yorker.

But even if I had no working obligations in San Francisco I should find it
impossible to retreat from the daily ferment of life and politics. In fact, in
San Francisco - because of its fortunate, or unfortunate, position in the time
zones, eight hours behind England - every morning at breakfast I can get not
only the Los Angeles and San Francisco papers and the New York Times, but also
the London papers, which if they were flown from Heathrow at midnight would
land in San Francisco at 5am local time.

Since I can no more avoid gobbling up available newspapers than a child let
loose in a sweet shop can resist the merchandise, I have failed in every
attempt to behave in San Francisco like a man on holiday. So come the first
week in April, and I fly south to Georgia, the first step of which is to avoid
Atlanta which is as much of a spaghetti tangle of motorways as Los Angeles and
more of a hotbed of industry.

To give you a quick passing idea of the growth, the prosperity, the very busy
business of Atlanta, I need say no more that it was the birthplace, the cradle
and the nursery and, eventually, the shipping centre of Coca-Cola.

Atlanta is the great - what shall we call it - aviation junction of the south.
Only Chicago's O'Hare Field has more passengers go through every year. New
York's Kennedy Airport, which New Yorkers automatically assume is the biggest
and busiest of its kind anywhere, has 20 million less passengers in transit
than Atlanta which every year handles just under 50 million people coming and
going.

It's, consequently, a great place to avoid, a huge rectangular design which can
oblige you to walk several miles to reach a flight and if it didn't have its
own underground railway system, floating on the Aeroflot principle, you'd
probably get to your connecting plane by nightfall.

I toss in here a digression which is suggested by a news item that is certainly
news to me. Somebody has had a bright idea to ease the suffocating problem of
airport congestion.It's so simple it has all the beauty of that idea which
about 70-odd years ago flashed into the mind of a dentist in New Haven,
Connecticut as he looked out of his surgery on a street intersection and saw
half-a-dozen motor cars going in four directions and jockeying for position.

How about, he thought, posting lights at the intersections of the main street,
having them flash green to go and red to stop. This idea was resisted by the
old and the middle-aged at the start. I remember an old editor of mine, a
Lancashire man, who told me on his first visit here that when he first
encountered - this was after the second war - the system whereby the lights
said "Walk" and "Stop", he said, "What is this, a fascist state? Nobody's going
to tell me when I can walk and when I can't."

Anyway, as we all know, it took only the arrival of the first generation of the
cheap car, Henry Ford's jalopy, for this country and soon every other country
to take to the invention. The undeniable beauty of it was it recognised the
prime fact of two objects in contrary motion when propelled by human beings -
namely, that a bishop and a gangster have an equal prejudice in favour of
staying alive.

All right, so what's the new big idea? Well, in any given year the 20 main
airports of the United States, none of which is a terminus, all junctions,
where people fly in and connect to another flight and on to their final
destination, those 20 airports handle every year 530 million passengers and the
latest projection from the Air Transport Association of America foresees at
least another 150 million in the 1990s. Indeed, at the end of the '90s, the
possibility of doubling the load to one billion passengers.

Well, I'm sorry, I don't know the name of the man who thought up a solution. I
will, but his idea is something which we shall soon all be calling a "way
port". He proposes to build, all across America, airports deep in the
countryside, say for example 30 miles outside of Chicago, which would handle
only flights of people on their way to another city, big or small. The people
who flew in or out of Chicago would be only the people who started or ended
there. End of digression.

So I chose to go to Georgia via, this time, Charlotte, North Carolina, a
smaller city and a navigable airport and then took the half-hour's hop to
Augusta, Georgia. Until 20-odd years ago all I knew about Augusta was that it
was a small southern town named after Princess Augusta, mother of George III,
that during the War of Independence, when the British captured the port city of
Savannah downriver the rebel families fled inland to Augusta as a sanctuary for
about a month, after which the persistent British moved in there too, that
during the Civil War, Augusta was the ordnance centre for the Confederate
armies.

I also remembered that some time in the mid-19th Century, when Augusta was a
winter holiday retreat for merchants, William Makepeace Thackeray appeared as
one of the first of those dependable perennials, the visiting British lecturer,
and that he declared himself enchanted by the beauty of the place, by the
towering Georgia pines as also, no doubt, by my vastly handsome fee of £100.

Came a day almost 30 years ago when I discovered, and took up, the Scottish
torture, the lovely, appalling, narcotic game of golf. So a few years later I
started to go down there in early April to attend the annual golf tournament,
played on a course built by and for the immortal Robert Tyre Bobby Jones, who
at 28, having conquered every championship in golf retired, looked around for
an ideal place to build his ideal and found it on a southern plantation which
during the civil war had been a fruit farm for the Confederate armies.

Subsequently it was bought by a Belgian baron, a distinguished horticulturalist
who turned it into the south's first great nursery. Now you need, say, 120,130
acres to build a golf course. Here they have 365 acres and there are - well,
there is one stretch of undulating meadowland between two holes where the
people stroll which are spacious enough for another golf course.

I won't go on, except to say that it is a vast private forest and botanical
garden without compare as the most beautiful stretch of inland landscape ever
transformed into a golf course. Each hole is named after a Georgia flower and
the whole rolling landscape, the creeks and the banks, abound with them and
with white and pink dogwood trees and whole hills of azaleas and the firethorn
and the pampas grass and on and on.

You might wonder why a golf tournament with 25,000 people sifting around could
possibly be designated a retreat. Well, there's one feature, the prevailing
feature of a golf tournament, which never strikes the television viewer because
he's always hearing the forthright chatter and the sidelong remarks of the
commentators.

On the course, whenever a player walks down a hill to approach his ball, and
all throughout the course, the main thing is silence, a cathedral hush never
quite achieved by the coughers in a lofty cathedral. Also, you can wander
around the Augusta national course without seeing any golf.

You can sit by a creek and smell the flowers and eat a sandwich and smile from
time to time as there rises against the sky from far away a great cheer like a
washing tide which dies down again into the prevailing silence. Also, a roving
army of 200 helpers prods and stabs every errant wrapper, paper cup and other
dreck.

The crowds are remarkably well-behaved and keep the faith which Jones, in a
memorable sentence, dictated to be printed on every ticket of admission, to
stay still, to applaud good shots, never to applaud mistakes and thereby ruin
the tournament's reputation for sportsmanship and good manners.

Now surely, as a sporting event in the 1980s, this is, as they say, unreal. It
is. Moreover, in the inn where I stay, while you can get the Augusta Chronicle
you cannot get a metropolitan paper and during the week of the Masters
tournament, the Augusta Chronicle has about 20 pages devoted to the play and
the players and about four to the unreal events of the real world.

I make a point, therefore, of not touching those events or ever of listening to
the evening news. This act of self-denial, when it's indulged only once a year,
is as ravishing as a child's annual visit to the circus.

There are, however, even at Augusta, even among the players, even the
professional players, men who do not think they are devoting their lives to a
game divorced from the real world. To a small group of them, men whose
profession it is to play golf four days of every week from January into
November, life is real, and earnest, not to say a religious exercise.

This group is the professional golfers' bible class. It meets on Wednesday
evening, the day before each tournament starts, and prays for strength and
guidance. It meets again on Saturday evening, before the final day, and prays
for a little bit of luck and for more strength and guidance - guidance
preferably towards the $200,000 winner's prize.

A very memorable sentence came over the telly from the president of the
players' bible class. He was asked by an interviewer, "Don't you find yourself
a little embarrassed playing golf on the Sabbath?" Without a second's
hesitation, this godly man replied, "No, the lord commanded us to do his good
work all the days of our lives. And that's the whole ball of wax."

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (&
copy;; BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF
MISHEARING, THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts &copy;BBC. Letter from
America scripts &copy; Cooke Americas, RLLP