Jesse Jackson in Cuba - 29 June 1984

I am one of those journalists who finds it hard to throw anything away.

The result is preposterous to anyone who dares to peek inside our apartment's
many closets, where books and magazines and files, never looked at, and old
slippers and golf shoes and even the stubs of theatre tickets of long ago, are
stacked or balanced so precariously that it’s not worth even trying to dislodge
a paper, let alone a book. The resulting earthquake would certainly bring the
neighbours running.

But let me tell you that this ocean of flotsam does not flow out into what you
might call the public highways of the apartment, my study, too, where I live,
and breath and exercise my so-called brain, is also a mess until about six in
the evening where I cease picking away on the old banjolele and begin the
nightly clean-up. Sometimes it gets so bad that I have about five minutes to
shovel the papers and notes and news magazines and memos into the one study
closet and jam the door against a possible landslide from that interior.

So, when the guests arrive, they see a neat, cool and, I like to think, elegant
small library with one sharp light focused on the potchean and the neighbouring
ice bucket. So this lamentable flaw in my character – "If only you had a
system," my father used to say – this glaring absence of a system is known only
to my closest and dearest. So much so that, years ago, when a ten-year-old
friend of my sons came to visit, he’d evidently been warned about the sewage
dump he was about to see. He came in, looked around, and said, "but Steven told
me you were a secret slob".

"That's right," I said, and left him to figure out the discrepancy between the
things seen and the chaos unseen. Well, from time to time, usually at the
beginning of the summer, I decide to reform and shuffle through masses of
papers and loads of unanswered correspondence from, say, 1972. The one great
advantage of this system, and lack of same, is that occasionally precious
needles or nuggets of information slip out of the haystack. And the other
morning, as if obeying some law of extrasensory perception, a piece of brown
paper, once white, fell at my feet. It was full of hasty hieroglyphics –
plainly notes on a speech. "Add FDR," it said, "the presidential speech" and it
said, quote, "but all debates and dissent about foreign policy stops at the
water’s edge".

What so extrasensory about that? Well, it would be hard to find a quotation
from Roosevelt, or any other president, more apt to something that happened
this week which shocked the Washington old-timers, and a large number of the
members of both houses, but I am afraid will not shock millions of Americans
who have never heard of, or noticed the old and once inviolable tradition to
which all American politicians – however mad at the incumbent administration –
deferred. You being, say, a senator, might thunder away at the Senate floor
about the sins and idiocies of the president’s foreign policy, but whenever you
went abroad you did not publicly criticise your own country on that count.

Roosevelt’s most fervent enemies – and he surely had many in the Congress –
when tapped by foreign reporters gave the standard reply, "I am sorry, but our
differences on foreign policy stop at the water’s edge." The water’s edge, you
understand, being the shores of the Potomac River or the docks of New York.

Now, there is one very big American politician – indeed, the leading black
politician of the United States – who was never told about this usage, this
tradition, or scorns to pay attention to it.

The Reverend Jesse Jackson went off this week as a one-man state department or
his own foreign secretary, to El Salvador and Cuba. When any congressman or
senator, or presidential candidate wants to go abroad on what they call a
fact-finding mission, he is automatically briefed by the appropriate desk of
the state department as a routine courtesy, no matter who was in the White
House.

The Reverend Jackson sought his own channels, corresponding directly with
President Duarte of El Salvador, and with Fidel Castro of Cuba. Nobody – no
official, you understand – sent Mr Jackson, he went to speak only for himself.
Before he landed in El Salvador he met, in Panama, four representatives of the
Salvadorian revolutionary front, the men fighting against President Duarte’s
government. He then hopped to San Salvador and told President Duarte that the
rebels want peace. President Duarte not a little startled by this unappointed
foreign envoy, told Mr Jackson that he had taken his stand and he would hold to
it, he would not hold talks with the rebels under the barrel of a gun.

So, on to Cuba. At the Havana airport, the Reverend Jackson was greeted as if
he had been a head of state, as if he were Mr Reagan – he was greeted by none
other than Fidel Castro himself. Who, said the Reverend Jackson, honours us
with his presence. No wonder, at the first stop in Panama, Mr Jackson
ingratiated himself with... I should guess millions of central Americans, by
denouncing his own country's – quote – "cycle of arrogance". He was seen on our
television in warm conversation and laughter with Castro, being treated
everywhere as if he were already president of the United States.

So, what’s wrong with the presidential candidate feeling out opinion and
learning the grievances that these countries have against his own? Nothing
surely, but Mr Jackson was not there simply to learn and listen and digest, he
was there to negotiate. He advocated a new relationship with the United States
and the opening-up of diplomatic relations again. He presented a list of 45
names of Cuban and American nationals who were being held as prisoners by
Castro, and he asked for their release. He got the American names not from the
state department, but from a friend in New York who runs an outfit dedicated to
getting these political prisoners out of Cuba.

When it appeared – to the delight of Mr Jackson and his small entourage, and to
the obvious embarrassment of the White House – that Castro was not only
sympathetic to release the Americans, but might do it now, President Reagan’s
press man limply announced that the administration would do everything possible
to assist them. Too late, Mr Jackson had done it. Castro said the 22 Americans
would return to the United States with the Reverend Jackson.

Now you will recall that in December, Mr Jackson, again on his own, went to the
Middle East and got Syria to release a black American lieutenant who’s plane
had been brought down in Lebanon. It seemed a small thing to negotiate the
release of one man, but the president and the state department had not been
able to do it. And the Reverend Jackson returned to the United States like
Pompey entering Rome in triumph.

That's the way he looked to millions of blacks, and it was from that moment
that his presidential campaign took fire, and was taken seriously by the other
hopefuls. And, as we all know, while five other considerable contenders fell by
the wayside in the Democratic primary elections, Jesse Jackson emerged as one
of the surviving democratic trio – Mundale, Hart and Jackson.

Now, to his legion of followers he will look a bigger man than ever, "Old Jesse
goes some place and says give us back our political prisoners. And even the
mighty Fidel says, yes sir, Mr Jackson sir." It will not occur, I think, to
these passionate and sincere followers that the Salvadorian rebels and Castro
are of course delighted to enjoy and exploit the actual novelty of an American
politician of national standing who goes abroad to deride his own country and
his policy, and suggests that he is their one true American friend?

I think it’s even doubtful that the Reverend Jackson himself knows what he’s
doing. The embarrassment. The actual indignation in Washington over his mission
is not prompted by a simple ignoring of protocol – the United States has had,
for a long time, an actual act of Congress which specifically forbids private
citizens, unless they are recruited by the president, to negotiate with foreign
governments. If Mr Jackson had failed to get any prisoners released it is
conceivable that his violation of the Logan Act would be brought up on the
floor of Congress. And it may still come to that, but the official protests
would have no more effect on Mr Jackson’s behaviour, or on the adoration of his
fans, than the head shaking of a Wimbledon umpire over John McEnroe’s violation
of the rules.

The brutal truth is that in one case, the violation of an act of Congress, in
the other a series of tantrums, they work, and the 22 prisoners, home-bound
with Mr Jackson, are his sure guarantee against a citation for contempt of
Congress, against even any effective protest from the administration. The
administration had dickered and negotiated for many months and failed. Mr
Jackson goes down, he initiates a rollicking friendship with Fidel Castro, and,
hey presto, the prisoners are on their way home. It’s a very small price that
Castro has to pay for helping to advertise among his people, and other central
American peoples, the fact that here is an actual candidate for the presidency
of the United States, who is as much against the Central American policies of
the detested Reagan as they are.

Once the shock and the jubilation cools off it must surely become plain, even
to some of the Reverend Jackson's followers, that he was used, a patsy, and
that the way to better relations between any or all of those embattled
countries and the next American administration has been made all the harder.

Certainly to the innocent applauding masses of Central America who see a black
man – it would be more pointed to use the old word, coloured man – who see such
a one, and a distinguished American at that, embracing Salvadorian rebels and
the ruler of Cuba with whom the United States has no relations. Certainly they
are bound to feel that, given time and a little more racial upheaval in the
United States, Jesse Jackson or a man like him will come to power.

Of course, he won’t. But he has raised the hopes and dizzy feelings of his
followers so high that after November there could be a despairing down. And the
possibility of a frightening backlash; a black lash, rather.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP