Roy Rogers and cinema cowboys - 10 July 1998

In the not so very long ago, I started a talk in a properly sombre way with the
single sentence, "Yakima Canutt is dead".

Now don't think I didn't calculate the shock value of a line lamenting the
death of a man that probably not one listener in 10,000 had ever heard of. It
was, however, I hope a praiseworthy effort to attract enough people long enough
to learn at least the identity of a man to whom millions of moviegoers owed
much of their pleasure and not a few of their near heart attacks.

The wonderful name, Yakima Canutt, almost always appeared on the screen but you
had to be very quick to catch it, because it came when the movie was over and
they started what is known as the credit crawl. Which these days, since every
carpenter and assistant make-up man has to have his name printed in letters as
big as the stars, ought to be called the whizzing credit roll.

You'll guess the crucial, breathtaking part that Yakima Canutt always played,
when I tell you that watching the breathtaking feats of horsemanship performed
by Roy Rogers, Gene Autry, John Wayne, it might have been a comfort for you to
know that Rogers, Autry and Wayne were cosily sitting up with the cameraman or
the director, that the body falling from a horse over a cliff or being dragged
at a gallop through a mile of mud and dust, or leaping from one bareback to
another, 10 feet away, was the tough, and by then, pretty battered body of
Yakima Canutt. The greatest stuntman in the history of the movies.

To fill in a little more about him, he was born in the far western state of
Washington, just a little over a hundred years ago. He was a ranch hand since
boyhood and joined rodeos and Wild West shows, which toured the country with
great dash and valour, once the Indian had been tamed and penned off in
reservations.

In his early 20s he became the world's rodeo champion. And pretty soon, in
Hollywood's early '20s he was beckoned and begged to fill in for the handsome
male cowboy stars who, with the increasing popularity of the western movie,
needed somebody to perform the appalling stunts that tended to rough up the
handsome profiles of the originals.

Canutt's name was Enos Edward Canutt but it was in the small town famous for
its rodeo of Yakimo, Washington that he'd made his name and that was the name
he stayed with. It was granted by the most sceptical prop man and the most
self-important star that Canutt performed the most dangerous and the most
spectacular stunts ever seen on the screen.

It was attested by the X-rays that, by the time he was approaching 40, he'd
broken most of the bones in his body. Patched up, he retired to direct other,
less gifted, stuntmen. In the teeth of the best medical opinion, he defied
mortality and died at the astonishing age of 91.

Well, I recalled him and some of his more excruciating gymnastics this week
when Roy Rogers died. The singing cowboy. One generation, at least, found its
spokesman on Tuesday in President Clinton who said there will be a lot of sad
and grateful Americans, especially of my generation.

President Clinton was born in – I can't believe it – 1946. What's he doing
telling us about the Second World War? And the Berlin air lift? I believe him
when he says Roy Rogers was his hero but the generation just before him, that
had seen most of the Roy Rogers' 91 feature films and probably brought Roy
Rogers lunch baskets and slept on camping trips on Roy Rogers blankets, that
generation, in a Life magazine national survey conducted among children at the
time Clinton would have been minus-2, the three greatest Americans named were
Abraham Lincoln, Franklin Roosevelt and Roy Rogers.

This reputation will astound previous generations who think back to Gene Autry,
to Tex Ritter, to Tom Mix, not to mention the commanding figures of John Wayne
and Gary Cooper. And how about the most brooding, most realistic cowboy of them
all? Who, from much roaming out west as a youngster in the 1870s, knew that the
cowboy tended to be, more than anything, a land pirate, greedy to intrude on
the homesteaders' land. In many ways a hustler and sometimes a reformed killer
or shootist. This man was 50 when he became the world famous film cowboy. I'm
about the only living person who remembers him. William S Hart. So I won't even
mention his name.

But I don't think Roy Rogers' resounding popularity in the late '40s and early
'50s when there were 2,000 or more Rogers fan clubs. I don't think it's
difficult to explain. He represented for the young the lighter myth of the
cowboy. Daring, of course, a good horseman. Properly devoted, as the
Constitution requires, to his horse Trigger, having a pretty wife, always
kindly, always coming out top man.

America, then, had come out top dog, and was set for a dozen more years of
prosperity and general cheerfulness under President Ike. What a rollicking time
the '50s was!

When he first appeared, the New York Times said of Roy Rogers, "He has a drawl
like Gary Cooper – Gary Cooper never had a drawl by the way – and a smile like
Shirley Temple". The studio didn't like that and suggested he use some special
drops to widen his eyes.

But to their great relief, his young fans liked his crinkly look. And since
Gene Autry had gone off to war, I mean for real, in life, Roy Rogers became the
King of the Cowboys and from then on solidified his image. Protecting the weak,
being kind to animals, doing good deeds every day, a singing Boy Scout.

But if other times require other heroes that means in the history of the
western movie another type of cowboy. I never fail to marvel anew at the hold
that the cowboy figure has on Europeans. Maybe on Asians too, I don't know. But
I read only the other day in a biography that when, at the very end of the
1950s, Nikita Khrushchev, on his first, I believe, visit to the United States
was asked by President Eisenhower if there was one American more than another
he wished to meet. Khrushchev didn't hesitate. "John Wayne," he said.

That time, close to the threat of nuclear war with the Soviets and not far away
from the nightmare of Vietnam, was no time for the kids' cowboy, a crooner who
was kind to animals and old ladies. Mr Khrushchev and other Europeans used to
confess, very reluctantly, that the American they most admired and feared was
the tough hombre. And nobody met the formula more impressively than John Wayne.

Before we talk about what he came to mean to so many millions of people, I
think it's worth noticing how rarely, if ever, a movie cowboy hero was born to
the trade. Roy Rogers was the son of a shoemaker in Ohio, christened one
Leonard Slye, whose ambition was to be a dentist. Gene Autry was a telegrapher
at an Oklahoma railway junction who sang on a local radio station.

John Wayne was born in the Midwestern state of Iowa, christened Marion
Morrison. And, after winning a football scholarship to the University of
Southern California, raised heaven and earth, and also Cain, to get rid of the
first name of Marion.

He was a big 6ft 3in labourer on the Fox lot when the director, the western
director John Ford, saw in him the very symbol, the right man, to stand, or
ride, or fight against the brilliant far horizons and bulging clouds of Ford's
western scenes.

Wayne was ideally matched to his time. He was most famous in his 50s, in
America's doom-ridden '60s, the era of the feared Soviets, of riots,
assassinations, youth's drug culture, the rise of feminism against just such
macho images as John Wayne personified.

In his enormously popular, The Green Berets and True Grit, he came to be, for
many more millions than the ones who loathed or mocked him, the all-American,
grim-jawed, super-patriot that a country floundering for an acceptable positive
image seemed to yearn for.

But before him, before Roy Rogers and long after William S Hart, there was a
man who for people long familiar both with the west and with the American
characters who peopled it as late as 60 years ago, there was Gary Cooper.

A man who, for most Americans during the anxious Hitler days of the '30s,
personified the heroic myth of the taut but merciful plainsman who dispenses
justice with a worried conscience, a single syllable, a blurred reflex action
at the hip, and who faced death in the afternoon as regularly as the matador,
but on Main Street. And for no pay.

Incidentally, no stuntman filled in for him. He was a superb horseman and the
best shot Hemingway had ever seen. It was in two films appropriately named The
Plainsman and High Noon that Cooper best filled this glowing, and probably
glowingly false, picture of the town marshal, heading down the railway tracks
back to duty, with that precise mince of the cowboy's tread, the rancher's
squint that smells mischief in a tumbleweed, sees round corners. And is never
fooled.

Gary Cooper's representation of this hero was not a tough guy necessarily
brutal to withstand the brutality of his enemies, he represented every man's
secret image of himself. The honourable man, slicing through the daily
corruption of morals and machines. He isolated and enlarged to 6ft 3in an
untainted strain of goodness in a very male specimen of the male of the
species.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP