Tiananmen Square - 11 June 1989

In this month of totally unpredicted turbulence in China, when one human being
in five on this planet doesn’t know who’s running the country, it may at first
sound perverse, even academic, to take our text today not from any of the
scattered teams of courageous journalists, and I must say, television
cameramen, in Beijing, Shanghai and elsewhere, but from an old reporter who, if
he were alive today would be, according to the best calculations, 2,373 years
old.

I am referring to nobody but old Aristotle. He’s talking about the dependable
tendency of the young to rebel, to protest, to seek some other system in the
certain hope it will be a better one and he wrote, “Young people have exalted
notions because they have not yet been humbled by life or learned its necessary
limitations.

"Moreover, their hopeful disposition makes them think themselves equal to great
things. All their mistakes therefore are in the direction of doing things
excessively and vehemently. They love too much, hate too much, and the same
with everything else.”

It struck me, watching the thousands and thousands of feet of television
coverage of the first gatherings in Beijing’s great square, then the hunger
strike, then the huge massing of students – and let’s not forget workers and
incoming farmers – and finally the horrid scenes of the Beijing massacre. It
struck me then how quick we all are, in any student rebellion, to jump to the
thought that the students are always right.

Nobody should jump to the opposite conclusion, to presume, I’m saying, they’re
always wrong. When it comes to political rebellion the judgement of any of us
will turn on how satisfied or dissatisfied we are with what we used to call the
system and now call the establishment. But I’ve noticed from all the talk and
commentary we’ve had, not only on the box but in print and among friends, that
most of us begin with the prejudice that students, especially in revolt, are
idealists who want something better.

It may be, as we shall see, that often they want rather something different,
something more exciting, something quicker, more downright which may or may not
turn out to be better than the thing they rebelled against. Even so dedicated a
revolutionary as Bernard Shaw once wrote, “Never tear down a building until you
have a better one to put in its place.”

Anyone who has listened much to these talks will know that of all forms of
human scientists and pseudo-scientists the ones I am never likely to quote
admiringly are the sociologists who have, more than any tribe professionals,
broken up a whole language in the process of first fracturing and then muddying
up our thinking. But there is one who, down the years, has made more
enlightening sense than most and who, believe it or not, has done it in cogent,
simple English.

So a sociologist, Dr Martin Seymour Lipset, moving on you might say from that
observation by Aristotle, wrote a piece more than two weeks ago when the
student rebellion in China was only just moving into the heart of Beijing.

It was a survey of the role of students as rebels in various countries at
different times. He remarked first that in Tsarist Russia the universities were
officially described as "hotbeds of radicalism and the higher the school, the
more are the young people imbued with the revolutionary spirit”. That was
written in the 1880s.

Dr Lipset then goes on to point out that the only certain common factors in
student rebellions are romanticism and idealism which exist, however, in groups
that vary considerably in their social and political views, which brings us to
the useful reminder that in Germany, the most stubborn and vocal supporters of
right-wing nationalism were students from the middle of the 19th century on and
that it was the student councils that provided, in 1931, the earliest majority
support for Hitler’s Nazis. The party anthem, by the way, of Mussolini’s
fascists was Giovinezza Giovinezza – Youth Youth.

Well in this country – which of all countries has boasted of itself for over
200 years as the country of youth and education – it’s surprising to look back
and see that students have played a very small part in the various rebellions
since the 18th Century.

Mostly it has been aggrieved or dispossessed farmers, oppressed workers,
usually the latest body of immigrants, union militants – steel workers,
railroad workers and the like – but 20 years ago it was students who disrupted
presidential campaign meetings, students who put together a rather undemocratic
and militant group called The Students for a Democratic Society, students who
seized university administration buildings in the east and the west for rampant
but dubious causes.

At Columbia here they stalled the running of the entire university to try and
have a piece of ground turned into a gymnasium. At Berkeley the first rampaging
protest I ever saw was a stomping parade of students, hundreds of them,
disrupting classes and the daily routine by demanding – it’s always demanding –
their own respect or their own version of the First Amendment, which is the one
that sanctions free speech and the right peaceably to assemble.

The peaceable injunction was always forgotten or violated. What those early
protesters wanted was the right, if it is a right, to march across the campus
endlessly shouting out four-letter obscenities. That must have been the witless
nadir of student protest, but it will not be forgotten that when the Vietnam
war went on and on and brought in hundreds of thousands of Americans and got
messier and more brutal, took to napalm and anti-personnel bombs that meant you
were blasted apart, it was the students on campuses across the country – and
notably in the west – it was the students who started and maintained a furious
vigil and said “Enough!”.

I think it’s fair to say that more than any single body, group, of Americans
the students played the decisive part in the administration’s reluctant
decision to get out.

Now in China, on the other hand, the students – it always means university
students – have been in the vanguard of popular uprising but their methods were
not always as benign as the methods used by the students here and now in
Beijing. A famous date in Chinese history is 4 May, as 3 June will become
infamous, 4 May 1919.

It was a march through the centre of what was then Peking to protest China’s
weakness, its military sluggishness, in meeting an aggressive Japan. It was a
student rebellion in favour of war. The protest wound down into a long bitter
government debate abetted by contending students about China’s decline as a
great power.

What we remember today is the massive student uprising which either assisted or
engineered the chaos of the cultural revolution of 1966-67 in which Mao Tse
Tung used the students to get rid of the political rivals who challenged his
power including, let’s not forget, Mr Jiang himself imprisoned, tortured – he
still shows a resulting limp – and banished.

And that led to the mobilising of the dreaded bands of so-called Red Guards,
students who went on a murderous spree of arresting, beating, sometimes
liquidating Mao’s rivals and enemies and suspected friends and families of
Mao’s rivals and ten years later, let’s not forget, the students rose in
furious rebellion protesting the introduction of economic reforms that seemed
to them to be a surrender to the hated liberal bourgeois democracies.

Those former students must still be around, greying slightly but by now stoical
or cynical onlookers as they watch their sons or younger brothers arise in the
cause of the democracy they believed had sapped the strength of their Communist
state.

It happens that the attitude of many of the young intellectuals who suffered
during the cultural revolution has been gone into by a professor at Berkeley
who has recently spent time among Chinese students in China.

He says, “These kids’ parents, many of whom were intellectuals who suffered
during that revolution, have told them about it and the parents said, 'Look,
you don’t get anywhere with violence, you have to take a new approach'." And it
does seem that the most striking change in tactics in this rebellion is, was,
even through the bloody 3 June the general – the remarkably general – resolve
to be peaceful.

This, of course, makes us ask what is different this time about their demands,
about the better system they are pleading for? All the American networks and, I
reckon, most newspapers have turned their protest into a simple massive demand
for democracy as against Communism, though certainly in the early days all we
heard from their own lips and waving posters was an end to corruption, no
suggestion then of overthrowing Communism.

They were protesting their low pay as against the wages of workers. They were
protesting corruption at low and high levels of their government, but pretty
soon the placards and the slogans changed and simplified. Up went the model
Statue of Liberty. Amazingly, we saw the name Jefferson being flaunted. Very
many of the students who were wounded on the bloody day had been students in
this country and the glow of democracy, its freedoms, was what fired them. No
mention then of what the marchers of 1978 had stormed about – the materialism,
the crime, the licence of western democracy.

If a month ago our visiting businessmen and the tourists, most of all our
intelligence services, had no hint or clue of what was coming, I find it hard
to believe that we can know just yet what is going to come out of it.

The one thought that stays with me is that perhaps the two fatal errors of the
Chinese government in the past few years was, first, to let 70,000 students go
off and live in the United States and other democracies and second, to allow
foreign television companies to come in and show to the world the bloody chaos
of 3 June.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC

Letter from America scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP