Foreign Aid Budget - 26 January 1990

If an American were to spend two weeks in Europe, as I did at Christmas time,
he would discover something, an attitude towards America that is quite new in
my time – and my time goes back to well before the Second World War.

I recall an indelible scene that happened to me in the melancholy autumn of
1938 when Hitler, having annexed Austria, had taken over Czechoslovakia and we
were all shrinking from the glaring recognition that Poland was to be the next
victim on his list.

I was on a train going up to Lancashire, and at Crewe an off-duty railwayman
got in. He was very familiar as a physical and emotional type to anyone who had
spent his boyhood in industrial Lancashire. He was short and wizened and
pigeon-chested. He had watery eyes and a chronic cough. Today, we should
certainly call him under-nourished as, in my father's time, he would have been
called, in the quaint lingo of the day, a candidate for consumption.

He wore a cap and a shirt, buttoned up without the celluloid collar that was
probably attached only once a week after he'd scrubbed up and put on his only
chapel-going suit. He sat for a while, gazing out at the grimy slums sliding by
and then looked up and saw my suitcase up on the rack. It bore a label saying
"Cunard, cabin luggage".

Quite simply and casually, as if we'd been talking for hours, he said, "Will
America be comin' in t'War then?" I said, "I'm afraid not this time. I think
the Americans will stay at home". He gave a little, cocky shrug to his
shoulders and said, "Eh well, we'll have to fight buggers ourselves then, won't
we?"

He didn't look as if he could knock over a mouse but it was the first flicker
of a spirit that kept the Nazis at bay until America came in. From this
Lancashire sparrow to government officials I talked to, the spontaneous
response was always the same. Of course, 1938 was a special and perilous time
for the future and, as it turned out, for the survival of a democratic Europe.

But ever since, an American, newly-arrived in Britain certainly, was met with a
similar sort of question, "Would Marshall Aid be enough to repair, as Dean
Acheson put it, the fabric of Europe?". "How would President Truman react to
the Russians blockade of Berlin?". "Did Kennedy mean what he said that Berlin
was the American front line?". "Did Reagan seriously believe that the Soviet
Union's superiority in nuclear arms was massive?" And so on.

Today, it's quite different. In many long evenings, with different friends,
nobody began by asking or wondering about American policy. I might have been a
visitor from Finland. Only one man asked me directly how Mr Bush was doing.

Of course, all of us were overwhelmed by the revolutions in Eastern Europe but
in all previous European moments of tension or crisis, from the Berlin blockade
to Mr Gorbachev's offers of arms reduction, what America would do was always
assumed to be the important counter-move.

People were not slighting America or making a point of underestimating her
power, it was just assumed in the most amiable way, that the United States was,
like Manchester United, say, the once-great football team which this year was
not in the Cup Final.

The reporters and commentators who came into their own were correspondents,
European and American, who were filing their despatches from Czechoslovakia,
Romania, East Berlin, Bonn, Azerbaijan, Lithuania, Latvia. And they were
analysing events in much the same way – apart from the actual fighting in the
cities or the countryside and the mood of the protesters in the city squares,
the reporters were beginning to count the difficult ways in which the peoples
liberating themselves from the Soviet empire would have to move to set up
something like stable, self-governing republics.

Mainly, we've been reading at great length about the problem in all the
rebellious countries of how intellectuals and idealists, with no experience of
democratic government, can learn a system in which different factions are
accepted, opposition is respected, and getting your own way is never
guaranteed.

And the aching problem for all of them, of somehow tolerating a desperate slump
in their already low standards of living until a new economy can be allowed to
stagger into working order. And the special problem of Mr Gorbachev, once he
allowed that eligion was a permissible form of spiritual comfort, to enforce
religious toleration on Muslims and Christians giving vent, at last, to
generations of mutual hatred.And the latest of our fearful questions – whether
or not Mr Gorbachev has not landed himself, in Azerbaijan, with his own
Northern Ireland.

Through all the European tumult of the past three, four months, it has been
understood that America, like Britain, France, the Scandinavian countries, was
treading water while Eastern Europe was taking the plunge.

Nobody in Washington denied this new, onlooking, role but if you asked what
American policy was to be when Eastern Europe became reasonably stable, the
answer was predictable – aid, money, investment were what the newly-liberated
would want from us.

At that point, we come up against American theory and American practice, the
traditional assumption of how America acts towards countries needing foreign
aid and the striking disparity in the past few years with its actual
performance.

It's a contrast that our media have not been dwelling on lately. I do believe
it would be a shock, not only to what we used to call well-informed people but
also to many congressmen, to learn how woefully the United States has fallen
behind in the dispensing of substantial foreign aid.

Put it to most Americans, "How do you stand in the amount of foreign aid that
is charged off per capita, as they say, to the taxpayer?", I'm pretty sure a
majority of Americans would say that this country is, if not the top
benefactor, at least among the top two or three.

The facts are enlightening. The number one nation in the scale of generosity is
Denmark. The Danes, from a small country of only five millions, give annually
$135 each. After them, the Dutch, $119. Then the French, $92, the United
States, $40 per capita. Next to the bottom of the list, Britain's offer $31 a
year.

But how about investment capital? We've been reading a good deal lately about
the intentions of big and small American corporations to move money and
factories into Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Poland. Well, so far the countries
investing heavily in markets and influence in Eastern Europe are Japan, West
Germany and France.

Recently, one lone senator has brought up the subject of foreign aid and
proposed a method of redistributing it. He is the Republican leader in the
Senate, Senator Dole. He has not, so far as I know, recited the figures I've
given you for which I'm indebted to a New York journalist, Mr Robert Reno, nor
has he otherwise disturbed the myth of America as the great western benefactor.

He just said that the foreign aid budget is top heavy, in favour of five
nations which gobble up two-thirds of the available monies. The countries he
mentioned are Pakistan, Turkey, the Philippines, Egypt and Israel.

Just to call them off that way suggests to the casual listener or reader that
their shares are about equal. The fact is that Israel gets more than all the
others combined. The main Jewish organisations in the United States know it
well and were the first to protest against Senator Dole's suggestion of cutting
aid to the five beneficiaries by 5%.

This confronts Senator Dole with a very ticklish moment in his political career
at a time when disturbing signs of rising anti-Semitism in this country
coincide with a marked decline in domestic oil production and a consequent need
for more oil from the Arabs.

Considering that Israel is America's firmest and strongest ally in the Middle
East, we can be fairly sure that the Congress is not going to cut what nine
successive presidents have thought of as essential – military and economic aid
to Israel.

I don't believe that Senator Dole's proposal is a careful, measured policy.
It's more like a cry of frustration at Israel's steady refusal to listen to the
appeals of President Bush and Secretary of State Baker, to permit some form of
self-government to the Palestinians.

This sudden focus on Senator Dole's five most favoured nations leaves the
bigger picture, in the background, blurred. The bigger picture is the
ever-shrinking mass of money available for foreign aid. Four years ago the
outlay for foreign aid was $12billions out of a total budget of $945billions,
about 1.2%. Today, it's $7billions out of a trillion – about 0.7%.

And recently something happened that, for perhaps a long time to come, is going
to reduce the government money for foreign aid outside this hemisphere. That
something was the invasion of Panama.

The United States has committed itself to repair the political and social life
of Panama, to invigorate its comatose economy, to help boost a democratic
society, when it acquires one. The guess of the people in the government
general's accounting office is approaching one billion dollars by the time the
occupying forces, the police and medical resources are withdrawn.

So the word for the brave and needy East Europeans seems to be "put not your
trust in Washington" but in the private sector, in American corporations – if
you can find any that are not owned by a Dutchman, a Briton, a Japanese or a
Canadian. Or all four combined.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.