Nixon, 'and the rest you know'... - 4 March 1994

Unusually sharp listeners, that's to say listeners who are not scrubbing their
backs or saying two lumps, darling, in response to "good morning", such alert
types may have noticed recently that I've occasionally said, about some knotty
current issue of war or peace, as I talk, I hate to calculate how many sharp
listeners exist by this criterion. But one of them, anyway, has written to ask
me: what do you mean, as you talk? What other time would I be listening to you?
Point taken.

Well the fact is I have not been able to find a polite way of saying out loud
the blunt truth that I'm talking on tape on a Wednesday and by the time you
hear me, perhaps the war will be over, President Clinton will have resigned,
the lion and the lamb will be setting up house together in the Middle East.
Friends here say, oh go ahead, say it, nothing drastic's going to happen
between now and Sunday, Well I notice from the calendar that this is an
anniversary week and after 48 years I know it's not possible, whether you're Mr
Yeltsin or Nostradamus, to say what might happen by Sunday morning, let alone
by 2000 AD.

Once, I recall, I was sitting all cosy and carefree with an old friend, by a
blazing fire, in his Washington house. We were both licking our chops at the
immediate prospect of Shostakovich's Seventh Symphony. The orchestra was tuning
up, the flutes doing their switchback giggle, the fiddles doing the twiddly
bits, when an excitable young man burst in with an incomprehensible sentence,
"The Japanese," he shouted, "have bombed Pearl Harbor". My friend, a British
government official, and I, honest, cried, "Where is Pearl Harbor?"

My own chief that day, the venerable, infinitely far-sighted Washington
correspondent of the London Times, was off at a country weekend party in
Maryland. General Marshall, the army chief of staff was put riding. The
president of the United States was manipulating his stamp collection. Luckily
there was no Letter from America in those days, so I was able, being on the
spot, to leap into the saddle of the absent Sir Willmott Lewis. He came puffing
in late in the evening. Dear boy, he said, I should have known. The Japanese
learned years ago that Americans have taken up the habit of the long English
weekend, during which it is considered bad taste to let anything important
happen. I learned from that.

Of course today, thanks in the first place to Ted Turner of Atlanta, it's easy
never to be out of sight of Sarajevo or Washington or Jerusalem or Beijing or
wherever the news is instant. Even so, there can be wracking days when I fear
that by the time you hear my stuff, empires will have stood or fallen. There
was the terrible and I'm relieved to say, unique experience of the 6 August
1974. For almost two years, the country had been increasingly distracted from
all other public business by what at first was facetiously known as the
Watergate caper. A night-time burglary effort by six men into the offices of
the Democratic Party.

A Laurel and Hardy absurdity in the beginning. Then it slowly came out that the
men had been hired by some Republicans, that a great deal of money, running to
millions of dollars, had changed hands. Then suspicion narrowed on two big men.
Presidential advisers, inside the White House. Then there was a Senate
investigation, which discovered that President Nixon regularly and secretly
taped conversations in his office. His chief sin was he forgot to destroy the
tapes and ultimately one tape, which the Supreme Court made him turn over to a
House committee, which by then was considering impeachment proceedings, that
one tape revealed, nay proclaimed in the President's own voice, that he not
only knew about the burglary, but only six days after it, he was telling the
CIA and the FBI to bottle up any investigation of it.

By that time, I mean by the time that fatal tape was published, the House
committee had voted to impeach him, which meant he must then go before the
Senate sitting as a trial court. A rapid head count of the whole House of
Representatives showed they would follow the committee and in the Senate it was
confidentially learned there was less than the one-third vote essential to
support and save him. He was doomed. So, would he face the trial or resign or
what? Just before I sat down in a studio in San Francisco, on the Wednesday
morning which was my deadline, I didn't know and nobody knew for sure. I
checked the word from the inner sanctuary of the White House and it was that he
would defy the verdict of the House Committee.

I called up the oldest, the most distinguished of American historians, the
late, great Samuel Eliot Morison. He said, he'll brazen it out. What to do, as
the engineer's finger signalled action, through the studio's control room
window. I recounted everything that had happened up to that point. I ended by
listing the alternatives he faced. Now it was time to say goodnight. But how? I
ended with the solemn and now I think of it, very wishful, sentence, the rest,
you know.

The tape flew off to London, two days ticked by. On the Friday morning, Nixon
abdicated. Wow. That evening the tape was played for the first time and
subsequently, in different countries, throughout the weekend, and every
audience heard the same last sentence: The rest you know.

I got more mail than I could count from people saying in various ways,
masterly, so dramatic, so tasteful, not rubbing his nose in it, wonderful
restraint, congratulations, right on. Well, you can't do that more than once,
though at the moment I'd like to talk about either Sarajevo or Hebron or both,
but, as I talk, it is Wednesday.

Why, why have I said that phrase, as I talk, several times this winter. Because
of the ferocious winter itself. The people who have to get to this studio,
really only two who are essential to the transmission of this talk, they live
across the river in New Jersey, and when Manhattan gets 10 inches of snow, they
get 18 inches and when our sidewalks are as slippery as jelly, their great
state highways are skating rinks. One time, about a month ago, after the worst
storm, when we were perishing below zero, the day I was sitting here being
recorded directly in London, we could no longer trust a transatlantic flight,
even taking off, I kept fading. Try again, they cried, in London. For the first
time in history the cable on the ocean bed was battered and damaged by storm.

Eventually we got the whole thing over and London patched it together just in
time for the first transmission. So instead of saying, as I talk now, I will
now openly declare that it is Wednesday and I'm recording these words now, not
on Friday because, because we've all been warned, heavy winter storm watch
through Thursday, 8 to 12 inches snow and ice. Better, they all said, get it
over to London now and take the risk of sounding foolish on Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday in New Zealand.

Well, while we tap our teeth and wait and hope the weather bureau is suffering
from one of its periodical hysterias, I can tell you about one thing that has
happened that cannot be cancelled or reversed. Last Monday the so-called Brady
Bill came into effect as a federal, a national law and that's the law named
after President Reagan's press secretary, who was badly wounded, paralysed, by
the young lunatic who shot Mr Reagan. Mr Brady has been campaigning since 1984
for a bill to control hand guns; 10 years up against one of the most lavishly
funded and most powerful of all the hundreds of lobbies in Washington, the
National Rifle Association, which for much longer than 10 years has somehow
been impressing millions of voters with the tinpot slogan – guns don't kill
people, people do. The Brady Bill's controls are very modest indeed. Every hand
gun owner must give his name and wait five days till his background is checked.
This is going to be possible for the whole country by about 1997.

Now note, 38 states already have gun control laws, some of them very much
tougher than the Brady Bill. California makes you wait two weeks. The man who
shot up that commuter train on Long Island had submitted to and passed the
California law, bought his gun, travelled 3,000 miles and went berserk here in
New York. President Clinton wants the Congress now to get busy banning all
assault weapons, those rapid repeating rifles that can kill 15 people in as
many seconds and cannot possibly be defended or defined as a hunting rifle. He
also wants all guns to be registered and licensed, like cars.

Now I ought to say that there are thoughtful opponents of any more gun control
laws and they say once you licence and register every home with a gun, a drug
lord, for instance, would be very happy to have that list and how many
criminals are going to register? Will they obediently insure their weapons? The
unsolved paradox is that any gun law will be observed only by, well by
law-abiding citizens. To me, the secret, unconsidered threat of strict gun
control is a roaring black market and the growth of an underground racketeering
empire, such as degraded and ridiculed what one president called the noble
experiment of prohibiting alcohol.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP