Clinton's Economy - 4 December 1992

It's been 30 years since John F Kennedy was elected to the presidency and in
his inaugural speech the following January he declared the torch has been
passed to a new generation.

Well, since he was the second youngest president in history, we all applauded
and said "quite right", but the leaders, both European and Asian, that Kennedy
was going to have to deal with were in their 60s and 70s: Macmillan, de Gaulle,
Mao Tse-tung, Adenauer and they would be in power when he'd gone after the
short less than three years of his reign. And his successor Lyndon Johnson,
though barely 10 years older than Kennedy, was a veteran politician who'd
started in politics 30 years before with Roosevelt's New Deal and believed in
its ideals and its methods, so really looking back on it now we can see that
Kennedy was a forced blip on time's radar screen. He would today be 75 and all
his contemporaries are long gone from government.

But if Mr Clinton were to echo the same phrase in his inaugural, he would be
more surely speaking the truth. Nothing is more striking during this transition
time than the youth of the new faces and the voices that speak for Clinton the
economic advisors, the press spokesman, the men so far only men who appear on
television and say what the new administration is to be about. After a few
weeks of our getting to know these people who will form his camp of cronies or
kitchen cabinet as we say, President Bush suddenly seems like a Chelsea
pensioner. He's only 68, but then only four presidents out of 41 have been as
old as Mr Bush was at his inauguration. The man who fooled us and scrambled the
record was of course the immortal Ronald Reagan the oldest man ever to enter
the White House, a year older than George Bush leaving it.

If there's one remark more than another that indicates the positive passing of
an old order it's the reflection somebody made the other day that George Bush
is probably – I would say certainly – the last veteran of the Second World War
who will come to the presidency. The war to Clinton's generation means Vietnam
and even at that he was only just old enough as we learned many times over
during the campaign to be eligible for the draft. I've noticed for instance
that no contemporary American politician ever talks about Korea as a United
Nations war. When it's mentioned, it's by old codgers who pass on to the young
the thought that Korea was an all-American war and probably not worth it. When
the Korean ceasefire was instituted, William Jefferson Clinton was five years
old, so the recognition that from the 20 January on we really are about to
enter a new American era has come to people in different ways, but the
recognition is there. It's general and I'm happy to tell you that for the time
being anyway, it has given the American people a lift in its simplest form, the
lift is the one you get from a new coach, a new team and the hope that they
have something bracing to offer.

I have friends who never had the slightest intention of voting for Mr Clinton,
some of whom stayed with Bush to the end, some of whom decided at the last
minute to register a protest against both principal candidates and go for Mr
Perot. I've been surprised to discover how many of them say their coming round
to the idea that Clinton's victory was probably a good thing and begin to have
hopes for him.

This feeling has surprisingly passed over on to Wall Street and I'm sure has a
lot to do with the first certain signs after more than two sluggish years that
the American economy really is stirring into life and strength. The awful
truth, which George Bush must find unbearable to dwell on, is that he was right
in the last month or so of the campaign when he insisted that the economy was
finally improving, but he'd been saying that for a year in the face of
joblessness, poverty, increasing despair among the industrial states. This time
he was right, but the sure signs did not appear until mid-November and, of
course, this constitutes the luckiest possible break for Clinton. Though
whatever your political allegiance, you have to admit that Clinton had nothing
to do with it. Come to think of it, it's doubtful that a president ever has
anything to do with the health and sickness of the economy, but it's a deep and
unshakable and popular belief that whoever is in the White House is like the
manager of a football team solely responsible for its performance.

The only grain of truth in this delusion is that, as the old Italian playwright
Pirandello put it, "it is, if you think it is" and even the most sophisticated,
the most tortured economist will admit that, whatever else affects the stock
market. One strong influence is public confidence, so it may be that although
the economy was improving at election time all on its own, yet the general
superstition if you like that things were likely to get better under Clinton
gave the economy the boost that was necessary to demonstrate its return to
health.

I report this trend with all the more alacrity because of the bleak contrasting
picture we get, and I'm sure you get, of Europe. Europe in the doldrums, the
dead-in-the-water condition of the Maastricht Treaty and the prospects for
European Union, the Continental-wide recession made wider still by the lapse in
German prosperity. What Mr Clinton seems to have convinced enough of the voters
is that he's a different Democrat, that he would forsake the 60-year-old
Democrat's devotion to deficit financing, John Maynard Keynes's weighty legacy
to the century, that he does not mean to be, in Mr Bush's gutsy simplification,
a tax-and-spend liberal.

That phrase harped incessantly by Mr Bush during the autumn was not plucked out
of the air, it takes us back to an battled time in American political history.

In the mid-summer of 1938, President Roosevelt's closest personal advisor, one
Harry Hopkins, a very sick Midwesterner who heroically overcame his illness
during the Second War to contrive Lend Lease to keep the Soviet Union in the
United Nations, to see Europe repaired and restored through the Marshall Plan.
Harry Hopkins was at a race track in New York and turned to his companion, a
New York theatrical producer, and said "apropos of the next big policy move of
the New Deal, we will spend and spend and tax and tax and elect and elect".

In fact, there's no proof Hopkins ever said it, but he could have. It was such
a lively, memorable phrase and it did express, albeit in a ruthless form, the
general philosophy of the New Deal that in no time it was picked up by
Republican speakers and Roosevelt-haters everywhere, and parodied and intoned
at every political meeting as a warning of the crushing future Roosevelt had in
store for all of us. And it's astonishing to realise now how much political
mileage the Republicans have got through successive presidential campaigns out
of the threat that the Democrats knew no other political strategy than to tax
the people into ruin.

When this year's campaign began, it's easy to forget now that Governor Clinton
was way behind Mr Bush in the polls, partly of course, because he was unknown
to the country at large, but also because he was the Democrats' latest
candidate and could be assumed to be following in the footsteps of all previous
Democratic contenders, all the way back to the original taxer and spender the
dreaded Franklin Roosevelt.

Well, as I say, we may not have seen it by election time, but by now it's clear
that Mr Clinton pulled off a small but decisive miracle of political
persuasion. He really did convince enough voters, including Wall Street and the
financial world, that he did not believe taxes were the only or the best way to
get revenue, that tax for business, helping business big and little to new
investment, was the vital impulse of an improving economy. He also made it
clear in his 12 years as Governor of Arkansas that welfare was a crutch and
should be fallen back on only for so long; only as long as the patient could
get on his feet and instead of mooning over his last job, get trained for a new
one. Governor Clinton's job training programme developed at the expense of
public funds for a perpetual dole has been so successful in Arkansas, it was
the main reason why at the last Governors' Conference last year that 49 other
governors voted him the most successful governor in the country. That accolade
no doubt offered a powerful incentive to run for the presidency.

Well, I'd love to go on bringing reassurance and good cheer in this report, a
suggestion that America finally dragging itself out of the slough of recession
might beckon to and help a floundering Europe, but suddenly the rosy domestic
picture has faded in the past week and Governor Clinton is faced with a problem
in foreign affairs as dire as anything since Vietnam. Of course, it is
President Bush's initiative to send 28,000 troops into the hell hole of
Somalia. He has briefed Mr Clinton every step of the way, but Mr Bush has
perhaps fatally jeopardised President Clinton's future initiative by saying now
that this mission is a police action, which will be finished by the 20 January,
the day of President Clinton's inauguration.

What this cocky assurance does is to tip off the warlords or gangsters that
they can rest up while American soldiers protect the food deliveries, no point
in fighting the fearsome American marines and then resume their civil war and
their looting from the famished once the American's have left. The Pentagon,
for once defying a president's judgment says, "the mission cannot have a
deadline that the troops might be there well into the New Year when it will
become President Clinton's decision whether to call it quits or to wade into a
civil war and get stuck in a quagmire the size of Texas".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP