David Koresh and Reverend Jim Jones - 12 March 1993

Lyndon Johnson used to pad around the White House at night just to be sure
people were turning the lights out. Jimmy Carter decided to wear a cardigan.
Bill Clinton is starting a cafeteria. These different gestures were performed
either to show the people that the new president is determined to rid
government of waste or to show the people that he's one of them.

Every man I can remember who ran for president at some point in his campaign
wrung his hands and in a tone worthy of Claude Rains discovering that gambling
was going on in a gambling joint would announce that the sheer waste in the
government was perfectly shocking.

Ronald Reagan I remember had a comical time reciting the cost of a short
documentary film put out by the navy, which was no more than a sort of
etiquette guide for sailors when entertaining ladies in the mess, it was pretty
basic, pull the lady's chair out at an angle so she can sidle in comfortably. I
don't remember anything quite as basic as the advice given to a small group of
English sailors on shore leave who'd been invited to tea with the local bishop
and who were told when they met the bishop's daughter to be sure to initiate
the conversation, which the most enterprising did by saying "my, miss, how
white your chest is".

President Reagan discovered some pretty trivial and expensive pamphlets
published at taxpayers expense by the largest and certainly the most
comprehensive publisher on earth, the United States government printing office
and he sought to it that such things were discontinued and he assured us that
this sort of economy would radically reduce the budget, balance it he promised
by, I think, 1984.

Jimmy Carter decided when he came in to be Franklin Roosevelt, something every
Roosevelt successor has tried to be one way or another without success.
Carter's winning stratagem was to address the nation a television version of
Roosevelt's famous radio fireside chats to address us wearing a cardigan. This
he and his new young team of advisors agreed would make him instantly and
visibly appear as a friendly neighbour, the helping hand next door, a man of
the people. To the astonishment of the White House, Carter according to the
polls the morning after appeared less like a man of the people and more like a
bum.

I remember now some of the more shocked and spontaneous responses of ordinary
folk, who do you think he is coming at us in a sweater? Maybe all right down in
Georgia but somebody had better tell him he's president of the United States,
at least he could do would be wear a neck tie. Well, of course fashions in
publicly acceptable menswear change and have been changing very fast lately,
yet when Bill Clinton held his first television phone-in, he's going to do
this, throw the lines out to the country let people phone in. When he started
this institution the other evening, he wore a suit, shirt, tie just like a
banker or a baseball champ invited to the White House, but when he was asked if
he'd sit in a presidential wing chair he said certainly not, he wanted a stool
just like any other talk show host.

Clinton's drive to clean up waste is I must say not restricted to populist
gestures, though you must have wondered at the beginning about his cafeteria.
Well quite simply the White House dining room, which has been described as the
most exclusive dining room in Washington is going to be turned into a cafeteria
for all the White House employees and it's on that list that Mr Clinton has
wielded his axe.

Again, it's absolutely routine for incoming President to deplore the size of
the White House staff and promise to reduce it, downsize it as we must now say,
reduce this at once. Last time anyone checked on such a promise was a friend of
mine, a statistician who has the figures on everything, and this was again
after a year or so of Jimmy Carter. How did he do, I asked my friend, I mean
the White House staff? Oh yes my friend replied, he reduced it from 550 to 780.

Well President Clinton has really sent a shockwave through all the government's
wage slaves because his first cuts are promissory – more to come. He is at once
cutting in the White House from Mr Bush's required team of 1,394 down to 1,044
– 350 staff jobs out. It's impressive, except perhaps to the Republican leader
in the Senator, Senator Bob Dole. You're going to hear a lot of unimpressed
remarks from him in the near future. Senator Dole said, "Well let's face it,
it's primarily a symbolic gesture, especially when many employees are merely
being transferred and he is reportedly requesting an additional three million
in taxpayer dollars to bring in dozens of new political appointees." But no
other president has made anything like such a cut symbolic or actual. The
president also announced that from now on only three of his top aides will rate
a chauffeur and a car, his National Security Advisor and his deputy. The
president thought that his oldest friend and buddy Thomas McLarty who's now his
chief of staff ought to have one, but Mr McLarty declined, maybe recalling Mr
Bush's notorious Mr Sununu who drove White House cars and flew White House
planes just to get his teeth fixed.

Anyway, the staff cuts saves 10 millions out of the White House total budget of
200 millions. These announced savings came in the wake of another puffing
headline: "In the White House, broccolis in, smoking's out". You'll recall that
to do a year or two ago, when President Bush kept seeing broccoli showing up on
the dinner menu and uttered a cry from the heart, which was echoed I'm sure by
a whole regiment of husbands. "Damn it," he said, I'm president of the United
States, I don't like broccoli." Of course, the fat was in the fire, the
broccoli growers of America or whoever protested at once declared their pride
in the fact that Mrs Bush did like broccoli and next day delivered a truck full
of the stuff to the White House once I'm told it was humanely despatched to
several hospitals.

Not quite as bad a clanger as poor old Gerald Ford who on holiday in the
Rockies leaned back with a drink one twilight and remarked to a couple of old
newspaper men that he liked to fill his days by keeping on the hop, eating and
drinking he said are a waste of time. Floods of telegrams of lamentation from
every branch of, quote, "the food industry of the United States". Imagine, the
president of the United States who has to learn as soon as possible that he's
allowed a very narrow range of personal opinions, none that will offend any
number of Americans unless he is or was Harry S Truman. A Washington music
critic didn't appreciate the musical gifts of daughter Margaret Truman, the
president threatened to knock the man's block off and made rude remarks about
his ancestry. Asked why he never invited the baseball champions or other famous
athletes to the White House, Truman immediately replied because sports are a
lot of damn nonsense.

Mrs Clinton is introducing her style to the White House and making few bones
about the fact that the day of French cooking is over. We're trying to move she
says towards healthy fresh American food including broccoli. We eat a lot of
vegetables and a lot of fibre and a lot of fruit. You want to know a healthy
fresh all American meal such as Mrs Clinton will serve/did serve at a banquet,
she consulted three American chefs who are doing interesting things around the
country and this is what they came up with, "smoked marinated Florida shrimp" –
probably a prawn to you, "roast tenderloin of beef, baby lima beans and
zucchini basket, INAUD gold potatoes, Vidalia onions, a salad of wintergreens
with goat cheese from Massachusetts and hazelnut dressing." The pud, sweet or
desert, "apple sherbet terrain with new Jersey applejack mousse and hot cider
sauce", the wines were from Oregon, Virginia and California. So there.

I, for one, must applaud the appearance on a menu on an American table once
again of the long forgotten local nectar applejack, which used to be known as
Jersey lightening, it's a rare, light apple brandy – Calvaldos if you must – an
applejack old fashioned was once a drink about as American as you could get and
if taken in suitable quantities left you as paralysed as you could get, but
sipped savoured a delicious and I swear a nutritious drink. To balance or
outweigh this indulgence, Mrs Clinton also announced understandably since she's
taken on the revamping of the American healthcare system that from now on the
White House will ban smoking everywhere, so no more ashtrays, which anyway in
this country are beginning to look like like hitching posts, artefacts of an
earlier civilisation.

Since all American airlines banned smoking, more and more cities are being
bolder about banning it in all public places, the rebel movement if it exists
is puny; after all, in 1970, 49% of the American population smoked. Today, it
is 24% and going down all the time.

Oh, by the way for any sinner temporarily depressed by this sort of news, a new
and a reputable study out by the Food and Drug Administration concludes that
after all the long years of commotion, coffee is really a pretty harmless
drink. There's another study I came on though, took years to complete with
hundreds of males being watched night and day and, you know what, sleep is a
prime or famous cause – now I must be accurate, sleep then is most conducive to
heart attacks, so I wish you good day or goodnight as the case maybe, be sure
to rest but don't sleep.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP