Clinton's foreign policy issues - 8 October 1993

It's the most obvious but plaguey irony of the Clinton presidency that he was
elected by a sizeable majority of those Americans who thought that Mr Bush had
spent too much time on foreign affairs and too little on the state of the
nation. And in less than a year, President Clinton found himself confronted by
a flood of foreign disasters that could not be stemmed or ignored.

Of course, he inherited and knew he'd inherited the recurring headaches of
Cambodia and its horrors, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the Chinese
insistence on nuclear testing, the scary possibility that the war between
Azerbaijan and Armenia might draw in its neighbouring patrons including Turkey
and Russia. Russia itself lurching sometimes forward, sometimes backwards
towards what we fervently hoped was some workable form of democracy.

It was bad enough to have to drop these burdens on a president sworn to do
something soon and drastic about crime, education, drugs, free trade, medical
insurance, the inner cities, but then he'd no sooner announced his plan for a
grand reform of the national medical system than two or three foreign sleeping
dogs came alive and rabid. First of course, no sleeping dog but a growling bear
that broke through the bars.

On the night when the Russian government seemed to have gone down in upheaval,
the best the president can do was to give immediate backing to Mr Yeltsin while
praying that he would put down the insurrection and that he could do it without
reverting to force and then to dictatorial power. Well, he did the first any
and it was plain enough that he'd reached the credible limit of pleading and
threatening, so the bombing of the parliament was deplored here but reluctantly
approved. The closing of Pravda and censorship of the press was widely
deplored, but that order was soon lifted. Really the best any of us in the West
can do seems to be to take the bet that Mr Yeltsin is more than anyone in sight
most likely to stagger towards a general democracy in the long run. The other
snarling dog is Bosnia and if the Western nations have more or less given up on
it, so with much riving and some shame has the United States.

The one issue that nine months ago seemed humane, straightforward and solvable
is the one that has turned into a nightmare, a nightmare that projects the
lurid recollections of Vietnam, Somalia. It's rough now to recall that when the
American Marines first went into Somalia, Mr Bush was in the White House and Mr
Clinton was about to move in on 20 January. The Marines went in to succour the
starving people whose grisly shapes and clanking bones we winced at on
television. It was a humane mission and everybody, Republicans, Democrats,
independents alike were in favour of it.

The idea was to restore the health of the children, deliver the food, which was
being stolen by small raids of darting bandits and then let the United Nations
forces restore order and calm. Incidentally of course, the bandits would take
to the hills or flee the country as in the movies. Well we know what happened
there, the food got through, the children began to look fine, but to the
surprise and despair of their saviours, they began to admire the leading bandit
giving him a sort of heroic Robin Hood status. Here is a man who has a few
hundred guerrillas who for almost four months has held off something like
18,000 troops, American then United Nations, all there under the well-known tag
of peacekeeping. American intelligence, crack soldiers, American gunships can't
find him let alone topple him.

The new and ugly turn in, I suppose the history of United Nations peacekeeping,
came when a native population looked on the UN Forces as fighting men,
combatants, enemies and shot them. When the now sturdy children turned on their
saviours and mocked them, suddenly the UN forces are resisted and attacked as
invaders and the Americans are the chief villains, so there arises all over
this country a great baying chorus of "get out". Some of you may have heard me
last week read the remarkable entry in December 1992 in the dairy of George
Kennan the former American ambassador to the Soviet Union and number one
Kremlinologist. He thought from the beginning that the American mission was a
dreadful error of policy that it did credit to American idealism, but mainly
attested the new power of television in creating so much sympathy as to send
American troops all over the world on adventures from which there was no
discernible way out.

Well, I'm very sorry to say that Mr Kennan called the precise tune, everything
that's happened he predicted and this week, the administration was faced with
either a great humiliation or a frightening risk to withdraw letting it be seen
that America had been beaten by a self appointed general with a rabble of a few
hundred guerrillas or to send in more and more American troops to redeem or
greatly strengthen the continuing mission of the United Nations. On this topic,
television is outdoing itself here giving equal weight to the off-hand opinions
of senators, journalists, mothers, motorcar mechanics, athletes, hamburger
flippers, schoolchildren, soldiers, of course, and rightly or madly half of
them mumble something about Vietnam.

Now neither the strategic situation nor the political situation nor the
rationale is the same as Vietnam, but one awful truth keeps emerging from the
lips of innocents or ignoramuses who know nothing about Vietnam, it's the
thought of pouring human lives into a sieve. I, myself, while irritatedly
dismissing this automatic relapse into an analogy with Vietnam, I couldn't help
remembering with painful vividness a morning in the White House in the summer
of 1965 when President Johnson was doing a very creditable job of persuading
two of us – or brainwashing us – myself and an American journalist on the
prospects of victory in Vietnam. Now this was 1965 just short of 10 years
before the surrender of the south or, if you like, the American defeat.

At one point, I asked the president if the commitment of American men to
Vietnam was ever likely to match the 400,000 who'd gone into Korea. LBJ gasped,
he beamed and shook his head as you might to reassure a frightened child and he
advanced, there's no other word advanced on me with both arms outstretched and
welcome his enormous hands embracing cubic feet of atmosphere. "My dear boy,"
he cried, "there's a chance in hell that we're going to send in there 400,000
men or 300,000 or 200,000 or anything like 100,000 I give you my word." I
believed him and I believe he believed himself. In the end, we sent in 543,000.

That simple boring statistic is one everybody alive and sentient 20 years ago
has never forgotten. The way the statesmen in Congress now put it, they don't
say how does he know when we'll get out, they say has the president formulated
an exit strategy? Well yes he has after talking for two whole days with
everybody of any account in Congress, old ambassadors and such, he felt he
could not just quit and bow to the obvious galling triumph of Mohammad Farrah
Aidid, so he will send 1,700 more American troops and 3,600 Marines offshore to
be there for just six months in the hope of bringing order to the country a
very odd way of entering a war telling your enemy when you're going to leave.
He hopes that the United Nations forces will, meanwhile, as never before
somehow dissolve the chaos of a lawless country without a government, he hopes
devoutly that we shall not see quote "a reversion to the absolute chaos and
terrible misery, which existed before", an inevitability predicted by George
Kennan nine months ago.

In the president's move there's no guarantee that any of us, the United States
or the UN can put together and impose a government on the Somalians, short as
George Kennan made clear, short of admitting that America is no longer just a
humane helper but is involved in a police action in another country.

The other day in an unlikely place, there was another sharp reminder of Vietnam
and what it meant to a generation now well into middle age. A woman comfortable
looking matron wispy fair hair glasses stood before a judge in a Boston
courtroom and was sentenced to from eight to 12 years in jail. She was an
accessory to a manslaughter, she'd driven the getaway car with her four
accomplices who were involved in the shooting killing of a policeman. The
bizarre side of all this is the fact that Catherine Ann Power is the last of
the team to be sentenced and served time, she appeared in the courtroom 23
years after the crime because she chose to, she'd never been caught. She
changed her name, lived in a town in Oregon become a cook, ran a restaurant
lived openly as a peaceable and useful citizen. This summer she could take it
no longer, she turned herself in under her real name. She belonged to the 1960s
student Vietnam protesters generation, some raised hell on the campuses, some
took over the college offices, some robbed banks. Catherine Ann Power helped to
shoot a policeman.

One of the nine children of the dead policemen, a Boston Catholic Irishman said
in court, "murdering a policeman in Boston to bring peace to South East Asia
was utterly senseless then and is just as senseless now". I think what this
sentence and the vacant face of the convicted woman reflected was the sad truth
about the student protest movement against Vietnam, however well intentioned,
however seemingly selfless its aims, it was also for much of the time motivated
by simply hate.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP