Ambassador Raymond G H Seitz - 26 March 1993

In all this week's turmoil of bad news and intimations of chaos, there is one
solid piece of good news and one item that may allow me to go out on a note of
quiet hilarity. The good news, a topic I thought of a good deal since November
and not dared to talk about for the obvious reason of not wanting to abuse a
reporter's job by seeming to be a pushy lobbyist.

Every time the White House changes tenants, several thousand human beings
suddenly acquire delusions of grandeur, from a dream of becoming United States
Ambassador to Britain or Russia, all the way down to a fantasy of waking up as
fourth inspector of customs at Baton Rouge, Louisiana. In between these
extremes are, I don't know the precise figure, but perhaps as many as 10,000
jobs in the federal civil service and also the privilege of appointing about
400 federal judges. All these jobs are at the disposal of the new president,
inevitably the president new or old cannot possibly know in every creek and
hamlet of the continental United States who is best qualified to be a judge or
a postmaster or a local tax collector. Inevitably then, the president has to
trust to an acquaintance or the friend of a Democrat of a friend in this city
or that village. Inevitably, the system works by cronyism; it is called, in the
president's case, patronage.

President Clinton has been so busy with so many serious matters that he still
has several hundred empty jobs, patronage jobs to fill and one of them rather
late in the day to be addressed is that of United States Ambassador to the
Court of St James's, British newspaper sub-editors please copy. I was shocked
last week to see an English paper and a Tory one at that, print what at one
time was always barely tolerated as a typical American illiteracy: the Court of
St James. However, pedantry aside, to some of us the job of American ambassador
to Britain is a matter of perhaps more sentimental concern than the weight it
can carry in the modern imbalance of power.

Now the ambassadorial jobs around the world are in obscure places and in
countries with little political clout filled by career men and women who
entered the foreign service in their youth and eventually got a reputation for
being spectacularly knowledgeable about the economics of Upper Volta and one
day such a type will be ambassador if the country rates an embassy or minister
to Upper Volta or to a neighbouring nation.

If I appear to jest, I hasten to apologise, the best qualified people to be
ambassadors to the big powers also are career foreign service men and women,
but in the United States they seldom if ever get to the big bow-wow capitals:
London, Paris, Bonn, Moscow, Tokyo. From a time way back there in the early
jungle days of American politics when presidential campaigns began to depend on
the intravenous feeding of large doses of money, it became the unavoidable duty
of the elected president to reward old moneybags for services rendered, so for
ever and a day the big posts in the big capitals went to the most generous fat
cats. Never mind if they knew nothing of the politics and couldn't speak the
language of the country to which they were posted.

Now you'll say yes, but surely the president can only nominate an ambassador,
he still has to be confirmed after an appearance before the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee. That's true, but I know of only one case of a rewarded fat
cat being turned down by the confirming committee and that was in Roosevelt's
time. In fact, a Franklin Roosevelt appointee, he was a Democrat of course, a
rich man who wanted very much to be american ambassador to Australia. Somebody
on the Foreign Relations Committee must have had something in for this man,
quite apart from his fitness to be ambassador. Within an hour of the nominee's
appearance, one senator asked him if he would bear in mind when he got to
Australia the contribution that sunburnt army veterans from the outback that
made to the allied victory in the Second World War. The what, queried the
nominee, the outback. The nominee consulted an advisor at his elbow "I'm sorry,
I thought you'd said something like outback." That's right, he'd never heard of
it. Tell me Mr Fat Cat, what's the capital of Australia? The man hadn't the
faintest idea, his innocence about Australasia was so gross and the papers so
delightedly fed on it that it was not possible to let the nomination go
through. Roosevelt withdrew it and I'm sure backstage took it out on who ever
had first put up the man's name.

Now theoretically the choice is always between a career man and a very rich man
and here's the snag, the nasty problem a president would face who decided say
to fill all the European capitals with career men, they would have to be
maintained in the ambassadorial style by the taxpayer as happens in most other
countries. The multimillionaire will maintain himself. I remember one
ambassador to Britain who told me that his entertainment allowance for one year
paid for an Independence Day reception at the Regent's Park residence for maybe
500 people to be served, wait for it, lemonade punch. The other 95% of the
embassy entertainment he paid for himself.

For the longest time, there were two politicians, two famous puritans, one a
Methodist senator from Oklahoma and the other a Baptist congressman from
Brooklyn, New York who were chairmen respectively of the relevant committees to
confirm, they were united by a common crusade, they would see to it that no
bill would be passed that allowed any embassy to claim what other nations call
"entertainment allowance", which of course runs in most places to well several
hundred thousand dollars a year. Senator Kerr and John J Rooney did not call
such largesse an entertainment allowance, they called "booze allowance" – they
were both, of course, teetotallers and were haunted by the fantasy of embassy
parties at which several hundred guests lay around in a swinish stupor at the
expense of the American taxpayer.

The first president I knew to challenge this chokehold on the system was John F
Kennedy, he wanted something that in those days was un-wantable, he wanted in
Paris a particular top man, career man who knew a great deal about the history
of France and of the Soviet Union and who was so fluent in Russian that he
acted during the Second War as interpreter between Churchill, Stalin and
Roosevelt at epoch-making conferences. President Kennedy also wanted as an
ambassador to India a leading economist, a professor who had supported the
Kennedy campaign.

At Christmas time after his election, Kennedy invited both Senator Kerr and
Congressman Rooney to come down to his father's house in Palm Beach and spend a
few carefree days in the sun, they were about to be conned, persuaded at least,
to believe that neither Mr Chip Bohlen nor Professor Galbraith were likely to
stage drunken orgies in Paris and New Dehli, but Kennedy very much wanted them
and that meant, since both were comparatively poor men, that meant voting a
special large entertainment allowance during their time in France and India.
Well, he got it.

After Kennedy, Johnson kept on one or two career men but pretty soon the system
reverted to normal and under Reagan and Bush flourished exceedingly, enough to
say that London when Britain was top dog was the top diplomatic post, it had
never been filled by a career man until two years ago, when amazingly President
Bush of all grateful buddies appointed a top state department career man Mr
Raymond Seitz. The question, the misgiving that afflicted many knowledgeable
people in the Foreign Office in London, in the State Department here and
luckily among some influential Democrats who know Clinton, the fear was that
Clinton would find himself bound to act according to form and give in to the
cravings of one of the many rich contributors who simply would do anything to
get to the Court of St James's.

Well he bravely resisted them; he has decided to keep Mr Seitz in London. This
for Britons and Americans who still care for good realistic relations between
the two countries is very good news, Mr Seitz is splendid at an ambassador's
first job, which is to be a fair, disinterested reporter. That he has been, he
knows British politicians of all stripes of opinion, he knows the country. All
in all, he's been the best ambassador since the late David Bruce, one of the
very few Americans I believe to be retained as ambassador by both a Republican
and a Democratic president and he was by the way the only American in history
to serve successively as American ambassador to Bonn, to Paris and to London,
to be the best since David Bruce is to be as good as you can get.

Now for the promised titbit of hilarity or, if you like, simply a happy
thought. I gather, in fact,I only recently discovered that British universities
have taken on perhaps long ago, the American habit of calling old boys and old
girls "alumni" and of putting out alumni magazine and of publishing in it
cheerful or jolly notes from the old gang saying what they're up to, whom they
married, children, jobs, hobbies, so forth. The Americans who once were Rhodes
Scholars have such a good old boy magazine, I do not expect to read their homey
notes about the Clinton's little girl, Chelsea.

However, the latest issue carried this item. "Bill Clinton writes to say that
Chelsea's ballet skills are at a high level, Hillary is still busy, Bill adds
that in November he was elected President of the United States".

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP