The closing of the San Francisco Presidio - 21 May 1993

Do you remember we talked just lately about the painful business of closing
military bases, the consequent unemployment, the impoverishment of the towns
that thrived on them?

I ought to say right away that I'm well aware that this and related economies
like abolishing old famous regiments have become a problem for more nations
than this one and have afflicted the Russians in a form so acute that along
with their many other economic ordeals, they're confronting hundreds of
thousands of officers with no job and no home.

Here in America, as I mentioned a few weeks ago, there are so many army and
navy bases on states bordering the east and west coast, not to mention the Gulf
of Mexico that the infighting is fierce between towns that live off the
military. Everyone saying, "Yes of course, we must trim the military budget by
closing bases, but not ours."

Well the government, the administration has just decided to close what I should
think of all the bases in the United States had the strongest sentimental claim
to be left untouched as an historic place, the San Francisco Presidio. San
Francisco you know is a broad peninsula shaped like a thumb, which juts upward
into the waters of the Bay that flow in from the Pacific. The Presidio, a
Spanish word for garrison, lies on the left tip, the coastal edge of the big
thumb. It's a marvellously placed. Well, it's more of a military park than
anything fenced off from the sprawling petticoats of the city, it encompasses
about 1,500 acres, which is twice the size of New York Central Park, maybe some
people will get a better picture if I say more than three times the area of
London's Regent's Park. So the 1,000 little houses and apartments are nicely
spaced, even visiting the place gives you the feeling of being the privileged
guest of some beautiful estate edging the great sail-less Pacific. The Presidio
guards that coast at the very entrance to the Golden Gate, the splendid red
bridge is anchored at its southern end on a fortified side of the Presidio,
which has its guns trained on any seaborne intruder since 1776.

So the Presidio has been a garrison for 217 years. First for Spain, then for
Mexico and since 1846, when the Mexicans were loosing their last war with this
nation, the western most military fort of the continental United States. It has
a forest of 400,000 trees and in the adjoining meadow lands an 18-hole golf
course, many rare some endangered plants and trees. a medical research centre,
two hospitals, one built only five years after the gold rush when San Francisco
was a treeless shanty town on nine windy sand hills. Accordingly, the
hospital's brick foundations and pine and hemlock girders were shipped around
the Horn. The cemetery is second only to Arlington as a national cemetery, it
bares the remains of 15,000 veterans and their wives and one other woman, not a
veteran's wife, not a soldier or nurse or any member of the military. She was a
young actress and was honourably buried in the Presidio for her services during
the Civil War as a Union Spy, Pauline Cushman Fryer. Somebody should do a life
of her, maybe somebody has.

Well, over the protests of the resident 9th Army Corps and local historians and
Mexican American war buffs and other sentimentalists, the presidential
commission that had the final say in recommending the 80-odd closures to the
president, it spoke and he, the heartless Clinton, oh military historian, he
gave the nod. The moment the decision was made, the air was thick with abrasive
shouts and pleas and proposals what to do with it. Promptly came an appeal from
the University of California, which is bursting with about 100,000 students too
many on is now nine campuses. Please, they would like the Presidio as an
additional campus. There were poignant appeals from San Francisco residents
turn it over all 5,000 acres to the homeless, the vision that offers of a
placid community boggles the imagination.

Of course, Hollywood and New York considered as entertainment centres hinted
that they would pay dearly for a movie museum or for something on the order of
yet another Disneyland, somebody had the brilliant idea that the whole place
should be turned into a mushroom research centre. Well, as I say, the decision
has been made it will be turned over to the National Park Service.

Now the National Park Service was born the germ of the idea on the high plains
of Montana when a few natives of that spacious western state sat around a
wilderness campfire one evening in 1872 and thought what a fine thing it would
be if a whole sweeping stretch of country on the upper Yellowstone River could
be set aside for, as they put it in a letter to their congressman, perpetual
public use. Two years later, Congress established Yellowstone National Park, it
was the first and since then and thanks mainly to the drive of Roosevelt the
First, Theodore of that ilk, the United States as many of you I hope know has
now over 40 national parks and the greatest possible range, size and variety,
some of them the size of Hyde Park, some of them the size of Wales. The western
ones, Yosemite, Sequoia, Yellowstone, Bryce, Zion for scarlet canyons, geezers,
geysers, the waterfalls, ancient red woods, prehistoric cliff dwellings,
glaciers, alpine lakes, thousands of mountains over 10,000ft, innumerable
beasties and on and on to mountain parks with hundreds of varieties of trees,
flowers to national military parks, battlefield sites and so on.

I'm always surprised by the way that intending tourists who write to me for
suggestions about what to do and see in the United States very rarely mention
any of the great parks. Several of the western ones, Bryce and Zion for
instance, if they existed in Europe would be Europe's number one tourist
attraction, so I suppose in theory the San Francisco Presidio will be
designated as a National Military Site, not I gather so. A spokesman for the
Department of the Interior, which is America's Home Office, said this week, the
Presidio will be a new kind of park, it is a kind of project that will reinvent
the park service. Needless to say there's already a committee formed to advise
the park service how to develop it. And the first question these days about any
splendid plan, policy, agenda: how much will it cost and where will the money
come from?

The army has been spending about $45 million a year in maintenance and of
course maintenance in that place means a good deal more than maintaining the
houses, hospitals, apartments, barracks, training grounds and the like. It
means they've done a beautiful job maintaining the forest and the woods and
copses and the meadowlands, which constitute practically a forest reserve, not
to mention, so I won't, the fine golf course. An ideal spot, a city father said
for a public park, but like most ideals when you want to realise them, they
cost a pretty penny and the first bill is already in, to cleaning up dangerous
wastes, estimate $62 million. What would they be?

Well, to begin with something most of us don't immediately think off when the
phrase comes up, am I right, we think of toxic wastes, industrial sludge and so
forth. These days no matter what building and wherever, a building is to be
converted, the first order of business is to rip out all the asbestos. This
undertaken throughout this entire nation has run up a staggering bill of many
many billions of dollars for old schools, factories, offices, apartment houses.
Ours was done last summer. After the accursed asbestos, next on the menu at the
Presidio is the residue of oil in underground tanks.

The laws that allow the Presidio to become a National Park do not allow a park
fee or road toll to be paid. What it does allow is the acceptance of wealthy or
anyway high-paying tenants, possibly the University of California will get its
wish not for the whole campus, but for a part of it to house some speciality –
how about that mushroom research centre? Foreign governments have been
suggested, if not exactly solicited, and as you might guess breathing down the
necks of the Department of the Interior in Washington already a pant of
developers and their lobbyists. The department says, for now anyway – and I
imagine with the enthusiastic assurance of Vice President Gore, who as you know
is an environmental missionary – no commercial or private development. However,
the new park does already have its first tenant and I think a little background
is called for.

In the 1780s, Russians moved on to the coast of California and King Charles in
Madrid assumed they meant to colonise his vast territory, hence the Spanish
established that chain of forts along 400 miles of the coast disguised as
Christian Missions, which by the way they also were. For the next, through the
better part of, half a century, the cry alarmed the Californians and was taken
up in the 20th century by William Randolph Hearst, "the Russians are coming".
Well way back there, they hadn't arrived to settle or colonise anything, they
came to hunt the sea otter and when the sea otter gave out, the Russians left.

Now you'll see how the identity of the Presidio Park's first tenant provides
the happiest possible irony. Last month, the keys to an officer's house were
given to a man who is being allowed to set up there the headquarters of his
personal peace foundation, his name is Mikhail Gorbachev.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP