New Year's Resolutions - 7 January 1994

And warm good wishes for a Happy New Year wherever you are or - quickly
remembering my political correctness - perhaps I should say wherever 1st
January is the beginning of your New Year.

Every New Year's Eve there's a scene in New York's Times Square that's been
going on for ever and one that's now watched by Americans across the country
who are respectively an hour behind New York or two hours, on the coast three
hours. Here I've dug out a description of the scene a year or two ago, which
describes not only New York's famous ball of light, but records what used to be
a compulsory chore for journalists, a sampling of the commonest New Year's
resolutions. Here it is.

"The clocks struck the hour and the great ball of 450 incandescent bulbs glowed
and then fell from the mast head of the Times building in New York City. Not
long after first light tomorrow regiments of women would be out invading the
January sales rustling among tidal waves of silk cr pe de Chine, picking up
bargains in Albatross boudoir jackets and non-bargains in French silk
stockings. All across the country, men would renew the usual annual resolutions
to stay away from the pool room, to learn hypnotism, to buy a Madelette, no
plates, no films, no fuss, picture taken and finished on the spot in less than
a minute, to abandon what they call the drink habit, to learn shorthand in 30
days, to buy a wireless practise set in order to learn the Morse code, to
invest in a John Deere plough, to take one of those correspondence school
courses and earn more money. I tell you what's holding you down, Jim, best of
all the most widespread of all American resolutions of the time to get fat,
which is what all the advertisements promised, let us make you fat. At our own
risk we offer to put 10, 15, yes 30 pounds of good solid stay-there flesh on
your bones."

Well, you must have already been brought up short by the all American
resolutions of the time, of what time? Of New Year's Day 1915 - that's what I
was describing. Of all those quaint resolutions I think there's probably only
one that still stands, the admirable sad determination probably due to fail to
give up the drink habit. I discovered, by the way, that by the end of this
year, it will have been just 60 years since two American men, drinking buddies,
took a pledge to shake the habit; the important thing about their pledge was
that they took it together and had a new idea about how to keep it. If either
of them as the weeks and months of their abstinence went along, if either of
them felt himself slipping or aching for a drink, he was call to the other who
promised to arrive at once like a nurse and see his pal through, as they say,
through it the throes of temptation.

The man who had this idea was known until he died as Bill W. He hoped to
recruit others, many others into this routine and he promised to do it on the
understanding that their identity would never be published, they would be
anonymous that was the beginning in 1935 of Alcoholics Anonymous.

Now at that time in this country, I remember in New Haven, Connecticut, Yale
University had a pioneering department of so-called alcoholic studies; it was
run by a psychiatrist and both before and after it was the educated consensus
that an alcoholic's best hope of cure was through psychiatric treatment. I
suppose Europe too had its clinics, it certainly shared the general presumption
about the value of psychiatry. I knew the man who was in charge at Yale and
after a few years he confessed that while their studies could detail symptoms
and the clinical course of the disease and could elaborate theories about
causes, well he was an honest man and admitted they were producing no cures.
Soon afterwards, he shut up shop.

Of course, all the psychiatrists had heard of Alcoholics Anonymous and its
methods and it's fair to say that at that time among most double-domed
psychiatrists AA was derided as a rather maudlin method, a sentimental routine.
Bill W at once admitted as much, he nailed the psychiatrists, the Freudians
especially on their own ground with their favourite doctrine, that most deep
human impulses are childlike and that chronic drunkenness has much to do with
the protest against a lack of affection. Well, said Bill W, we make it up to
them, we give it to them at the moment they most need it.

Very soon, I should say by the 1950s, psychiatrists no longer claimed to be
able to cure alcoholism and grudgingly admitted that AA worked as it does and
has gone on doing. There was at the time, one famous intellectual who might,
you might have guessed would be certain to back the psychiatrists and despise
AA as rather vulgar stuff but, no, he saw it working from the start on good
friends and when Bill W died and his identity was revealed as William "Bill"
Wilson all of us actually called him the greatest social architect of our time.

Among all the other resolutions, I don't suppose anybody today is vowing to
learn shorthand in 30 days or 30 years or learn the Morse code but the one
resolution I'm positive no American swore to in the waning hours of 1993 was
the last one I noted, "we promise we can make you fat with good stay-there
flesh on your bones". Heavens to Betsy.

When I came on that 1915 advertisement, I turned the page and faced an
accompanying illustration. I'm looking at it now, it shows a handsome muscular
man sitting tailor fashion on the beach beside what was then called a deep
bosomed fine figure of a woman, say 160 pounds, 11-12 stone, they were both
wearing what were known as bathing costumes. She's looking over to him and
pointing to two skeletons up the beach. Today, they'd look normal enough and
she's saying "gee look at that pair of skinny scarecrows, why don't they try
and then the brand name of the stuff that came in box costing 50¢, first box
free, if you didn't gain 10 pounds in the first week or two, money back". Don't
you wonder what it could possibly be? All it says in the fine print blurb is
that this treatment increases the red corpuscles in the blood, strengthens the
nerves and puts the digestive tract into such shape that food is assimilated,
imagine and turned into good solid healthy flesh.

Today, the ad would more likely echo Hamlet and show you how this too too solid
flesh could be made to melt. That ad and that dieting mania was published as I
say in 1915. Ten years later, certainly by the mid '20s, the ideal female
figure in Britain as well as America had changed dramatically. I never know who
dictates these things, I suppose the fashion designers in order to stay solvent
have to change the ideal shape drastically at regular intervals so that you
can't just take in a tuck or two, you have to buy completely new clothes.

Well, by 1925, it was decreed that the deep bosomed woman should not only loose
her depth, she should have no bosom at all and take off at the very least those
30 pounds her mother had put on. And so in that curious absolutely dependable
way that life imitates art everywhere suddenly young women of all classes
except the very poor and the very old and rich had flat chests, short skirts
above legs without calves, bobbed hair and were in 10 years more radically
different looking from their mothers than any two generations have been since.

Shortly after the First War was over, a word came into the language and a
dieting practice that swept Britain. The practice but not the word did the same
in the United States, it was Banting. I used to think this probably derived
from the Canadian doctor Frederick Banting who discovered co-discovered
insulin, but no. Mr Banting was a London cabinet maker who came to fame rather
late in life. By the 1920s he was crowding 60, he had a theory how to take off
that stay there fat, how in fact to slim, avoid all fats, starches and sugar
hence "to bant" became the fashion first with society women and very soon with
all women and ever since dieting has meant taking flesh off not putting it on
to stay there.

There was a report, however, a so-called survey came out last weekend
announcing a new trend called pleasure revenge, a fad for defying all the good
rules we've learned through the years about cigarettes, caffeine, fatty foods.
This defiance takes the form of choosing high-fat snacks, of putting on a
couple of pounds instead of losing 10. And who conducted this survey? A
marketing vice president and a professor of psychology whose specialty is
studying New Year's resolutions. He finds that neither losing weight nor
stopping smoking was the number one resolution among, he says, a lot of people;
he doesn't say how many over how many years they were studied. In fact, the
last thing that's indicated by this so-called survey is a scientific study; the
professor calls the movement a backlash against the last decade's relentless
beating of the health drum. Don't believe it. It says here, quote,
"representatives of the dairy, beef, pork, sugar, snack food, fast food and
tobacco industries view the recent survey with enthusiasm". You can believe
that.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP