Bill Clinton's Presidential Honeymoon - 2 April 1993

A quick trip to England's green and not so cheerful land produced for me three
surprises, perhaps they wouldn't have been so startling if they'd crept up on
me gradually, but for various personal reasons now happily overcome. We hadn't
been to Britain since Christmas time 1991 Ð of course I've not stopped reading
British papers, books and other publications, but, as my old editor Alfred
Wadsworth used to say, "a week of the flesh is worth a year of newsprint".

The first shock, the unexpected pain that will afflict American tourists this
summer is the price of things. Now this is not quite the same as the exchange
rate, which as I talk is about 50¢ to the pound, but in the purchase of things
from a watch strap to a bottle of Scotland's barlienus vulgaris - that is the
generic name, honest - and I'm not going to sully a lifetime's integrity by
telling you a brand name. I was saying, the exchange rate is deceptive to an
American buying anything, it's not what he stopped to calculate. We're back in
the situation of exactly 20 years ago, when a very simple equation prevailed;
everything in England was twice the American price on paper. If a shirt cost
$20 in New York, it would be £20 in England it's exactly so today, the wine of
Scotland is $12.95 a bottle round my corner on Madison Avenue,12.95. In London,
I shelled out exactly £12.95p.

By the time on Friday, I flew back to New York, I'd come to wonder how anybody
in Britain lives comfortably on less than £60,000 a year. A good friend said
"we don't, we live frugally". In the London street where we lived on the first
morning, I ambled off to talk to shopkeepers I know, it's always a pleasant
reintroduction to the real life of any town and was dismayed to find that half
of them had gone out of business. I think the most dramatic, the bleakest sign
of the recession was an empty window down the street, it was a poulterer,
they'd always had in this window stuffed models of the birds and about four
months from now they would have had the real thing, the partridges, pheasants,
woodcock, widgeon, tule, dual, duke and the rest hanging there in rhythmical
rows like an illustration from Dickens. Today, the window is dark and empty. On
the top of it are two lines of print in faded gold, John Byrn Poulterer
established 1720. After 273 years he's gone bust.

The surprise about the recession did not dim with familiarity, only on the last
day did the good word come from the governor of the Bank of England that the
recession had probably bottomed out and hearing this, I couldn't help thinking
back with a with a twisted smile to the same news coming from Mr Bush's
secretary of the treasury in August of last year mentioned very gingerly
because the Bush administration had made a point in the campaign of soldiering
on in the pretence that the recession had never happened. Well, the fact was
the American recession began to expire earlier than last summer. Mr Bush was
right, but nobody believed him and it became pretty clear to everybody by the
time Governor Clinton had moved his belongings into the White House, so Bush in
the White House equals recession. Clinton in the White House, recovery. There
go, Clinton did it, hooray for Bill. This of course is logical nonsense, but
the mood of it still pervades the country and with visible signs of companies
especially small businesses taking on employees, people naturally back Clinton
in larger numbers than they did in the election.

Somebody in London asked me if the Clinton honeymoon was still on? A tricky
question, honeymoons as I recall started right after the wedding, Flitterwochen
is what the Germans call "butterfly week". Clinton's first week could have been
called mosquito week, a nasty experience twice stung. First he puts up for
attorney general a very able and I must say very beautiful lady and sees her
quickly shunted back to her corporation law firm on account of employing not,
as a London paper wrote last week, employing cheap labour. On the contrary, the
immigrant couple in Zo‘ Baird's household were very handsomely paid, but they
didn't have any immigration papers. Ouch, so after that what is the first
policy issue President Clinton decides to take up? Homosexuals of both sexes
must be openly admitted as equals into the armed forces, shock and dismay at
the Pentagon where General Powell is known to be dead against it and in the
armed services committee of the Senate whose Chairman, the Democrat's Senator
Sam Nunn is equally opposed. The mistake was raising this issue first an
awfully dumb start to an administration. And commentators began to say, "we're
in for a presidency of bumbles and boo-boos by novices", however that passed.

The president quickly got out his economic bill violating his campaign promise
to save a dollar spent for every tax dollar, the ratio in his bill came out
more like $2 to be spent for every dollar raised in taxes. No matter, the House
whipped the bill through, it was doubtful it would ever pass the Senate. Wrong,
barely amended it swept through the Senate even old staunch Republicans began
to ask in a manner of speaking "what food doth this Caesar eat that he grow so
fat", so the answer to the lady's question is the Clinton honeymoon still on
is, yes, indeed it has only just started.

The second shock came when I read a piece from a rather distinguished English
critic-biographer who's not generally thought off as a lover of America, she
wrote that she'd noticed during the past few weeks among her friends and
acquaintances and ordinary people casually met, she'd noticed a new feeling
about America, a feeling of envy. What is new about that?

Well, I must say that not since Roosevelt, no perhaps not since Kennedy has
there been a wave of genuine good feeling, admiration even, flowing from east
to west, but now a serious British critic looks across the Atlantic at
President Clinton talking to scholars, politicians, plumbers, kids in small
studio audiences all over the country. Clinton saying what he thinks and feels
about everything from the Middle East and Bosnia to training the unemployed,
what to do with the rotting inner cities, tax breaks for small business, tax
wallops on the sick who are also rich and old; young Hillary Clinton at his
side or off in a big room listening to everybody and his doctor's aunt, chemist
and dietician telling her what to do about sickness insurance. I wished we'd
stopped calling it health insurance; nobody puts out money for health.

Anyway, this bright and rather severe British lady looks across the Atlantic
gets the feel of things, senses the vibrations of a government on the move,
whether it's forward or backwards doesn't at this point matter. And we may be
mad but it's true that I dare to say most Americans are feeling it, I'd define
it as no more but no less than the notion of something we've seem to lack
certainly since the arrival in the White House of Ronald Reagan, the stride of
leadership. Better not go on, as Harold Wilson said in politics a week is a
year - and a year, a month from now, we may be along with the voters in
Germany, France, Italy and Britain in the dumps looking round with little hope
to find that very rare bird a genuine leader.

In the meantime, I hope you'll forgive Americans for basking however briefly in
the rare sunshine of approval, envy indeed, from the more quirky and often
superior Brits. By the way, best cure for superiority feeling on either side of
the water is the incomparable Jane Walmsley's book with alas the clumsy title
Brit-think, Ameri- that means Yank-Think, Ameri-Think.

The third shock is contained in two confessionals I read in England, one from
the novelist Anthony Burgess, the other from an old and for long-incorrigible
beatnik Jay Landesman. These confessionals were prompted by another round of an
old and never-resolved public debate, which has been going on for at least 40
years: does violence on the screen, the cinema, television encourage violence
in real life or has it nothing to do with it?

Well, for 20 years or more, the fashionable wisdom came from innumerable
testifying psychiatrists to the effect that the impulse to violence lay in the
individual and could not be stirred by violent movies. On the contrary, they
said the watching of blood and lust acted out and served rather as a purge of
emotions that otherwise might be expressed in life. The first jolt I had to
this advanced theory was when a woman friend of mine in San Francisco was
raped, then tied up and made to watch the rape of her 15-year-old daughter by a
trio of very oddly dressed rather bland courtly men. She asked them at one
point, what they thought they were doing? One quietly sneered: did you never
see Clockwork Orange?

Well this week Mr Burgess the author of that vivid work has recanted saying
anyway that his book never taught violence but did teach new styles in violence
and he's truly sorry. As for the old beatnik Landsman, he deplores the young
who are imitating repeating his socially destructive and self destructive way
of life of 30, 40 years ago. Now he said the other day, I do have regrets all
that business that we started in the '50s knocking the traditional values,
knocking patriotism, family, homes, schools was a terrible mistake and
sometimes I feel mea culpa. We were the people who started it all undermining
the values of American society in the name of self-expression and freedom,
unquote. I like to think without much hope that these penitential statements
will give thoughtful pause to all those liberated types who bawl censorship at
the suggestion of banning anywhere any human expression or act however vile or
degrading.

THIS TRANSCRIPT WAS TYPED FROM A RECORDING OF THE ORIGINAL BBC BROADCAST (©
BBC) AND NOT COPIED FROM AN ORIGINAL SCRIPT. BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF MISHEARING,
THE BBC CANNOT VOUCH FOR ITS COMPLETE ACCURACY.

Letter from America audio recordings of broadcasts ©BBC. Letter from America
scripts © Cooke Americas, RLLP